Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 10 July 2008 .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , welcome to you all .
I would like to begin with some comments about the situation regarding the plenary chamber in Strasbourg .
As you know , due to the partial collapse of the false ceiling in the plenary chamber in Strasbourg on 7 August , this first part-session of the European Parliament in September has had , exceptionally , to be held here in Brussels .
I took this decision with a view to ensuring the greatest possible safety of Members and staff , based on my perusal of the initial expert reports and after consultation with the chairpersons of the groups and the French Council Presidency .
The decision also takes account of the need to maintain continuity in the European Parliament 's legislative work .
The preliminary findings of the investigations indicate that the partial collapse of the false ceiling was caused by fractures in the building components which connect the suspended ceiling with the actual ceiling structure .
The investigations are ongoing and are being carried out by several independent international structural engineering firms commissioned by Parliament with a view to establishing further details and responsibilities for the collapse .
These investigations are being carried out in very close cooperation with the relevant local authorities as well as with a senior buildings safety expert appointed by the French Government .
The apportionment of responsibility and liability between the contractors involved in the construction of the original ceiling will be established on the basis of the final investigation reports , once they are available .
The false ceiling in the plenary chamber will now be re-suspended using a new technique which has been approved by the independent experts and the local buildings authorities .
Although every effort is being made to complete the work as soon as possible , the procedure involved is , of necessity , somewhat lengthy .
Nonetheless , we hope that all the safety investigations and necessary repairs will be completed in time for the House to hold its September II part-session in Strasbourg .
May I assure you that safety takes absolute priority in all our considerations and decision-making .
Tribute
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see minutes
Composition of Parliament : see minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 28 August 2008 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
No amendments have been proposed , so the agenda is adopted .
( DE ) Mr President , looking at the agenda and assuming that the debate on Georgia takes place today , we do not have any specific requests .
However , if there are delays and the sitting overruns , with the result that the debate on Georgia cannot take place until tomorrow , then we would move that the debate on the social package be postponed until the September II part-session for , in my view , it will be impossible for us to debate the social package and Georgia in a single morning .
I just wanted to give the House advance notice , as it were .
Thank you , Mr Swoboda .
There was no interpretation , I believe , particularly into English , if I have identified the colleagues concerned correctly .
Let me repeat what Mr Swoboda has just said .
Mr Swoboda said that , if the debate on today 's Summit does not take place today but happens tomorrow , the debate on the social package should then be postponed until the September II part-session , as the time allocated for this debate will then be taken up talking about today 's Summit .
That is as I understand it .
Do we agree on that ?
It seems we do .
That brings us to the one-minute speeches on important political issues under Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
We now come to the one-minute speeches on important political issues .
Mr President , the Beijing Olympics have proved , sadly , that authoritarian regimes are not able or willing to comply with Olympic ideals of respect for human rights and peace .
Symbolically the Russian authorities preferred to mark the start of the Beijing Olympics by launching an armed invasion of a neighbouring country .
All this happened in the immediate neighbourhood of the future Sochi Winter Olympics .
I am convinced that by this unprecedented violation of the territorial integrity of a neighbouring country , and by annexing parts of its territory , the Russian Federation has lost the moral and political justification to host the 2014 Sochi Olympics .
I call on the International Olympics Committee to designate in the shortest possible time another city to host these Winter Olympics .
( ES ) Mr President , as a Spanish Member resident in the Canary Islands , I want to thank you for remembering the victims of the accident on 20 August .
I also want to add my condolences . I hope that this type of accident will not occur again and that the European Union will be able to act to guarantee aviation safety .
( SL ) Mr President , the problems of environmental protection and increased energy needs in connection with climate change are a challenge requiring a conscientious approach by all politicians .
They transcend state borders and national interests .
The construction of marine gas terminals in enclosed seas , such as the Adriatic , is even more sensitive .
Terrestrial and marine gas terminals have been planned for the bay of Trieste with an intended location only five miles from the Slovenian coast , right opposite the largest tourist region of Piran .
If the Italian Government dared , it could locate it in the Venetian Laguna as well , but this would not succeed because the whole of the civilised world would object to it .
Citizens have the right to object to such a construction , and politicians must respect their wishes and make up for the democratic deficit in the European Union .
We have neglected the environment too often to allow ourselves to do such a thing again .
The Italian Government should be given a clear message about it from the European Parliament .

Mr President , I wanted to raise with you quite a serious case about a Sri Lankan journalist , Mr J. S. Tissainayagam , which we raised on our recent delegation visit to Sri Lanka .
He is a very well-known writer and journalist and has been running , amongst other things , a German-Government-funded website called ' Outreach ' promoting peace and justice .
At that point he had been detained without charge for over four months in poor conditions , and he was finally charged and remanded in custody last week under the country 's Prevention of Terrorism Act , with charges related to bringing the government into disrepute and stirring up communal disharmony .
We would ask you , Mr President , to use your good offices with Council and Commission to follow this important case , not least to see to it that he be able to meet his lawyers in private - which he has not been able to do yet - and that there will be full disclosure of the evidence against him .
Our officials will follow the case .
( PL ) Mr President , Russia is one of our main political and economic partners .
In recent days , however , Russia has made intimidating statements against the Union , threatening it with the Russian economic and military might .
Countries involved in the European Neighbourhood Policy have received similar threats .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the context of a partnership , is it normal practice for one of the partners to resort to such action ?
I have in mind , in particular , our shared interests , namely the construction of oil and gas pipelines .
The European Community is home to 500 million citizens and is the largest economy in the world .
The fact that a country with significantly less potential can ride roughshod over the Union indicates that we are being treated as a weak partner incapable of taking serious political decisions .
It is just as well that the Lisbon Treaty is not in force because if it were , even individual Member States of the Union would be denied the opportunity to give an honourable response .
Thank you .
The Lisbon Treaty is explicit : I would ask you to bear with me as I have just made the same point in my speech to the European Council .
Solidarity between the Member States in the energy sphere is a principle laid down in the Lisbon Treaty .
This means that should one EU Member State be faced with a threat to cut off its energy supplies , all the other Member States would have a duty to support it .
For this reason , it is particularly important that the Lisbon Treaty be ratified .
I apologise for reiterating the point , but the Treaty is very important for the energy sphere in particular .
Mr President , I should like to take this time to point out the effect that the implementation of the Energy-using Products Directive will have on a company in my constituency that has expertise in this heating field .
They inform me that the current proposal for implementation in relation to boilers will have a severe and unnecessary impact on Ireland 's central heating industry , which employs many people in my constituency .
Current proposals for boilers will require manufacturers to apply an energy-rating label to the boiler , as well as heating controls , pumps and some renewables .
These labelling proposals overlook the key role of the professional installer .
Installers are a vital part of the heating supply chain , and the Commission 's approach will mean their expertise will be largely ignored or wasted .
The Commission 's proposals will fundamentally change the entire Irish domestic heating market , with wider implications in terms of restricted choice , misleading information for consumers , higher costs and a less flexible and competitive market , as well as loss of employment .
Ahead of the Commission 's Consultation Forum , I should like the Commission to listen to the experts when considering the effects of this directive on Ireland .
( ES ) Mr President , I too want to add my thanks for the formal statement made by the Chamber on the grave accident that occurred on 20 August at Barajas Airport and which led to 155 deaths .
However , I also think it is perhaps time , ladies and gentlemen , for us to question whether all the airlines are strictly applying all the European directives on safety and maintenance .
I think the time has come , and I make this request from this House , for the European Commission to critically review the level of compliance in terms of aviation safety , particularly in the area of aircraft maintenance .
I therefore believe that this is the time , not only for sorrow , of course , and solidarity , of course , but also to critically review the level of compliance with the European directives on aviation safety and maintenance of European aircraft .
Mr President , the EU often shows interest , with good intention , in my constituency of Northern Ireland .
However , I wish to warn it against funding a project of immense divisive potential .
I refer to the foolish embracing by the EU task force , at the behest of the DUP and Sinn Fein leaders of the Northern Ireland Executive , of possible support for a so-called ' conflict transformation centre ' at the site of the former Maze prison .
However it is dressed up and whatever spin is deployed , the preservation of the H-block section , including the hospital wing , would become a shrine to the terrorists who committed suicide in the Maze in the 1980s .
That would be obnoxious to the vast majority of people , and is something that Unionists , whom I represent , would not accept .
I would therefore caution the Commission against meddling with such an explosive issue and against being used by those anxious to hide behind the EU to deliver something which will severely set back relations in Northern Ireland .
( RO ) Following the Russian Parliament 's recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , the settlement of the Dniester conflict regarding the issue of Transnistria has entered a new phase .
It is obvious for each of us that Russia 's foreign policy has changed following the Russian Parliament 's decision and , consequently , a repositioning is required at the level of the entire Union by taking into account this reality .
Taking into consideration that the issue of Transnistria , a region close to the European Union 's Eastern border , is of high interest for all Member States and in particular for Romania , I consider a decisive involvement at Community level to be necessary in order to avoid needless tense relations between the countries and entities that have declared interests in this region .
Taking into consideration that Natalia Timakova , Dimitri Medvedev 's spokeswoman , announced that several meetings shall take place , with participation of all interested parties , including with the Tiraspol representatives , it could be important to examine here the possibility of establishing a committee to determine and present the Community point of view in this matter .
A recent study of the European Council on Foreign Relations shows that , following the events in Georgia , the negotiations for the Moldova-Transnistria agreement shall be much harder .
Mr President , Georgia is not just another international crisis to which the EU has to respond .
It signals Russia 's military comeback , heralded by its offensive energy supply policy initiated in 2006 .
The EU is caught between principles and economic interests .
Upholding the former would imply a readiness to sacrifice the latter .
Conversely , giving priority to the latter would imply a major loss of face .
In its turn , Russia is equally caught between the profits from its energy sales to the West and respect for international legality .
The latter cannot be disrespected with impunity .
That is the message our leaders should convey to Moscow loudly and clearly .
It would be a major waste for the entire international community if Russia chose to invest its newly-acquired energies in a futile attempt to restore the bipolar world , instead of associating itself with shaping the new , multipolar , globalised one .
( RO ) I will speak about the blockage of Sapard payments for Romania and its short and medium-term effects .
A European Commission mission of June 2008 visited Bulgaria and Romania and ordered the suspension of payments in Sapard projects .
It requested actions to remedy procedures deemed non-compliant and , in Romania , the authorities directly involved and responsible proposed an action plan to remedy the problems , which was accepted .
Nevertheless , difficulties have only begun now .
National payments will be resumed , probably in September , by implementing procedures related to the manner of making payments and with an independent audit , which may last for one year , ensuring that they are compliant and with the major risk that money could be lost permanently , unfortunately in a region that was seriously affected by floods this summer .
If the twelve previous audit missions found no irregularities , if deficiencies are not fundamental , I wonder and I ask the European Commission if sometimes savings from the agriculture budget are not more important than the Sapard projects and their results .
I see only one solution , namely to accept the deadline extension by one more year .
Mr President , there are threatening signs of the revival of racism , homophobia and anti-Semitism in many countries of the EU .
The peaceful Pride Festival in Budapest this summer was brutally attacked by extreme right-wing groups , and stones and eggs filled with acid were thrown at the participants .
Many of them were injured .
After that shameful event , the Hungarian Prime Minister has initiated a Hungarian Charter , and here in the European Parliament I would like to launch a European Charter with my colleagues Michael Cashman and Edit Bauer .
We condemn all kinds of violence .
We cannot allow the formation of extreme organisations that want to practise their own idea of justice .
We reject the rebirth of fascist ideas and prejudice against all kinds of minorities , and we strongly reject all forms of racism .
We should act together against violence and intimidation with the help of legislation and also by setting a good example in our everyday lives .
That is why I would like to ask for support for the European Charter here in Parliament as well .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe was founded on the conviction that it was no longer possible to guarantee well-being , freedom , democracy and peace on the basis of national sovereignty .
However , we are condemning the Georgians , who cast off the suffocating yoke of dictatorship in the name of Europe and with hopes of Europe , we are condemning them to national independence , while much of Europe is now kowtowing to Moscow and Putin 's politics in a most cowardly fashion , and preparing to do likewise with China .
Our problem today is that we cannot carry on condemning Georgia , Turkey , Israel and Morocco - whose king asked to join the European Union in 1985 - we certainly cannot condemn them to something that we ourselves rejected , leading to our salvation !
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite substantial efforts and worldwide initiatives to secure justice for the former head of Yukos , Mikhail Khodorkovsky , and his business partner , Platon Lebedev , their fate remains unchanged .
' Freedom is better than unfreedom ' said the newly elected President Medvedev .
That should be the basis for Russia 's future , along with a reform of the judicial system and a much-needed improvement in prison conditions .
Unfortunately , the latest ruling in the Khodorkovsky case shows that hopes for more rule of law in Russia are not being fulfilled .
The recent military policy decisions in respect of Georgia and NATO also indicate that , with the new Putin-Medvedev duo in power , a new Ice Age has begun , not only in the domestic but also in the foreign policy arena .
We really do need to be alert to that .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to refer to an incident that has caused considerable distress to my fellow citizens .
In the course of a debate on criminality in a committee of the British House of Commons , a senior representative of the British police stated that all Poles carry a knife , because it is part of their culture to carry one , and that they need to be re-educated .
I should like to make it clear that , although I am a Pole , I do not myself carry a knife and that the standard use of a knife in my culture is in conjunction with a fork for the purpose of eating a meal .
It is unfortunate that such a statement was made , particularly as the large number of my fellow citizens living in the British Isles are far more likely to be the victims of crime than its perpetrators .
Indeed , all collective allegations ascribing any kind of negative characteristics to any nation whatsoever are expressions of intolerance . No such allegation should ever be made in a Member State of the European Union .
( PT ) The media in Portugal has in recent days reported a further 312 redundancies at Yasaki in Ovar .
Together with this latest round of redundancies , in the last year and a half Yasaki Saltano has made nearly 1 200 people redundant at the Ovar and Vila Nova de Gaia units .
This poses a serious social problem in an area where there are few alternative jobs and where unemployment is constantly on the increase .
However , this is also a real scandal , bearing in mind that this multinational has received millions of euros in Community funds to invest in Portugal .
The people suffering from the change in its business strategy are the workers and residents of the areas where its plants are located .
We must prevent these situations from being systematically repeated .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after yesterday 's Sunday service in my home town , our Indian priest reported on the atrocities being committed in his home country .
For the last week , Christians in the state of Orissa in East India have been subjected to a campaign of persecution , humiliation , abuse and murder .
By the end of last week , this had left 26 people dead , with 41 churches destroyed , four monasteries in flames and many Christian homes in ruins .
People are taking refuge in the forests , praying for safety from the Hindu fanatics .
This is not the first attack on Christians , which is why some 60 000 Christians in Orissa have now fled their homes .
The present conflict was triggered by the murder of a spiritual leader and member of the World Hindu Council on 23 August .
Father Saji from my village has asked our parish to pray for the victims , but we can do more than that .
I utterly condemn these crimes against humanity .
The European Parliament must urge the Indian Government to guarantee the right to life and liberty of Christians in Orissa .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , Transnistria has recognised the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
As far as the separatist Transnistria area of Moldova is concerned , this overheating has much to do with a frozen conflict .
South Ossetia , Abkhazia and Transnistria are in a similar position - for years Russia has been refusing to withdraw its forces from there .
The President of Moldova has said that Transnistria resembles a volcano which , like the events in Georgia , could begin erupting at any time .
Russia has told President Voronin that it is interested in an agreement under which Transnistria would be treated as an autonomous region of Moldova .
As such , if necessary , Transnistria could legitimately separate from Moldova following a referendum .
It is vital to bring the 5 + 2 partners to the negotiating table : we cannot allow Medvedev and Voronin to resolve the conflict between them .
As head of the Moldova delegation I strenuously urge preventive action on Transnistria .
Transnistria should have an international peace-keeping force ; we should offer Moldova a plan for closer partnership and allow Moldovans to enter the European Union without visas .
Mr President , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) decided in July 2007 to grant the right to host the 2014 Winter Olympics to Sochi , Russia .
Following the Russian aggression against Georgia , United States Congressmen Allyson Schwartz and Bill Shuster made an announcement that , as soon as the US Congress returns from its summer vacation , there will be a US Congress resolution calling on the IOC to designate a new venue for the 2014 Olympic Games .
It is quite clear that , if the Olympic Games were to be held in Sochi , countries would boycott the event , just as in Moscow 1980 following the Soviet military invasion of Afghanistan .
That would strike the Olympic movement much harder than selecting a new host for the 2014 Olympics now .
Therefore it is time for the European Parliament to act .
Otherwise we might once again be facing the idea of holding the Olympics in an authoritarian and aggressive country that respects neither human rights , civil liberties nor the Olympic Charter .
( HU ) Mr President , in connection with the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , Traian Băsescu , the President of Romania , has lashed out violently at the collective rights of minorities since , in his opinion , they would lead to the collapse of some states .
The European Community 's concerns about the crisis in the Caucasus , the imperialist aggression and menace of Russia , and the dangers facing Ukraine and Moldova are justified .
However , over and above any interests of great powers , and despite the endeavours of all separatists , a real , peaceful solution could ensure collective human and national rights , as well as full autonomy .
According to Andreas Gross , rapporteur for the Council of Europe , autonomy is the most effective antidote against separatism .
President Băsescu should not worry , because the Hungarians in Transylvania do not want to separate from Romania , in the same way as Tibet does not want to separate from China ; they are merely striving to achieve their collective rights and autonomy .
Mr President , during the summer break in Northern Ireland , the region I come from , we suffered very heavy falls of rain during the month of August .
While many areas suffered , there were flash floods washing away topsoil , destroying many hectares of potatoes and flattening grain .
I visited some of the areas that were worst affected , and what I witnessed was a pitiful sight for those who had worked so hard to try and produce food at this time , with road and bridges washed away as well as some livestock being lost .
Now farmers are well used to battling the weather to survive , but on this occasion these small areas could and should be helped .
In Europe we have the Solidarity Fund that should be made available to the Northern Ireland Executive by the Commission , and I would ask you to write to the head of the Commission , to contact the Office of the First Minister in Northern Ireland to see how best it can help .
( PL ) Mr President , today is the anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War .
I believe it is an appropriate occasion on which to call on you and on all MEPs to support the call for 25 May to be declared an international day devoted to honouring those who fought heroically against totalitarianism .
The choice of the date of 25 May is not accidental .
On 25 May 1948 the Communists murdered Captain Witold Pilecki . The Captain was the only person to go to a concentration camp voluntarily , in order to organise resistance inside the latter and gather information on the mass murders taking place .
After spending more than two years in Auschwitz , he escaped and subsequently fought in the Warsaw Uprising .
He remained in Poland after the fall of the Nazis in order to oppose the next totalitarian regime , namely the Soviet one . This decision eventually cost him his life .
People like Witold Pilecki deserve to be remembered .
As the democratically elected representatives of Europe , we have it in our power to establish a day on which to honour their memory .
Let us hope that , once the date of 25 May is set aside for that purpose , we will only need to remember past struggles against genocide and that the tragedy of totalitarianism will never be re-enacted .
( BG ) President , colleagues , at the beginning of July Filip Dimitrov , our first democratically elected prime minister of Bulgaria , retired from politics .
Filip Dimitrov was among the founders of democratic opposition in Bulgaria , he took over the governance of the state from the disintegrated communist regime in the beginning of the 1990s , was a representative in the European parliament and , finally , Deputy Chairman of the Bulgarian National Assembly .
In all the eighteen years when Mr. Dimitrov was in politics , to all of us who knew him , he served as an example of honesty , openness and a man who to the very depths of his soul believes in the European , Euro-Atlantic choice of our country , in the freedom of speech , in democracy and human rights .
I am convinced that in spite of his retirement from politics , with his advice and with his experience he will continue to help all of us return to our state the image it deserves to have because of the efforts of people like Filip Dimitrov .
( ES ) Mr President , my speech concerns an issue that has not been mentioned .
In Cuba , dissidents and people who do not agree with the dictatorship are being arbitrarily detained on a frequent basis .
The latest detention was that of Gorki Águila , leader of a rock band , who has now fortunately been released .
However , I want to bring to the President 's attention the fact that these arbitrary acts of the Cuban dictatorship must be reported and publicised to prevent them from being repeated .
I therefore invite the President , when he has the opportunity , to inform the Cuban Government and the Cuban Embassy to the European Union of our dissatisfaction and disagreement with such actions .
Mr President , the consumer rights of air passengers travelling from third countries who are transiting through EU hub airports are being breached .
Thousands of EU citizens continue to have their liquid duty-free purchases confiscated because of the failure of the Commission to speedily implement Regulation ( EC ) No 915 / 2007 , which amends Regulation ( EC ) No 622 / 2003 laying down measures for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security .
Thirteen non-EU countries have applied for recognition under the Regulation , but only one has been approved .
I would appeal through you , Mr President , to again ask our new Commissioner , Antonio Tajani , to sort this issue out and implement the regulation as quickly as possible .
Many competitors at the Olympic Games in Beijing - and , indeed , their supporters and families - had goods taken from them transiting back through the main hub airports in Europe when coming home .
Again , the complaints have been coming in in their dozens .
Please sort this out .
It is not in the interests of consumer rights , and it is a farce if we are quoting security reasons .
( DE ) Madam President , on 14 August 2008 the departure time of a Ryanair flight from Austria to the United Kingdom was postponed until the following day .
The company then guaranteed that they would reimburse passengers ' hotel and transfer costs and , in accordance with Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 , an information leaflet was distributed , pointing out passengers ' rights in the event of a flight being delayed or cancelled .
When one passenger applied to Ryanair to refund the additional costs , the airline refused to pay , without giving any precise reasons for its decision .
Ryanair 's refusal to pay is a clear contravention of Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 which specifies the assistance to be provided for air passengers throughout the EU .
In the event of a delay , or more particularly the postponement of a flight until the following day , passengers have a right to compensation which is regulated by law .
Low-cost airlines such as Ryanair must also comply with the law and adhere to the Regulation .
This type of thing is happening more and more frequently , at European air passengers ' expense , and it really is time that the European Commission took some action .
( PL ) Madam President , 87 years ago Lenin , the then leader of world Communism and of the Soviet Union , took the decision to separate three regions from Georgia .
South Ossetia and Abkhazia were two of those regions . Almost 90 years later , Georgia and Europe are paying a high price for this decision .
It so happens that today 's sitting of the European Parliament coincides with a meeting of the European Council .
We therefore have the opportunity to say loud and clear to the Union 's leaders that , in the name of the freedom of nations and of human rights , we cannot condone Russian aggression against Georgia .
Like the Soviet attack on Hungary in 1956 and its later attack on Czechoslovakia in 1968 , this is a notable case of a large state invading a small one during the period following the Second World War .
It is , however , the first case in the last 60 years in which a large country has appropriated part of a small one through military action .
After all , the declaration of the so-called independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia is merely an act of political theatre , choreographed by Mr Putin .
The European Parliament should today declare its solidarity with Georgia and , more generally , with all the nations of the Caucasus .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Madam President .
Hungarian public opinion witnessed a remarkable manifestation right in the middle of the Georgian crisis .
The Russian ambassador to Budapest made a considerably undiplomatic declaration against the leader of the opposition , Viktor Orbán , since Mr Orbán stood up for Georgia .
The Russian ambassador - this cannot be described any other way - threatened the Hungarian opposition , and thereby most of Hungarian society , with the malevolence of the Russian state .
It is not difficult to decipher the coded message : whoever votes for FIDESZ must face the disapproval of the Russians .
His Excellency 's message is undisguised interference in Hungarian internal affairs , and thus in the democratic system of one of the Member States of the European Union .
Of course , Hungary is not alone , and nearly all the former Communist states have received similar threats , which threaten the whole of Europe .
Madam President , despite Ireland 's military neutrality , Ireland is not neutral , or indeed unconcerned , about the crisis that has erupted in Georgia .
There is deep public concern that powerful people on all sides seem to want a new Cold War , and worry about the self-destructive talk of sanctions against Russia .
Knee-jerk reactions will not build or guarantee peace or justice for the people of the region , or indeed anywhere else .
Essentially , Russia has fired a warning shot across our bows .
The EU 's response must be to use its resources to build new EU institutions capable of negotiating binding multilateral agreements .
We must seek to build a new peaceful world in partnership with Russia , not in opposition to it .
That concludes the item .
European Judicial Network - Strengthening of Eurojust and amendment of Decision 2002 / 187 / JHA - Application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Kaufmann , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the European Judicial Network ( 05620 / 2008 - C6-0074 / 2008 - ;
by Mrs Weber , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the strengthening of Eurojust and amendment of Decision 2002 / 187 / JHA ( 05613 / 2008 - C6-0076 / 2008 - ;
by Mr França , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters ( 05598 / 2008 - C6-0075 / 2008 - .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to speak to you today and to tell you about my deep attachment to the values of the European Union .
At the heart of these values , without doubt , is justice .
You wanted to start your part-session with a joint debate on justice issues .
This shows the importance that this House places on the issues of European judicial cooperation and protection of fundamental rights .
I am just as keen on these issues and thank you for this opportunity .
Three texts are on the agenda , as recalled by your President : the decision on the European Judicial Network , the decision on Eurojust and the framework decision on the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia .
These three texts will improve judicial cooperation within the European Union and will also alter the way in which the Member States work .
These three initiatives are also eagerly awaited by those working within justice in our countries .
The work of the JHA Council on 25 July has allowed a political agreement to be reached on the draft decisions on the European Judicial Network and the strengthening of Eurojust .
The combined efforts of the Slovenian Presidency and the French Presidency have brought this about in under a year .
These two draft decisions will give greater protection to Europe 's citizens and strengthen judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
That is the mark of a European Union that can act and make progress while taking account of freedoms and fundamental rights .
As regards the European Judicial Network , the draft decision which should replace the 1998 Joint Action clarifies the obligations of Eurojust and the Network .
It takes account of the wish of Member States to maintain both bodies and to reinforce their complementarity .
The creation of secure methods of communication between Eurojust and the European Judicial Network will ensure effective judicial cooperation and greater mutual trust .
The European Judicial Network is a well-known and recognised tool and has proven its usefulness in encouraging contacts between those involved on the ground . The report by Sylvia Kaufmann stresses the usefulness of the Network and its success .
It highlights the Network 's adaptability which meets the needs , in particular , of magistrates .
This report further underlines the need to retain this flexibility and decentralised structure .
Mrs Kaufmann , you have taken on board and supported the main lines of the original proposal for which I thank you .
You have also raised some concerns .
You have rightly said that secure telecommunications should be established in strict compliance with data protection rules . We absolutely agree .
I can assure you that the Council will pay close attention to the proposals adopted by Parliament .
This assessment of the operation of the European Judicial Network goes hand-in-hand with the strengthening of Eurojust .
One cannot exist without the other .
After six years of Eurojust , experience shows that we need to improve the operation of this judicial cooperation unit .
Eurojust is not sufficiently well-informed , particularly on terrorism matters .
The powers of the national members are not harmonised and the operational capacity of Eurojust is not sufficiently well-developed .
The text on which overall political agreement was reached on 25 July is a vital stage in the construction of the European judicial area .
You will be well aware that the fight against all forms of serious crime is one of the European Union 's priorities .
As an example , in 2004 fourteen cases on the trafficking of human beings were referred to Eurojust ; in 2007 there were seventy-one cases referred .
This shows that we must have effective tools for combating the trafficking on an unparalleled scale to which thousands of our citizens are falling victim .
Eurojust must also become a leading unit in European judicial cooperation .
Thanks to this text on which the JHA Council has agreed , Eurojust will be more operational and reactive . This is therefore an important step forward for us .
I particularly want to congratulate the work of Renate Weber and to thank her for her support .
I am well aware of her commitment and her desire to make this proposal succeed .
With the strengthening of Eurojust , the prerogatives of the national members will be reinforced .
An emergency coordination cell will be established and the transmission of information will be improved to better respond to the challenges posed by the new forms of crime .
Some would have preferred an even more ambitious approach .
As the institutional framework does not allow this , we must take advantage of every possibility to reinforce Eurojust , on the basis of established law and without delay .
Some of your concerns have also been taken into account .
The reporting to Parliament on Eurojust 's operation in this respect will be looked at closely .
As regards the application of the principle of mutual recognition , which is also one of the pivotal aspects in the construction of an area of justice , freedom and security , the framework decision on the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia will allow existing instruments , such as the European arrest warrant , to be reinforced .
It is vital that a decision rendered in a person 's absence by a Member State can be enforced throughout the European Union .
The framework decision will also be accompanied by a reinforcement of people 's procedural rights .
This involves allowing sentences delivered in absentia to be enforced while respecting the right of defence .
However , this framework decision does not aim to amend national rules but rather to improve the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia .
Your report , Mr França , underlines the need to harmonise the existing instruments and that the right to be heard during proceedings must be guaranteed .
The diversity of legal systems must be respected , for example with regard to how a person is summoned .
The Council shares these concerns and the draft proposal therefore relaunches the joint debate on strengthening fundamental guarantees within the European Union .
I know that your Parliament is deeply attached to this issue .
The Council will examine your proposals which , in the main , are along the same lines as the text which has been the subject of political agreement in the Council .
This is the case in particular with the proposals on representation by a legal counsellor and the right to a retrial .
These amendments are undoubtedly improvements on the original proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council will study closely the proposals that will be adopted this week and I must once again assure you of the Presidency 's desire to work with your Parliament .
We must move forward hand-in-hand and I will never forget that you are the representatives of the European people .
Through these three texts , progress will be made in terms of judicial cooperation in criminal matters and also the common good in Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) As you have just said , Mrs Dati , we are at a critical point in the formation of this European judicial area which we want with all our hearts and to which the European Parliament is making a vital contribution .
I want to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Kaufmann , Mrs Weber and Mr França , for their excellent reports on the three initiatives .
These documents show that the European Parliament supports the proposals made by the Member States .
I am also delighted , Mrs Dati , that the Council meeting on 25 July proved to be so fruitful , with a political agreement on the three texts .
The Commission supports these three initiatives and we have endeavoured to contribute constructively to the Council 's work .
As regards Eurojust and the European Judicial Network , the Member States , taking inspiration from our communication of October 2007 on the subject , have clearly shown their desire for convergence .
Many proposals have been included in these two Member-State initiatives : harmonising the powers of the national members of Eurojust , reinforcing the role of the College in the event of conflicts of jurisdiction , improving the circulation of information from national members to Eurojust , and the possibility of appointing Eurojust liaison magistrates to third countries .
Many of the amendments proposed in the extremely useful reports of Mrs Kaufmann and Mrs Weber have already been taken on board during the Council discussions .
Accordingly , Amendment 32 to the Eurojust decision , appearing in Mrs Weber 's report , aims to improve the level of data protection in third countries cooperating with Eurojust .
This cooperation will be evaluated not only when the agreement is concluded , but also after its entry into force .
The Commission suggested taking up this idea and the draft decision was amended accordingly .
It states that the cooperation agreement must include provisions on the monitoring of its application , including the application of data protection provisions .
I will cite another example : Amendment 38 to the ' European Judicial Network ' decision , as set out in Mrs Kaufmann 's report .
As highlighted by Mrs Dati , this amendment aims to ensure that a report is made to the European Parliament every two years on the activities of the European Judicial Network .
This amendment was supported by the Commission and is included in the text of the draft decision .
As you know , the Council has reached political agreement on the Eurojust and Network initiatives .
I hope that the Council will soon formally adopt these instruments and , just as important , that the Member States will take the necessary steps to fully implement the decisions in their national legal systems .
As regards the França report on the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia , I note that most of the amendments , at least in their spirit , if not also in their wording , are already included in the text adopted by the JHA Council on 5 and 6 June .
These are just a few of my observations , Madam President .
I will obviously pay close attention to all Parliament 's suggestions .
However , I am very happy that we are starting this part-session with work that is extremely positive for the future of the European judicial area .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to make use of my full allocation of speaking time now , if I may .
I am pleased to see that the President-in-Office of the Council and the Vice-President of the Commission are here today .
The Committee adopted my report on the European Judicial Network unanimously .
The cooperation was very constructive and I should like to thank everyone involved , especially Mr Popa , Mrs Gebhardt and Mrs Weber , the rapporteur on Eurojust .
The European Judicial Network - or EJN for short - has been in existence for 10 years and has proved its worth in practice .
Even after the launch of Eurojust in 2002 , the EJN remains relevant .
The EJN is not about coordinating investigations ; it is about facilitating direct contacts , the proper execution of mutual legal assistance requests and the provision of information .
It is important , therefore , to leave the EJN 's decentralised structure untouched .
Changes should only be made where necessary , or where such changes arise naturally from the practice applied over recent years .
One example is the establishment of national contact points which play a coordinating role within the Member States and are responsible for maintaining contact with the EJN Secretariat .
A key innovation is the establishment of a secure telecommunications network .
I was delighted to hear that the President-in-Office of the Council has also drawn attention to this issue .
Personal data are exchanged between authorities in the Member States , and this can include sensitive data such as fingerprints under a European arrest warrant .
In order to ensure secure transmission in this case , a secure telecommunications network is needed for it would be unacceptable for such data to be transmitted by fax , for example .
As early as 1998 , when the EJN was established , a secure telecommunications network was envisaged , but it has been impossible , so far , to agree on the modalities , apparently on grounds of cost .
The report proposes that safe telecommunications be established , initially , for the contact points alone .
However , given that the aim is to ensure that , as far as possible , all contacts between the competent authorities take place on a direct basis , a second step envisages integrating all the relevant authorities responsible for legal assistance in their respective Member State into the secure telecommunications network .
Due to the sensitivity of the data , the report makes reference to the relevant data protection provisions , and I would emphasise once more , in this context , how important it is to have a strong framework decision on the protection of personal data within the framework of the third pillar .
This would apply to the exchange of data between the various contact points of the Member States .
Regrettably , the Council has yet to adopt such a framework decision as lex generalis , so basic data protection provisions have been included directly in the legal text itself .
The EJN 's functionality largely depends on the contact points .
For that reason , guidelines have been drawn up for the selection of contact points based on specific criteria .
Persons acting as contact points should certainly have good foreign language skills in at least one other EU language and should have gained experience in international cooperation in criminal matters as well as have served as a judge , public prosecutor or other official in the justice system .
It is important that these guidelines are complied with by the Member States and , of course , they must also ensure that the contact points are adequately resourced .
In order to improve cooperation between the EJN and Eurojust and achieve better coordination of their activities , members of Eurojust should be able to attend EJN meetings by invitation and vice versa .
The Eurojust decision states when the Member States ' judicial authorities - in other words the EJN contact points - must inform Eurojust about specific cases .
The present decision supplements this obligation to the effect that the EJN and Eurojust must inform each other on a reciprocal basis about all cases on which they take the view that the other organisation is better able to deal with these .
Using this flexible and needs-based rule , the aim is to avoid a situation in which national authorities have to provide overly extensive information to Eurojust and also avoid ' swamping ' Eurojust with information which the authority simply cannot process .
Finally , as regards reporting on the administration and activities of the Network , this should be carried out by the EJN itself , not only to Council and the Commission but also to Parliament .
I am pleased that this approach is expressly supported by the Commission .
With the present decision , the European Judicial Network will be adapted to the developments that have taken place over recent years , and its relationship to Eurojust defined in more precise terms .
As a result , the European Judicial Network will be better able to fulfil its remit in the field of judicial cooperation in criminal matters , especially in the event that the Lisbon Treaty does come into force , with the ensuing communitisation of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
rapporteur . - Madam President , conceiving of the European Union as an area of freedom , security and justice would be nothing but a remarkable goal without the involvement of the already-established European agencies , whose capacities to act and react to combat organised cross-border crime should become stronger .
I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , with whom I have worked very well on nearly all aspects of this report , and also the President of Eurojust and his team for their openness during this process .
While drawing up this report , I heard many colleagues call for a European prosecutor .
In this respect , I am much more in favour of harmonisation and the setting-up of a European justice system than of reinforcing cooperation .
However , for a number of reasons we are , for the time being , still pretty far from such a goal : firstly , because there is no European legislation addressing the issue of jurisdiction in cases that are the competence of Eurojust ; secondly , because of the reluctance shown by Member States even to transfer some of their investigative powers to a European agency .
The text on the possibility of Eurojust 's national members being part of a joint investigation teams provides a good example .
It is a paradox that while the Members of the European Parliament are ready to truly address serious cross-border crime - including by granting more powers to Eurojust , with our major concern being respect for human rights - the Member States are preaching one thing but legislating in another .
It is difficult to explain to European citizens how we can establish an area of freedom , security and justice if Member States do not sufficiently trust our own European agencies .
We as a Parliament understand and agree with the fact that Eurojust must work 24 hours a day , seven days a week .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has also agreed that in order for Eurojust to be efficient it is essential for its national members to have the same judicial powers they enjoy in their own countries .
It also voted in favour of strengthening relations with Europol and the European judicial network , and of creating links with other European and international agencies , such as Frontex , Interpol and the World Customs Organisation .
What we as Members of this Parliament require - and the report is a reflection of this approach - is a proper balance between the powers of Eurojust and those of its national members , on the one hand , and the rights of the defendant , on the other .
That is why several of the amendments I have tabled aim to increase the level of protection of procedural rights , such as the right to defence , the right to a fair trial , the right to be informed and the right to judicial redress .
At the same time , although we are aware of the strong data-protection system established by the agency , several amendments represent additional safeguards .
However , a major concern still exists about data transmitted to third countries and international organisations , because the truth is that we do not know , in reality , what will happen to this data .
Therefore , in order to make sure that our own European standards are observed , I propose setting up an evaluation mechanism .
I should like to thank Commissioner Barrot for mentioning this .
Last but not least , I am concerned about the role that the European Parliament should play in relation to Eurojust .
Not knowing what the fate of the Lisbon Treaty will be makes things even more worrisome .
However , there is nothing in current Community law to prevent Parliament from playing an active role in supervising the activities of Eurojust .
It is entirely a matter of political will , and I truly hope that this House will be allowed to do its job .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , Madam Dati , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the process of European construction initially involved the communitisation of the economic area .
However , step by step , the Community , this method idealised by Jean Monnet and its founders , has advanced into other areas in order to find common solutions to common problems .
We have not yet reached the end of this long and difficult road , but must continue taking firm and decisive steps .
One of the areas that causes us all complex and difficult problems within the European Union , now enlarged to 27 Member States and occupied by nearly 500 million people , is justice .
Justice is one of the pillars of democracy and one of the instruments at the service of freedom .
Democracy and freedom are two of the EU 's fundamental values .
As a result , due to the challenges posed by the process of European construction itself and due to the new problems of modern life , justice has now , in my opinion , assumed critical importance .
It demands particular attention from those of the EU 's institutions with responsibility for legislating , making decisions and giving political guidelines on this issue .
Decisions rendered in the absence of defendants in criminal proceedings , known as decisions in absentia , have different procedural solutions which vary a great deal from Member State to Member State .
The situation is serious as these different procedural solutions form a permanent obstacle to the enforcement in one Member State of criminal decisions rendered in another Member State .
This situation hinders , or even prevents , the application of the principle of mutual recognition and encourages an increase in crime and insecurity within the Union .
We therefore welcome the legislative initiative of Slovenia , France , the Czech Republic , Sweden , the Slovak Republic , the United Kingdom and Germany , as received and welcomed by the Council .
Its main aim is to lay down procedural rules on summoning people , retrials or appropriate appeals and legal representation .
These rules will make criminal proceedings quicker and more efficient .
They will also increase the effectiveness of the principle of mutual recognition , particularly in terms of the European arrest warrant and surrender procedures between Member States , and also the application of the principle of mutual recognition to financial penalties , confiscation orders and judgments in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences and other measures involving deprivation of freedom for the purpose of their enforcement in the European Union .
The recognition and supervision of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences must also be included .
The report that I am presenting to the House today includes contributions from a large number of members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Various amendments were proposed by myself or by other colleagues , resulting in numerous compromise amendments and a firm consensus between Members of the PSE , PPE , ALDE , Verts / ALE and UEN Groups , such that there were only two votes against this report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report therefore contains amendments to the proposal for a Council framework decision which , in our opinion , technically enrich this and make it politically robust , particularly with regard to the procedures for summoning defendants and the guarantee of their rights of defence , the possibility of the defendant being represented in his absence and being represented by a legal counsellor appointed and paid by the State and also the possibility of a retrial or appropriate appeal , in accordance with national laws , to be instigated by the defendant already judged in absentia .
Finally , I must highlight and express my thanks for the understanding and consensus of the political groups and I hope , and wish , that the outcome of the vote will at least match the broad consensus achieved .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Madam President , I welcome these reports , especially the one on in absentia , because it will make it easier and simpler for those who have to defend or take legal action where one or the other party is not able to be present .
Differences in approach across the Union have created a degree of uncertainty and have undermined confidence in each other 's judicial systems .
I therefore welcome the statement made by the Minister that the Council will try and ensure that this process is harmonised across all Member States , because to date some Member States have not made every effort to contact the defendants .
I believe that the onus has to be on the judicial system , wherever it is , to ensure that the defendants understand the implications of any judgments made in their absence , and that their fundamental rights are protected in this respect .
I would also call upon the Council to ensure that all Member States have a system where defendants are able to have legal representation regardless of the country they may reside in .
Finally , my congratulations to all the rapporteurs in their work to simplify a complex set of legal processes and proposals that I believe will give substance to the European arrest warrant .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( RO ) Thus , cross-border crimes have increased and the judicial system must adjust to the new situation .
Thus , I have noticed the need to harmonize legislation between the Member States and , in particular , during this period , the need for rapid and efficient information of the relevant authorities of Member States .
This report is obviously a step forward for solving this challenge that the European citizens and institutions are dealing with .
Modernizing the European judicial network shall create an adequate response to the cross-border crime phenomenon .
The report , which was voted unanimously in the LIBE Committee , makes the European judicial network more efficient and capable of providing necessary information at all times and from anywhere in the Member States .
The beneficiaries of this modernization will be the European citizens , who will notice that the national judicial institutions have the necessary means for a rapid response , through a modern and safe telecommunication network .
Both Eurojust and the judicial system in the Member States shall be able to rely upon the European judicial network structure and nobody shall be able to come up with excuses anymore for the lack of necessary information .
As a Shadow - Rapporteur from the European People 's Party , I thank Mrs. Rapporteur Silvia-Yvonne Kaufmann for her work and for the way in which we managed to find compromise solutions .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , I am delighted that we today have the opportunity to debate such an important package together , and I fully anticipate that tomorrow we will be adopting decisions on the basis of a very large majority .
I should particularly like to thank the two rapporteurs whom I shadowed , Mrs Kaufmann and Mrs Weber , for their very good cooperation , as this was a prerequisite for being able to produce such good work .
Good work is essential in this area and I am also very pleased that , when it comes to the European Judicial Network ( EJN ) , the outcome achieved enables us to take forward the work that has already been done .
Good cooperation among jurists , magistrates and the relevant authorities in the Member States is essential if we are genuinely to create law and justice for our citizens , and that , after all , is what we want to do .
I am particularly gratified , in this context , that we are finally establishing the cooperation between the EJN and Eurojust on a formal basis and ensuring links which can only be productive and which we can only welcome .
However , whenever increasing volumes of data are exchanged , data protection naturally becomes increasingly important , and this applies to security of telecommunications and the exchange of these data as well .
I am therefore very pleased that Parliament , the Commission and the Council apparently agree on this , and again , this is something I can only welcome .
I am equally glad to say that we will get a large majority on all the reports tomorrow , for this expansion that we have proposed - and which I hope will secure the endorsement of the Commission and the Council - this addition by the European Parliament which we have Mrs Weber to thank for , namely that the sexual exploitation of children or child pornography is now also to be included as an offence , which was not the case before , this is , in my view , a very important issue for our society , and one which I would underscore .
A particularly important issue for the Socialist Group in this context - but also one where I believe a solution has been found - is ensuring that , in this area , it is not just about organised crime but also serious crime .
I think it is important that we do not have to produce evidence , first of all , that organised crime is taking place , but that , through the exchange of information , we can demonstrate that organised crime may be happening somewhere along the line .
It cannot be a basic prerequisite .
I think there has been something of a misunderstanding here between the groups and I wanted to try and clear that up .
I hope , and I am confident , that we can move ahead in a positive way , and I greatly welcome that .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , when our Prime Ministers ' meeting almost a decade ago in Tampere set out the main guidelines for EU criminal justice policy , they rightly stressed that European citizens had the right to expect the Union to ensure there was no hiding place for criminals .
That is why European Liberal Democrats have consistently supported measures like the European arrest warrant , unlike British Conservatives who spout hot air on law and order but oppose EU cooperation instruments .
Those measures also explain the justification for strengthening the ability of national prosecutors to work together in Eurojust and bring major criminals to justice .
It is legitimate to ensure that they are available around the clock and to give them more powers to get their decisions implemented , like issuing search and seizure warrants in their own Member States and accessing their own national criminal databases .
There is also certainly scope for clarifying and streamlining the rules on when judgments delivered in absentia without the presence of the accused will be recognised , but this must not shade into lazy habits of not trying hard enough to inform the defendant .
I would not want every Member State to copy the worrying Italian volume of in absentia trials .
When I questioned the Commission a few months ago , it stressed that the initiative was balanced , increasing the fundamental rights of citizens while also enhancing the principle of mutual recognition .
But bodies like the European Criminal Bar Association , the Council of Bars and Law Societies , and Fair Trials International have all expressed fears at weak safeguards for defendants .
The presidency minister stressed and promised that the Council would consider Parliament 's amendments with attention .
I am sure she means well , but my response is : big deal .
Directly-elected MEPs are marginalised in decisions on EU law as regards cross-border justice .
Until we get the Treaty of Lisbon into force those laws are largely decided by national civil servants and that is a big part of the reason why the second part of the 10-year-old deal , which promised to raise justice standards in Member States like good data protection rules and to strengthen defendants ' rights like legal aid , translation and bail , have not been kept .
Until we get a democratic instead of a technocratic EU justice policy , one truly balanced between catching criminals and guaranteeing fair trials , support for the measures discussed now must be qualified .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , I know that I could never be accused of being a Tory , but I too voted against the European arrest warrant .
The reason for this is not that I am against extradition , against suspects being handed over from one country to another .
Actually I am very much for that .
My problem at the time was that I believed that we had not put in place adequate regulations on the rights of suspects and that we should have done that at the same time .
The procedural rights of defendants were not regulated .
Despite the energy put into this and the excellent proposals that we are going to debate here today and which I am also in favour of , it remains a fact that we have still not got that proposal through which has been on the table for years and which is a crucial element to creating trust between Member States , and therefore also facilitating extradition .
I should very much like to hear from Minister Dati whether she also considers that proposal to be so crucial to our European cooperation , on what points it is still sticking in the Council and whether there is a possibility , in this energetic French Presidency , to make any headway with this issue of the rights of defendants .
The fact of the matter is that this is really essential to facilitating extradition .
As far as the judgments in absentia are concerned , it is good that the requirements as presently worded are being put in place for extradition .
The question is : are they sufficient ?
You could infer from the political agreement within the Council that you should be given a retrial or that a possibility of appeal is sufficient .
Can Minister Dati assure me that everyone has the right to a retrial ?
After all , an appeal does not give you all the chances and all the options that you have with a completely new trial .
I really would like to hear , therefore , whether people do indeed have the right to a completely new trial and not only an appeal .
Now to my final point which I will keep short : we hear a great deal about what is needed to facilitate the work of the investigation authorities .
We hear too little - or it is unorganised - about how things are with the loopholes in the area of defence , loopholes that are precisely because of the European cooperation .
I hope that we will arrive at a Eurorights panel , an ombudspanel , so that we can see what loopholes there are in the area of defence , and so that we can find solutions for them together .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , here is a concrete example of what a one-size-fits-all integrated European judicial system leads to .
A 19-year-old man in London , Andrew Symeou , faces extradition to Greece on a manslaughter charge .
Mr Symeou maintains that he has nothing whatsoever to do with the crime in question .
The evidence against him is suspect , depending on dubious identification and statements allegedly beaten out of his friends by the Greek police .
That evidence should be scrutinised by a British court before it agrees to his extradition .
However , under a European arrest warrant , a British court now has no right to examine prima facie evidence in order to satisfy itself that extradition is justified , and no power to prevent it .
The European arrest warrant means that British citizens now effectively no longer enjoy the basic protection of the law against arbitrary arrest and detention as established by Magna Carta .
That does not serve the interests of justice for the victim or the accused , both of whom deserve it .
( EL ) Madam President , let me first congratulate the Slovenian Presidency and the other 13 countries that have endorsed this proposal brought before us today .
It is a significant contribution to the issue of justice in the EU .
Let me also congratulate the three rapporteurs , Mrs Kaufmann , Mrs Weber and Mr França , on their fine , methodical work .
They have basically approved the proposal with the amendments , which the Council and the Commission are on the verge of adopting .
I was glad to hear this and welcome it .
I should be even happier if today we also had the proposal to adopt the minimum procedural rights for suspects and defendants before us for approval .
Efforts would then be complete .
I therefore appeal to the Commission and the Council to put forward this proposal as quickly as possible .
As shadow rapporteur for the proposal on Eurojust , I must say that I am pleased with the strengthening of this body .
When it was founded , it seemed to be merely a typical institution with precious few prospects and of minimal use .
The facts have proved this to be wrong ; its usefulness has been proved , as has its need to be strengthened further .
I need not refer to what previous speakers and rapporteurs have said about the additions to this body ; I merely welcome its reinforcement .
These proposals undoubtedly make for useful progress towards the development of justice , freedom and security .
More radical steps need to be taken , however .
We must overcome an obstructively nationalist approach to issues and implement broader justice in the European area .
Then we shall be able to say that justice really is the same throughout the EU .
I hope that this will come about with the approval of the Lisbon Treaty .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteurs .
In recent years , the activity of the European Judicial Network and Eurojust has proved extremely important and useful in the field of judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
The adoption of the Council 's decision regarding the European Judicial Network , as well as of the decision on the strengthening of Eurojust , is necessary for the two structures to become increasingly prompt , taking into consideration that the mobility of people and cross-border crimes have increased significantly in recent years .
The two structures should cooperate and supplement each other .
The creation of a contact point as national correspondent for coordinating the activity of the European Judicial Network , as well as the creation of a Eurojust national co-ordination system , is important for permanent mutual information , as well as for guiding the national authorities either toward the Judicial Network or toward Eurojust , according to the specific cases handled .
Structured information , provided in due time , is essential for an efficient Eurojust activity .
Increased attention should be given to the creation of a special communication network for the transmission of personal data .
Ensuring adequate protection of data in the activity of the two structures is extremely important .
( SL ) The nature of Mr França 's report seemed at first to be more legal and technical than concrete .
However , it transpired that among the Member States there are some which are totally unfamiliar with this legal institution .
This report also exposed differences between the Anglo-Saxon and Continental penal systems .
It is therefore logical that some of my fellow Members will oppose the report .
Of course , that does not imply that the topics are not important .
We of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are of the opinion that the right to be tried is a fundamental political right .
However , there have been cases when the accused did not attend the trial , but the court nevertheless pronounced sentence .
Sentences pronounced in absentia in one country have not so far been recognised in another Member State .
This outline decision ensures that such sentences could also be enforced in other Member States of the European Union , under certain conditions of course , one of those conditions , in our opinion , being that the accused was summoned to the court in a correct manner and that , despite being summoned by the court authorities , failed to attend the court .
Evading justice is common and a person legally sentenced in one European Union country should not be allowed to stroll peacefully down the streets of other Member States .
We of the PPE-DE are of the opinion that the rapporteur has managed to harmonise the amendments and prepare a balanced report , for which I would like to thank him .
I would also like to make the following remark : it is right and proper for us to secure conditions for just trials , but we must also take care of the victims of criminal acts .
Madam President , I rise to speak solely on the França report on mutual recognition of judgements in absentia .
The very concept of this proposal is alien to many judicial systems within Member States , especially those who have a legal system based on common law .
In the UK we have over centuries built up our legal system based on the idea of habeas corpus and the right of the defendant not to be judged unless he has the opportunity to defend himself .
This principle is enshrined in the well-known document I have here - Magna Carta of 1215 - which has guaranteed this right in my country for 800 years .
Recognition of trials in absentia goes wholly against the basic ideals of this historic document .
For a judgment to be made in one Member State and subsequently recognised in another , once a European arrest warrant has been issued , certainly raises the question of whether a fair trial has taken place .
The organisation Fair Trials International , in their paper on this proposal , mirrors my concerns and highlights - and I quote - ' significant concerns on the issue of extradition procedure to be followed ' .
Colleagues , I urge you to look seriously at what is proposed and think how this will affect your constituents and their right to a fair trial .
Madam President , no sensible person wants to make life easy for criminals , but we do have to guard against justice in Europe being reduced to the lowest common denominator .
And with such a wide range of judicial procedures , safeguards and processes across the EU , talk of obtaining judicial equivalence often involves exactly that .
In the United Kingdom , our common-law-based legal system is quite different in practice , precedent and processes to the system in our continental neighbours .
So when I see reports that are predicated on the fusion of practice for fusion 's sake , I must be concerned .
I take the report on mutual recognition of judgments in absentia .
I frankly say that there is not equivalence between the painstaking judicial precautions taken before someone is convicted in absentia in the United Kingdom and what seems to me the far more casual approach in , for example , Greece or Bulgaria .
Therefore , I do not agree that my British constituent convicted there in his absence should have that conviction automatically recognised in the UK .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I simply want to congratulate the rapporteurs and also the Council Presidency on the results achieved at this stage of the debate and preparation of the texts .
Many of our citizens question the added value of Europe in their daily lives .
As regards justice , any measure to improve this vital public service is likely to improve the perception of Europe 's usefulness in relation to the security of its citizens .
In this respect , it is particularly important to ensure that decisions can be enforced across Europe and to remove the barriers to their enforcement within the EU territory .
This is the aim of the proposed texts .
While respecting public freedoms , these measures will reinforce the effectiveness of penalties ordered by national courts .
Madam President , this is just to react to the British sceptics because I agree with them that we should not make legislation on the basis of the lowest common denominator .
The thing is , however , that you then have to think about how you want to make legislation , because if we also agree that we want to have a common approach in catching criminals , then you cannot make legislation through unanimity .
That is why everything is now stuck in Council .
But I also expect their help in coming up with a decision-making process with Qualified Majority Voting ( QMV ) , because otherwise we are stuck .
Either you isolate yourself and do not want to cooperate in the field of justice , or we go over to QMV , because that is the only way we can make really substantial , meaningful legislation .
( FR ) Madam President , I must reiterate what Mrs Buitenweg has just said .
The question raised by these texts , as by all the progress made in this area in the last 20 years , is very simple : in the European Union , as stated by my colleague Jean-Paul Gauzès , do we first of all take into account the interests of the people , in particular honest people , or do we first of all take into account the interests of the States and the mechanisms of State ?
It is clear that European construction - and this may be regretted but it is a fact and a positive fact in today 's world - involves ensuring that the mechanisms of State of the 27 Member States cannot , as they have done for too long , prevail over the interests of the people and in particular the interests of security .
This is the whole purpose of the European project , otherwise there is no European project .
The Council and these three proposals must therefore be supported .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , your words this afternoon bear witness to the great importance that you place on these three texts .
They also show your commitment to ensuring that effective progress is made in judicial cooperation , particularly in criminal matters , and , as you have pointed out , while respecting fundamental rights .
This dual requirement is essential as it forms the very condition for the construction of the European judicial area , because we all have different legal systems and even different legal organisations .
The guarantees given in the operation of Eurojust and the European Judicial Network , like those which will be offered when enforcing decisions rendered in absentia , clearly obey an identical logic .
I should therefore like to thank the European Commission , and Jacques Barrot in particular , for its support of the Presidency .
As you indicated , numerous elements of these reports were agreed by the Council , in the end , almost unanimously .
As you also said , we have a lot to do and must work together on this .
I also want to thank Sylvia Kaufmann for her report and for her speech today because the assessment of the European Judicial Network is an important step in improving judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
It should be noted that this Network has been important and effective .
Mrs Kaufmann , you have again today rightly emphasised the links between Eurojust and the European Judicial Network .
Their development goes hand-in-hand ; this point was also raised on numerous occasions during the last European Council .
I also want to thank Renate Weber for her report and for the important contribution that she has made .
Her speech in Toulouse on this subject was also brilliant .
Mrs Weber , I must also thank you for your welcome .
I know that you have carried out remarkable work with all the other people involved in Eurojust .
You also mentioned the Lisbon Treaty .
I understand that you would have preferred to work within another institutional framework but we must , however , progress on the basis of established law as this affects all the European institutions .
Mr França , your speech highlighted the need to adopt a single framework for enforcing decisions rendered in absentia .
You are right to raise this point and it is one way for our legal systems to prove their effectiveness .
Mrs Gebhardt , there is a vital need for cooperation between all political and legal players because the challenge facing judicial cooperation in criminal matters in Europe is to learn to work together in order to effectively combat all forms of crime .
I know that you are a demanding advocate of this cooperation .
I should now like to respond to those of you who have doubts about a Europe of justice and who fear that we are endangering fundamental rights .
It is true that , under the German Presidency , we could not reach agreement on the minimum procedural guarantees .
In response , I must say that the framework decision on decisions rendered in absentia provides for the right to a retrial which is a fundamental guarantee .
The result of this process is eagerly awaited by judges , public prosecutors and legal professionals who cooperate on a daily basis and also by the victims who suffer from the forms of crime which are constantly adapting and changing .
We must show that we are equal to these demands and put in place effective and useful tools .
We must build a Europe that protects its citizens within such a judicial area .
The Presidency knows that it can count on your full support for these three texts .
It would like to express its recognition of this fact and thank everyone who has today shown an interest in these issues .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I should like to join in the praise and thanks of Mrs Dati who is chairing the JHA Council during the French Presidency .
I must say to Mrs Kaufmann that she is right to insist on data protection .
I must also remind her that the draft framework decision on data protection actually lays down detailed rules that will also apply to information exchanged between the contact points of the European Judicial Network , but we should certainly make sure of this .
I must also say to Mrs Weber that , in order to ensure the success of these texts , trust between Member States and in the EU agencies is clearly very important .
Mrs Weber , I believe that you made some very strong statements on this subject .
Mr França has clearly shown the importance of the text on more rapid enforcement of decisions , for which he was rapporteur .
He did this in a balanced manner , which I must highlight , while confirming that there will also be a possibility of a retrial , as just mentioned by Mrs Dati , and that the right of defence will clearly be maintained .
I must respond to Mrs Buitenweg and Mr Demetriou on procedural rights .
I regard procedural rights as extremely important for the development of the common area of freedom , security and justice .
The Commission was disappointed that no agreement could be reached last year on our proposal for a framework decision on procedural rights .
I am now considering initiatives in this area that could be taken in the near future .
I am determined to make progress in this area , perhaps by presenting a new proposal on procedural rights .
In any event , you may be sure that this matter is receiving my full attention .
I must also say to Mrs Gebhardt , although I believe Mrs Dati has already responded on this subject , that we are talking about serious crime in new forms that perhaps do not correspond to the overly strict definition of organised crime .
Serious crime must also form one aspect of this judicial cooperation that we truly want .
I do not have much else to add , apart from reiterating what Jacques Toubon said , namely that we must consider the interests of European defendants and the interests of everyone of us and our compatriots in order to ensure that this judicial cooperation proves to be increasingly effective , while of course respecting human rights .
In any event , I too should like to thank Parliament for the quality of its contribution to this important debate which will mark a very positive step in the development of this European judicial area .
Madam President , Mrs Dati , thank you for having urged on this European Council which was able to reach a consensus in this area and arrive at these political agreements .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I should like to say a few words in my capacity as a shadow rapporteur on the other two reports and to thank Mrs Kaufmann for the way we worked together , and Mr França for his work .
There were 57 compromise amendments in his report , which says something about the level of work we put in .
Concerning the report on decisions rendered in absentia , probably the most sensitive aspect relates to the fact that , in some Member States , when judgments are rendered in the absence of the defendant , the solution is to have a retrial , thus fully respecting the European Convention on Human Rights ( Protocol No 7 , Article 2 ) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , whereas other countries recognise only the right to an appeal .
Unfortunately , the proposal in this report is not about harmonising current legislation in the 27 Member States .
Although we should aim at having a European legislation in the future , for the time being we have done our best , at least by ensuring that even in the appeal the defendant enjoys the procedural guarantees as provided for by Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
I should like to conclude by saying that the good functioning of the principle of mutual recognition of judicial decisions requires a high level of mutual confidence between the Member States , and this confidence must be based on a common observance of human rights and fundamental principles .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) I must thank the Minister for her words and also the Commissioner and my fellow Members , both those who agree and those who disagree , because the latter give me the opportunity , here and now , to clarify one or two points .
However , first of all I want to say the following : both as a Member of this House and as a lawyer and citizen , I feel particularly satisfied today to be able to endorse the Council 's proposal and our amendments .
Why do I hope and pray that the framework decision will be adopted and applied ?
The answer is because the situation in Europe is serious and we must respond without further delay .
There are many people who have already been sentenced and who are moving freely through the Union without the courts being able to enforce the decisions rendered in other countries .
This is serious in terms of the development of crime itself and security in Europe and it is important that the European institutions respond .
In particular , the framework decision promotes the principle of mutual recognition , and our amendments , the amendments proposed by Parliament , must be read in conjunction with one another .
The solutions proposed on summoning people , on the rules for the representation of defendants and on retrials or appeals must be read in conjunction with one another .
All these technical solutions are interlinked and , in our opinion , the rights of defence of defendants must always be guaranteed in all circumstances .
We well know , and this must be said , what we should leave well alone .
Under these circumstances , the solution that has been found is , in my opinion , a solution that we must adopt .
It is both an important and a great step forward and also another small step forward .
According to the old rule , this is how to build the European Union , this is how to build Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The legislative proposal on decisions rendered in absentia must be adopted in order to overcome serious differences in treatment and the huge amount of discretion granted to executing authorities in the 27 EU Member States .
These are the objectives which the Committee on Legal Affairs set itself when presenting its opinion to the Committee on Civil Liberties .
The four amendments , adopted unanimously last May and basically taken over by the committee responsible , aim to ensure a fair balance between citizens ' fundamental rights and freedoms and the need for mutual recognition of judgments .
It has therefore become essential to harmonise our criminal justice systems , by introducing into the proposal uniform criteria recognised by the largest possible number of EU countries , with a view to legal clarity .
These are minimum standards geared to combining safeguards for guarantees to protect the accused with the need to preserve efficient cross-border judicial cooperation .
Nevertheless , in certain cases the Member State is granted the leeway needed to take into account the specifics of its own legal system .
The European Parliament voted in favour of the proposal for mutual recognition by the legal authorities of the EU Member States of penal sentences in absentia , that is , sentences that have been pronounced in another Member State in the absence of the accused party .
Together with the European arrest warrant , this means that anyone is liable to be arrested and sentenced in any EU Member State in which they have been tried and sentenced by default , without ever being told or realising that proceedings have been brought against them .
The problem is even greater for Member States such as Greece , where the legal system , at least for the most serious offences , does not recognise the possibility of the accused standing trial in their absence .
This regulation crucially undermines the accused 's right to a fair trial .
It destroys the right of the accused to a real defence ; it has already led to violent reactions in legal bodies and associations throughout the EU .
It is now becoming clear that harmonising the Member States ' penal systems and the so-called ' communitarisation ' of criminal law being promoted by the EU are leading to the infringement of fundamental sovereign rights and of the rights of Member States to determine their own guarantees of protection in critical areas such as criminal proceedings .
Use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) under the Schengen Borders Code ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Brejc , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 562 / 2006 as regards the use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) under the Schengen Borders Code - C6-0086 / 2008 - .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Brejc , for his work on this proposal .
An important step is being taken which will allow us to benefit fully from the technical tools available to secure our external borders .
It is extremely important to use the Visa Information System ( VIS ) to ensure that the checks carried out at external borders are efficient .
The VIS provides a reliable link between the visa holder , the visa and the passport in order to prevent false identities from being used .
The full benefits of this system will only be gained with the introduction of biometrics .
The legislative instrument on the agenda will lay down , once formally adopted , the common rules to guarantee the efficient and harmonised use of the VIS at our external borders .
Without common rules , those border crossing points where the VIS is not systematically used could be exploited by illegal immigrants and criminals .
By amending the Schengen Borders Code , these common rules will be established .
I can therefore fully support the compromise reached and congratulate the European Parliament and the Council on the agreement at first reading .
rapporteur . - ( SL ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for his kind words .
The European Parliament is involved in a co-determination process for amending the regulation governing the use of the Visa Information System .
The amendments to the visa system proposed by the Commission initially envisaged a very thorough control of the entry of third-country citizens needing a visa .
This would involve not only the usual procedure of matching the person to the document , but also fingerprinting .
The regulation contains all the search measures and conditions for the appropriate authorities managing the controls at external border crossings to access data for checking identity and so on - I will refrain from listing all these checks .
In accordance with this regulation , the border official has access to the Visa Information System , where he can check all the data on the passenger at the border , including fingerprints .
The proposed regulation , that is to say a systematic checking with fingerprinting of third-country citizens every time ( I emphasise every time ) they enter the Schengen area , would certainly prolong the waiting time at border crossings , especially during the tourist season and at the beginning and end of public holidays .
Since Europe is a global economic power as well as an interesting tourist destination for third-country citizens , who of course need entry visas , in my opinion it is , or was , necessary to ease the regulation appropriately .
That is why I proposed random checking and fingerprinting at border crossings .
I thereby wanted to draw attention to the fact that the visa holder was fingerprinted once in the process of obtaining a visa , and then again on entering the Schengen area for the purpose of comparison and verification of identity .
I think that such an operation or such a rigid provision is an exaggeration because we actually have no data on , or estimates of , the numbers of forged visas .
On top of that , fingerprinting totally unsuspicious people is senseless and time-consuming .
Despite separate lanes for citizens of the European Union , very long queues would form at border crossings where everyone , namely citizens of the European Union and those with visas , would be queuing during public holidays and vacations .
In this session of Parliament we have managed , relatively quickly , to reach a consensus on certain deviations from such rigid provisions , and a compromise with the Council and the Commission was also reached after two trialogues .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs approved the proposal with a large majority , there being no votes against and only two abstentions .
In brief , I think that the current regulation is good because it ensures a smooth border crossing .
Even when there are many people queuing , the border official makes his own assessment in accordance with the regulation and , if conditions dictate , carries out a random check .
The decision to carry out random checks is not a matter for the official alone , but primarily for his superiors at the border .
I think we have ensured appropriate safety standards and at the same time enabled passengers to cross the border in the shortest possible time .
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank the Council and the Commission for their excellent cooperation , and especially the shadow rapporteurs , in particular Mr Cashman , for a number of good ideas and their active search for a compromise .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the extension of the Schengen area has removed border controls in most of the EU and made day-to-day travel within those borders quicker and easier for our citizens .
It also means , however , that non-EU citizens entering the Schengen area are effectively only checked once , at the external border .
While our citizens often equate illegal immigration with dramatic scenes of unseaworthy and overcrowded vessels breaching our maritime borders , or container-loads of unfortunates - victims of human trafficking - crossing land borders , the reality is much more complex .
About 50 % of illegal immigrants enter the EU legally , but fail to leave our territory on expiry of their visas .
Secondly , incidents of falsified documents are widespread , especially at airports .
In order to reduce the number of overstayers , as well as to decrease the risk of granting access to persons with falsified documents , a harmonised and secure system for checking visa validity and taking fingerprints will apply in the Schengen area .
However , as all our citizens who travel are well aware , increased security leads to increased inconvenience and waiting times at borders for bona fide travellers .
Therefore a degree of pragmatism is also necessary .
If there is deemed to be no risk related to internal security and illegal immigration , and traffic at a border is of such intensity that waiting times become excessive , then the need to take fingerprints may be waived .
This more flexible system may operate for a maximum of three years , after which an evaluation of its effectiveness will take place .
While we aim to make Europe secure , we need at the same time to be welcoming to business travellers and tourists alike .
I believe that the proposed visa information system has struck the right balance between those two objectives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work he has done .
The compromises we have achieved with the Council are sensible and effective , and I say this as the original rapporteur on the Schengen border code .
Brevity is the source of wit , so I will detain the House no more , other than thanking - as every MEP should - the two wonderful assistants , Renaud and Maris , who work with me and who make my work not only enjoyable but also productive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as the rapporteur on the visa information system ( VIS ) , and still working on the amendment of the common consular instructions to govern the actual collection of the biometrics , I take a great interest in anything that concerns the visa information system .
When we decided on the VIS , we allowed for this three-year period when the search could be done using just the visa sticker , without the fingerprints in the VIS .
But I have slightly mixed feelings about the compromise .
I support it because that is what has been able to be agreed .
But on the other hand the Commission has rightly said that only a biometric check can confirm with certainty that the person wishing to enter is the one to whom the visa has been issued , and therefore a systematic consultation of the VIS , including a biometric check by border guards , should be performed for each visa holder .
I am therefore a little bit worried about the derogation and the ability to have random checks .
I shall look forward to this report after three years , and ensure that flexibility has not become a loophole , because of course if we are going to have the VIS we had better apply it properly .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brejc for his excellent report .
We appreciate his point that consulting the VIS using the visa sticker number in combination with the verification of fingerprints will create a lot of problems .
Therefore we welcome the introduction of a derogation in exceptional cases to consult the VIS without verification of fingerprints .
Nevertheless , in our opinion , the report is not as ambitious as it should be .
The derogation should instead be a general rule .
We suggest that the VIS should be consulted in exceptional cases when there are doubts regarding identity .
It is well known that the Verts / ALE Group strongly opposes the extensive introduction of biometrics until its necessity is proved beyond reasonable doubt .
We believe that it has crucial implications for personal data security and for fundamental rights .
Therefore we cannot vote in favour of the regulation at this time .
( NL ) Mr President , the regulation rightly provides that , for everyone in possession of a visa , the Visa Information System ( VIS ) should be systematically consulted for a biometric check .
This is the best and safest way to check the authenticity of a visa .
It is regrettable , therefore , that Parliament feels the need to undermine the principle by introducing a list of situations in which we will make do with checking the identification sticker and not proceed to check the biometric data .
There is a danger then that , due to the introduction of this list , biometric checks will become the exception rather than the rule .
I know , of course , that it is impossible to perform the biometric checks routinely in all circumstances , but it should certainly be the rule .
In the context of the fight against illegal immigration and the fight against terrorism and cross-border criminality , we cannot permit a lax and informal approach in this case .
( HU ) Mr President , Hungary was naturally also very pleased about joining the Schengen zone .
Allow me to say a few more sentences in connection with this topic , concerning the unfortunate situation that has developed on the border of Hungary and Austria .
In many respects the Austrian authorities do not take the Schengen system into account : although Hungary has been part of Schengen for nearly a year , they ask for the passports of Hungarians arriving from across the border and impose fines if they do not have a passport .
Naturally , this is not a frequent occurrence but , when it does happen , it understandably and justifiably causes great antipathy in Hungarian public opinion .
Unfortunately , in addition to this , there is also a practice of closing , at the border , roads that have existed up to now , to prevent Hungarians from using them to cross the border without a passport under the Schengen Agreement .
I hope that there will be a way for us to stop these abuses by the Austrians . Thank you .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I must once again thank your rapporteur , Mr Brejc , because he has grasped the main aim of the proposal , which is to secure the borders , without forgetting , however , that these borders must be sufficiently flexible .
I believe that the two can be reconciled and that you have achieved this in this text which is the result of an excellent compromise .
I would add , as an echo to what Mr Weber has just said , that we do have a problem in terms of both opening up Europe to everyone wishing to enter and leave on a regular basis , while being relatively attentive to those who , it must be said , try to cheat and abuse the rules .
This dual requirement of openness and , at the same time , regularity and respect for the law must therefore be taken into account .
My thanks go to the House for allowing us to make progress in securing our borders while maintaining the necessary flexibility .
rapporteur . - ( SL ) I would like to comment on two contradicting opinions : deviation as a general principle and strict observance of the rules laid down in the Schengen Code .
It is precisely the compromise we have reached that allows reasonable border crossings even when the queues are really long .
Just imagine a border crossing between , say , Slovenia and Croatia during a public holiday when fifty to sixty thousand people turn up , ten thousand of whom have a visa .
If those ten thousand had to be fingerprinted , the others , who are citizens of the European Union and can cross the border without any formalities , would have to wait a day or two .
Therefore , let us be realistic and create a strict control system comprising reasonable measures for a smooth border crossing .
Let us not forget that the regulation clearly states , and I quote : ' ... for the sole purpose of verifying the identity of the visa holder and / or the authenticity of the visa ... , the competent authorities for carrying out checks at external border crossing points ... shall , ... , have access to search using the number of the visa sticker in combination with verification of fingerprints of the visa holder ' .
Therefore , in all cases where there is even the slightest doubt , the border official will check ; in all other cases , when there are a large number of people at the border , he will act in accordance with the regulation , which allows for some deviation .
We must not build a new ' Berlin Wall ' of officials and information .
The European Union is and should continue to be a global power that is considerate towards its own citizens and to others who are entering .
I would like to thank Mr Cashman , among others , and of course the Commissioner for their patience when we were working on this compromise .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree on the necessity of amending the Schengen Borders Code so that its provisions are consistent with the stipulations of the Visa Information System .
However , the Commission 's original proposal is problematic since it stipulates that , when citizens of third countries cross the border , not only should the validity of the visas be checked but fingerprints should also be taken from them .
This may , however , cause huge congestion at the EU 's external borders , mainly at inland border-crossing points during holiday periods or on public holidays .
I therefore welcome the rapporteur 's proposed amendments , which provide that these checks should not be carried out systematically but only as random samples , under well-defined conditions and time restrictions .
In the vote tomorrow , please support the Committee 's opinion that crossing our external borders should become possible without long waiting times , not only in principle but also in practice .
This regulation comes as an answer to the need to secure and strengthen the European Union 's borders by making control at border check points more efficient .
Nevertheless , the most important aspect refers to establishing common rules for the harmonization of the Visa Information System .
Although some Member States deemed that the mandatory use of VIS could only be achieved when the technological development allowed the feasible use of portable devices , with a rapid transfer and a certain check , I believe the rapporteur 's proposal to let the border police officer choose whether to use the Visa Information System or not represents a solution until the technological system allows rapid data transfer and its systematic use .
We should also not forget that an adequate control at the EU borders would increase the internal security of Member States and , consequently , would fight frauds such as organized crime and even acts of terrorism .
Moreover , in addition to the significant increase in the efficiency of border controls , a systematic consultation of the Visa Information System would also constitute a preliminary condition for greater flexibility when submitting the visa application .
Evaluation of the Dublin system ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the evaluation of the Dublin system .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their serious interest and commitment , and all those who have contributed to this report .
The Dublin II Regulation , as you will know , is part of the European common asylum system and it determines which Member State is responsible for the examination and determination of an asylum claim .
Its effect is also linked very much to the sound implementation of other directives , such as the Reception and the Procedures Directives .
Our committee report makes clear that the Dublin Regulation , and indeed the system as a whole , is a system based on mutual trust and reliability , so that all Member States have to fulfil their responsibilities .
We have a number of concerns which we address in this report - although I obviously will not address them all here - about the quality of delivery in terms of the asylum system , the impact on the individuals concerned and whether Dublin II is effective overall .
What problems does it create for some Member States ?
Are we almost looking at something and making it too simple for the complexity of the issue ?
On the quality of delivery , we know that there are enormous variations between Member States in delivering a fair and thorough examination of claims for protection .
This is unjust for the individual and unfair to other Member States .
In fact , looking at one or two Member States within the European Union , if you were an asylum-seeker really fearing for your life you would have to be almost suicidal to claim asylum in one or two of them , because your chances of having your claim recognised would be so low and , therefore , your risk of return would be very high .
So we agree as a committee that we wish to see systematic measures taken against those Member States which fail in this respect .
A majority in the committee also wants to see the Dublin transfers to such Member States stopped until failures are rectified - although there is an amendment on this issue which we will vote on tomorrow .
For the individuals concerned , we want to see a clear improvement in the quality and consistency of decision-making .
We want to see cases fully examined on transfer and not closed due to technicalities ( our paragraph 11 ) .
We want clear information provided to those coming under the Dublin Regulation ; we also want to increase the possibility of family reunion and a wider definition of family for this purpose - although , again , I know there is an amendment on this - so that , for example , a minor can be transferred to live with their sole family member in the European Union , even if that person is a cousin rather than a sibling .
We also want clear procedures in relation to minors , who should only be transferred for the purpose of family reunion ; these procedures should include their representation and accompaniment throughout , so that no child is lost in transit , as has unfortunately happened on a number of occasions .
We are also asking for greater use of the humanitarian clause , for example , for those who are particularly vulnerable .
We have concerns about the potential extension of Eurodac for purposes other than identification .
The Council and the Commission will be aware that Parliament takes such issues very seriously .
As regards the problems - and I know that other colleagues will talk more on this - one of the issues which also concerns us is that Dublin II can create pressure on certain Member States which find themselves as primary points of entry to the European Union for asylum-seekers .
We are , therefore , asking the Commission to bring forward proposals on so-called ' burden sharing ' which are not just financial but actually provide a solution for the Member States and the individuals affected .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , the application of the Dublin system was technically and politically evaluated during the debate commenced in 2007 following the Green Paper on the future Common European Asylum System .
Based on the conclusions of this dual evaluation , the Commission intends to propose , before the end of the year , amendments to the Dublin and Eurodac Regulations while retaining the basic principles of the Dublin system .
The aim is to reinforce both the efficiency of the system and the protection of those concerned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must thank Parliament for instigating this debate on these future amendments .
This is a debate that is shaping up to be constructive and undoubtedly intense .
The Commission shares the concerns expressed in your report , Mrs Lambert , as regards the shortcomings .
It agrees with the conclusion that the success of the Dublin system depends on greater harmonisation of protection standards at EU level .
This is the way to guarantee equal access to protection for all asylum seekers transferred to other Member States .
We need both this greater harmonisation of the laws of the Member States on asylum and also an increase in practical cooperation as envisaged in the second phase of the Common European Asylum System .
The Commission plans to better define the procedures and time-limits to be respected and also to improve the quality and reliability of the data contained within the Eurodac database .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not wish to go into too much detail , but it is true that we are considering a series of amendments . These include improving the information given to asylum seekers , making the right of appeal more effective , ensuring that the detention of asylum seekers is not arbitrary , clarifying the conditions and procedures to be respected in the application of the humanitarian clause , offering more guarantees for unaccompanied minors , and expanding the right to family reunification for asylum seekers and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection .
Although , despite everything , the evaluation of the Dublin system has been positive , it is also true that this system has led to additional burdens for certain Member States which have limited capacity for reception and absorption while , at the same time , being subject to particular migratory pressure due to their geographical situation .
The Commission is considering the possibility of introducing a temporary suspension of the application of the Dublin provisions for an overburdened Member State and also creating teams of asylum experts who may be called upon by these somewhat overburdened Member States .
The Commission takes note of the substantial and constructive recommendations contained in Parliament 's report .
We will not spare any efforts in taking all the necessary steps to respond to the concerns expressed by Parliament in its report on the operation and impact of the Dublin system .
Thank you Mrs Lambert , ladies and gentlemen .
I am going to listen to you closely as I am convinced that perfecting the right of asylum is an important issue for the future and , I would say , for our design of Europe which must remain true to its great tradition of welcoming people .
This law needs to be revised .
Let me try to explain why .
When this law was issued , the aim was that anyone seeking asylum - that is , asking for protection - could do so in the country in which they first landed .
This seems reasonable , but when this law was issued , no-one ever imagined , especially in this day and age , that many people would end up entering and arriving in the European Union or a Member State by boat , crossing the Atlantic or the Mediterranean Sea to enter the European Union .
This was never the idea of this Regulation , and now it is forcing countries in this situation to welcome these people who arrive by boat , in a disproportionate , difficult and serious situation .
I am pleased to hear Commissioner Barrot say here that one of the possibilities for revision of this Regulation is to temporarily suspend it in the case of those countries that are bearing a disproportionate share of a particular burden .
This is what we need : either this , or a well-functioning mechanism , one of solidarity , which permits immigrants arriving in a country bearing such a burden to proceed to another EU country .
It is imperative that this revision is carried out , and as soon as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Dublin system must be used to determine the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application .
However , this system is deeply unjust .
Asylum seekers can sometimes therefore be returned to a Member State which it is known will reject their asylum application whereas the Member State in which they are found would have granted them refugee status .
This is the first injustice .
In addition , this system poses a problem of solidarity between Member States .
It is well-known that Member States situated at the external borders of Europe bear a greater burden .
On our return from Malta , we demanded that the very principle of the Dublin system be questioned .
We believe that the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application should not necessarily be the first country entered .
There must be solidarity in the examination of applications .
We have observed serious shortcomings , particularly with regard to the protection of unaccompanied minors .
We have seen that Member States do not sufficiently use the instruments allowing minors to be reunited with members of their families present in another Member State .
We also want minors to be able to join , for example , aunts and uncles in another Member State , rather than being left to their own devices .
We must therefore extend the idea of the family .
Finally , we deplore the virtually systematic use by some Member States of the detention of people awaiting a Dublin transfer .
We would point out that these people are applying for international protection and that their application has not yet been examined in detail .
The evaluation of the Dublin II Regulation must therefore allow us to correct the serious shortcomings that we have observed during our visits to the detention centres .
We have visited numerous detention centres and I must tell you that some of these visits have left us quite disgusted .
I must remind you that the aim of the Dublin Regulation is to determine the Member State responsible for examining the asylum application .
The Regulation must allow access to the asylum system and must guarantee that a Member State carries out a detailed examination of every asylum application .
The European Union must not ignore its responsibility towards third countries .
It must guarantee protection of the right of asylum .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur for what was generally a balanced piece of work .
I do not want to split hairs over a few details therefore .
Besides , if we are completely fair , the evaluation is already quite dated .
Priority number one , at least as far as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is concerned , is to bring the available data from the Member States up to the same standard .
Only then will a really good , and therefore effective , evaluation be possible .
The Member States really do need to work on this , with the necessary guidance from the European Commission , of course .
It is important to emphasise - and obviously I am making a different distinction here from Martine Roure - the fact that , on the basis of the transfer data obtained , we cannot conclude that the Dublin system as such results in a disproportionate transfer burden for the Member States at Europe 's external borders .
Of course - and that is what the rapporteur and also what the Commissioner said - the geographical position of these Member States means that they are confronted with a substantial burden .
That is precisely the reason why the ALDE Group has been arguing all this time for a compulsory burden-sharing mechanism alongside the Dublin system , not only in terms of financial and material resources but also in terms of putting in manpower on the ground .
After all , all 27 Member States are responsible for what is going on at Europe 's external borders .
I am also very intrigued , Commissioner , about what exactly you mean by the possibility of temporary suspension .
What does that involve ?
Does it mean that the asylum seeker can choose the Member State he wants to go to , that he is free to travel on ?
If it does , that would seriously undermine the political message of the Dublin system .
In short , just go for the compulsory solidarity mechanism that we have been arguing for all this time .
Finally , if the EU wants to retain its credibility , there really does have to be an adequate and consistent level of protection in all 27 Member States .
The importance of a proper common asylum procedure and corresponding status cannot be over-emphasised .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Lambert 's report should spur us on to deliberate seriously on this issue .
The facts that the report describes are worrying .
While the European Commission continues with new initiatives in the area of asylum and legal immigration , it appears that the implementation cannot be controlled .
The cost calculation , data on asylum applications and the handling of personal details are inadequate .
I find that a worrying conclusion .
If the Dublin system already does not operate as it should , how will it work with the new initiatives on migration ?
Can this House rely on the Council and the Commission to make serious work of the cost calculation ?
Will the protection of personal data be taken seriously then ?
I am very keen to hear what conclusion the Council draws from Mrs Lambert 's report .
It is clear to me that the Dublin system is not perfect yet .
Can the Council investigate whether the exchange of data will work properly with the new initiatives on asylum and migration ?
( EL ) Mr President , the Dublin II system for granting asylum should , at long last , be revised .
Firstly , it is not truly European : it does not guarantee genuine solidarity and support for those Member States that receive a disproportionate number of asylum seekers owing to their geographical location .
The second and more important reason why it should be revised is that such disproportionate numbers often directly threaten the humanitarian principles and the obligation to treat people arriving at our borders in search of protection with dignity .
We know that occasionally many Member States are either perfectly reasonably unable to fulfil their obligations according to the regulation or , in the worst case , they hide behind a lack of European solidarity to justify even extreme violations of human rights committed by their authorities .
Practices such as detaining minors in unacceptable conditions and the wholesale rejection of asylum applications on political grounds are not justified by any lack of solidarity .
We also know , however , that other Member States that do not face such problems consider their humanitarian obligation fulfilled if they accuse other states .
We hear nothing about solidarity , however .
Thus Dublin II has in practice led to a series of accusations and counter-accusations between Member States .
The only real losers are the asylum seekers .
It is therefore of crucial importance to establish a genuine common European asylum system .
The debate will be resumed after the debate on Georgia .
Situation in Georgia ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Georgia .
( FR ) I should like to welcome the French Minister for Foreign Affairs , President-in-Office of the Council and a former Member of this European Parliament , Mr Kouchner .
I also welcome the Secretary of State for European Affairs , Jean-Pierre Jouyet .
In particular I welcome the responsible Commissioner , Benita Ferrero-Waldner .
I also welcome Jacques Barrot who unfortunately is leaving us .
The European Council has just ended , but Minister Bernard Kouchner will undoubtedly tell us all about it himself .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I firstly want to welcome the European Parliament 's political commitment to Georgia .
I also want to start by congratulating the efforts of the French Presidency , in particular the speed of the actions taken at the moment of crisis .
It is true that the European Union , through the negotiation of a ceasefire and the prompt delivery of humanitarian aid , in particular by the Commission , has proven its efficiency .
Today 's European Council was , in my opinion , very important and , given the complexity of the issues raised by this conflict , the European Union must and had to react collectively and define , by mutual agreement , the appropriate responses .
I will be brief because a lot has already been said .
In my opinion , our meeting today sent out a very clear message on Georgia , aimed at both Georgia and also Russia , in terms of our capacity to respond to crisis situations and the unity of the European Union .
That is what we have always demanded .
Secondly , our unity is also expressed through the defence of our values .
Since the start of the crisis , as I have already said , the Commission has contributed to the EU 's efforts aimed at stabilising the humanitarian and security situation in Georgia in , I believe , a fairly significant way .
In terms of humanitarian aid , we immediately made available EUR 6 million which should allow the immediate needs of all the civilian populations affected by the conflict to be met .
To this sum must be added nearly EUR 9 million made available in the meantime by the Member States .
We have therefore managed to cover all the immediate humanitarian needs .
As regards aid for reconstruction , last week we sent a Commission expert mission to make an initial assessment of the needs and , according to our initial evaluations , as Bernard Kouchner has already said , which do not include the areas under the control of Russia , the property damage is much less than anticipated .
Around EUR 15 million will be needed for reconstruction and repair .
However , the most pressing need is in relation to the fate of the 22 000 people recently displaced by the conflict .
Around EUR 110 million will be required to meet their needs .
It is important that the European Union shows that it is ready to provide real support to Georgia , as evidence of our political determination to strengthen our relations .
First of all , the Council has decided to plan a substantial increase in our financial aid to Georgia , particularly for reconstruction , as I have just mentioned , and for the refugees .
We are currently in the process of assessing the reserves that could be rapidly mobilised from the 2008 appropriations .
However , there is no doubt that , without an extraordinary budget appropriation , we will be unable to mobilise the necessary funds .
I am already delighted at the general political support that we have received today from President Pöttering in this regard .
A conference of international donors will also be needed to send out a strong signal of confidence to investors .
In my opinion , it is also more important than ever to strengthen the instruments of the neighbourhood policy in order to stabilise Georgia .
Based on the European Council conclusions , we will step up our efforts to prepare , once the conditions are met , to create a free trade area and to facilitate the issue of short-term visas .
The latter agreement will of course also be linked to a readmission agreement and it remains essential to encourage Georgia 's commitment to democracy , rule of law and freedom of expression .
It is crucial to speed up the democratic reforms and political pluralism .
As regards stabilising security and implementing the ceasefire agreement , we are effectively relying on the civilian observation mission organised under the European Security and Defence Policy , as already mentioned .
This must be closely linked with other EU actions , such as reconstruction .
Now for some comments on relations with Russia .
Russia 's actions raise wider questions about the nature of our relations in both the short and long term .
Its failure , to date , to honour the six-point plan brokered by the presidency and its decision to recognise Abkhazia and South Ossetia are against the basic principles that underpin international relations .
We have been seeking to rework our relations into a modern partnership to reflect our growing economic integration .
I think fundamental mutual interests are at stake - economic interdependence , the need to find common approaches on non-proliferation or counterterrorism or many other international questions - so keeping channels of communication open with Russia was - and is - vital .
However , relations with Russia cannot remain ' business as usual ' in the light of recent events .
Therefore it was important to strike the right balance between maintaining channels of communication and sending a clear signal to Russia .
I think the right approach is for our existing joint work and dialogues to continue but for new initiatives to be put on hold .
Therefore the Commission will now review all new initiatives under way to deepen our relations , which then will allow the Council to draw conclusions ahead of the Nice Summit in November .
Regarding long-term implications , recent events will give new importance to some areas of policy .
Our commitment in June to developing an Eastern Partnership and a European Neighbourhood Policy does indeed demonstrate the EU 's legitimate interests in the region .
These policies underline the fact that we will not accept new dividing lines in Europe and that partners like Georgia , Ukraine and Moldova can count on our support for their territorial integrity and sovereignty .
We are ready to accelerate and also to submit as soon as possible new proposals for a new Eastern Partnership , certainly before the end of the year but maybe even in the late autumn .
Secondly - and this is my last point - energy is at the heart of our relations with Russia .
What we do on energy inside Europe will directly shape our relations with Russia , so we must keep up the momentum to develop a coherent and strategic energy policy for Europe .
In conclusion , recent events have posed a real challenge to the European Union .
In the coming months , I think we will need to continue to show that we can rise together to the tasks ahead .
Today has been a very important marker .
Only through coherent strategy , united positions and concerted action can we defend European interests and values .
I applaud Parliament 's commitment , and trust that we will all play our parts in ensuring that the Union maintains a strong and a united front .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation that has developed in Georgia since this summer is unacceptable and intolerable and merits a firm and determined response from the European Union .
Russia has the same rights and obligations as all states in the international community .
One of these obligations is to respect sovereignty and territorial integrity and in particular not to violate internationally recognised borders .
By invading and occupying Georgian territory , and by recognising the independence of the breakaway Georgian provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , the Russian authorities have flouted , one after the other , each of these three fundamental principles of international law .
The European Union must actively participate in the resolution of this conflict and I congratulate the French Presidency on its proactive attitude .
We must show that we are equal to meeting the hopes of thousands of Georgians who are proclaiming their distress in the streets of Tbilisi .
My Group invites the Commission , the Council and all the Member States to demonstrate both their unity and also their resolve with regard to our Russian neighbour .
The European Union cannot be content to verbally condemn these systematic violations of international law .
Our Group believes that Europe must use the means that it has available , and in particular its political and economic tools , to put pressure on Russia and make it respect the agreements that it has signed .
We call on Russia to honour all the commitments that it made on signing the ceasefire agreement , starting with the full and immediate withdrawal of Russian troops from Georgian territory and the reduction of the Russian military presence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
We also condemn the looting perpetrated by the Russian invading forces and the accompanying mercenaries , as you very rightly said , Mr Kouchner .
We are extremely concerned about the fate of the Georgian populations in South Ossetia who have been displaced by force , even after the signature of the ceasefire agreement .
We strongly call on the Russian and South Abkhazian authorities to guarantee the return of these people to their homes .
We call on the Council and the Commission to review their policy towards Russia , including the negotiations on the partnership agreement , if this country should fail to respect its commitments on the ceasefire .
We also call on the Council and the Commission to positively contribute to the international mechanisms that will be put in place to resolve the conflict , including through a field mission under the European Security and Defence Policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this crisis has revealed the vulnerabilities of the European Union in several sensitive areas : firstly , our energy supply .
More than ever we must ensure the security of Europe 's energy supply .
We must develop and protect alternatives to the Russian energy transport infrastructures .
Furthermore , it seems obvious that the role of the European Union could be much greater in the management of this crisis if the European Security and Defence Policy were reinforced .
The Lisbon Treaty allows for this reinforcement .
We therefore call on the Member States which have not yet ratified this Treaty to do so as quickly as possible .
Our Group considers that the only way of ensuring stability and security on both sides of the Atlantic is to develop cooperation on an equal basis between the European Union and the US .
Finally , we would point out that Georgia wants to eventually join NATO .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a crucial moment and the European Union must not fail to take advantage of this opportunity to show that it is firm and determined with regard to the Russian Federation , however great and powerful the latter may be .
The credibility of the European Union , the stability of the whole region , and the protection of our closest neighbours and even Member States of the Union depend on this .
I also call on you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to ensure that relations with Ukraine are also very quickly resumed .
Thank you for your attention .
Please stand firm .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , for several days now , advertisements have been run in various newspapers with the following message : ' Lenin .
Stalin .
Putin .
Give in ? '
In fact , the message is somewhat simplistic , for it was actually under Lenin that South Ossetia became part of Georgia .
In the process , some 18 000 lives were lost and around 50 000 people were expelled .
Abkhazia became part of Georgia under Stalin .
It is important to stick with the truth here and to take account of all sides ' positions .
Zviad Gamsakhurdia , who became the first http : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / President _ of _ Georgia " \ o " President of Georgia " of the http : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / Georgia _ ( country ) " \ o " Georgia ( country ) " and has now become very fashionable again , described the http : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / Ossetians " \ o " Ossetians " as ' trash that has to be swept out through the Rokihttp : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / Roki _ tunnel " \ o " Roki tunnel " tunnel ' .
We do need to be mindful of this aspect of Georgian nationalism as well .
None of this , however - and let me make this very clear , as Martin Schulz has done on many occasions - none of this justifies the Russian intervention which , after all , has been ongoing for years .
It is the expression of imperialist behaviour and we have repeatedly seen Russia exploiting the existing minority conflicts accordingly .
We have witnessed repeated threats and boycotts which we absolutely cannot accept .
I do not wish to deny that mistakes have been made by the West and by Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili , but in its relations with its neighbours , Russia has repeatedly sought to exploit internal conflicts for its own ends .
Nor does the recognition of Kosovo offer any justification for this action .
The fact is that the European Union has always made clear and unequivocal attempts to achieve an international multilateral solution .
Russia has made no such attempt .
The European Union has also offered clear and unequivocal support for the Serbian minority in Kosovo and will continue to do so .
What has Russia done ?
It has , at the very least , looked on while Georgians were expelled from South Ossetia and Abkhazia , and I hope that Mr Kouchner is right when he says that a new policy will now be adopted .
The EU should now concentrate on giving our neighbours our backing and support .
We have been proposing a Union for the Black Sea for some time .
Whatever name we choose for this structure , it is clear that the current Neighbourhood Policy must be strengthened and reinforced and that we must invite everyone in the region who has an interest in the integrity and stability of this region , from Turkey to Kazakhstan , to get involved .
If Russia is prepared to revert to a policy of cooperation and respect for its neighbours , Russia will be invited to join as well .
Russia feels strong at the moment because of the high energy prices , but we all know that this is not a sound economic basis for Russia and that it has a lot to gain from partnership and cooperation with Europe .
In the meantime , we must focus on giving our neighbours our clear support .
In that sense , Mr President-in-Office , may I say that the conclusions that you have agreed at today 's Summit are good conclusions which offer a sound basis on which to move forward , for they are a clear expression of what is realistic and sustainable .
I hope that the European Parliament will arrive at similarly clear and consensus-based conclusions as the Council , so that the European Union can speak with one - and a stronger - voice .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am a little surprised by the President-in-Office 's speech tonight , as indeed I am by its delivery from the podium d 'honneur .
The conflict in the Caucasus is one for which both sides must take responsibility , as you have said , President-in-Office .
So why do the Council 's conclusions not reflect this ?
President Saakashvili cannot have believed that military intervention would evoke no response from Russia . Equally , Russia 's reaction was disproportionate .
You said , ' Les dégâts n 'ont pas été considérables , ' and yet Commissioner Ferrero Waldner has given us the figures and this House will be called on to agree to pay the bill !
On one thing we do agree with you : we must condemn Russia 's actions ; they are indefensible , but we will not dissuade the Russian bear by backing Medvedev into a corner .
Dialogue and engagement will defuse tensions better than isolation .
That is the lesson of the Cold War , and the Union - as with the Helsinki Process - has a central role to play .
This conflict highlights the need for us to build a common foreign and security policy .
And though Member States hold diffuse views about Russia , your presidency was quick to negotiate its six-point plan and for that credit is due .
The plan may not be perfect , but it has brought an end to violence and it should be fully implemented , including Russian withdrawal from the Black Sea port of Poti .
But what steps should the Union take now ?
The Council is right to agree a crisis-management and reconstruction fund and the rapid deployment of humanitarian assistance .
Now it must designate an EU representative who will make both sides listen .
The Union is right to send observers , but they must replace Russian peacekeepers , which will mean commitment from those Member States which are not already stretched militarily on other fronts .
Europe should convene a trans-Caucasian peace conference , bringing together all sides in the search for the settlement of unresolved conflicts .
But the Union should start in one area of glaring inconsistency which requires little more than ministerial fiat to fix .
End the anomaly whereby Georgian citizens with Russian passports have freer access to the European Union , because this encourages them to adopt Russian citizenship .
Georgians should have the same access to Europe as Russians , although this could be achieved by freezing the visa facilitation agreement with Russia .
In strengthening our neighbourhood policy , how can we ensure continued cooperation with Russia while showing that a full ' strategic partnership ' is no longer credible ?
What more can we do to cut Europe 's dependence on Russia 's energy supplies ?
You did well to strengthen the text of your conclusions in that regard .
Russia must of course face the consequences of its illegal actions , perhaps including a discussion on the future of the Sochi Winter Olympics just 40 km from the border .
Can Russia 's behaviour be considered in keeping with the Olympic Charter ?
No .
Solving these matters requires determination , foresight and patience .
That is a challenge that this Union must meet and I am afraid , President-in-Office , one that we must meet before we offer you your vin d 'honneur .
Could I say to the next speaker that , at the next Conference of Presidents , we will be looking at the order of the political groups as one objection has already been raised .
For today , I will call Mr Szymański next , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
We will be looking at this matter on Thursday , as no one can explain to me why the order is as it is .
It is an issue that needs to be clarified systematically .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Kouchner , Russia is not complying with three of the six points in the agreement negotiated on our behalf by President Sarkozy .
By failing to do so , Russia has forfeited the right to be deemed Europe 's partner .
The European Union 's credibility is therefore also at stake in this dispute .
It is not enough to set up humanitarian aid , rebuild Georgia and introduce visa facilitation and trading agreements .
Russia needs to fully experience what self-isolation is like .
If it does not , we shall actually be depriving it of the opportunity to review its policy .
Russia will simply be confirmed in its belief that it can get away with anything .
In the run-up to the next presidential elections , due in 2012 , generating awareness of increasing political and economic isolation is our only chance of sowing doubt and division amongst the dominant group in Moscow .
Russia must not be allowed to benefit from this aggression .
We need to review our energy policy .
Europe 's room for manoeuvre is already limited because of its dependence on Russia .
Do we really wish to aggravate the situation ?
The Member States should put an end to their involvement in the construction of the northern and southern pipelines at the earliest opportunity .
If we fail to draw these long-term conclusions , we run the risk of being sidelined and becoming a laughing stock .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , in the current situation , we should be discussing what to do now .
I believe that what the Council has decided and what has been done is basically what was possible , although we could always quibble about whether an Extraordinary European Council of the Heads of State or Government should not have been held straightaway to show our cohesion , but so be it .
I believe that we must now ask some fundamental questions .
The most fundamental question clearly concerns our position towards Russia , our cooperation with Russia and how we are in fact going to solve these problems in the Caucasus , because there is also Nagorno-Karabakh .
We could from now on see permanent conflicts and President Sarkozy could therefore find himself permanently faced with such situations . He could take a room in the Kremlin and remain there indefinitely ; that would also be a possibility .
My opinion is as follows : firstly , Mr Daul , if there is something that we should not be discussing , it is Georgia and Ukraine joining NATO .
This is truly the most idiotic idea at the moment because it means that we would be unable to go any further politically .
Will Georgia or Ukraine join NATO when its reforms have been carried out ?
Perhaps , I am not sure .
However , this is not really the relevant issue today .
Do you think that , if Georgia had been in NATO , Article 5 would have been mobilised ?
Of course not !
Therefore we should not talk rubbish .
On the other hand - and here I agree with Mr Watson - how we can control actions such as those of President Saakashvili ? While we agree that Russia 's action was unacceptable , it was also unacceptable for a Georgian President to decide to bomb a town , for whatever reason !
If you are provoked , you should respond in another way , not by bombing .
Therefore there is a real political problem .
We propose to tackle this political problem as follows : we should propose to Georgia and Ukraine a privileged partnership as a first step towards possible integration .
This integration can then take place if there is a fundamental reform in Europe , and so on .
However , we should have political instruments and not just economic and social instruments to bring pressure to bear on these political classes .
A future in the European space specifically means a future in which these countries are rid of nationalism .
We should consider the phrase of François Mitterrand : ' nationalism is war ' .
Georgian nationalism , Russian nationalism , Abkhazian nationalism and South Ossetian nationalism is war !
We in Europe must say ' our view is to go beyond that ' .
Therefore , by proposing a European view , we are also proposing to put on the table European values because , if nationalism endures in these regions , we will never find a solution .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , with regard to the crisis in the Caucasus , adopting a pro-Georgian or a pro-Russian stance can only lead to deadlock .
This has been blindingly obvious since the breakup of the Soviet Union 17 years ago as this region is full of recurring tensions and disputed borders . It is a place where the collective memory is haunted by the inherited traumas of successive wars and violence , where the ethnic and religious mosaic and the accumulation of resentments and humiliations provide dangerously fertile ground for nationalism .
In this context , political irresponsibility will cost dear , and that is true for everyone .
It is certainly true for the Georgian President who , since his election in 2004 , has constantly pandered to the spirit of revenge in relation to the breakaway territories .
He has constantly pushed his luck in terms of his allegiance to the Bush administration and his policy of confrontation in the region .
He has launched an attack on South Ossetia , about which Mr Van den Brande , one of the co-rapporteurs of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , responsible for monitoring problems in the region , has declared having been - and I quote - ' shocked by the stories of the refugees about the massive and indiscriminate shelling and bombing of Tskhinvali and the destruction of residential areas ' .
This strategy is disastrous for Georgia , for the Caucasus and for Europe .
This lesson is also valid for Russia .
The brutality of the counter-attack , including against civilian populations , the continued occupation of strategic sectors of the Georgian territory , the expulsion of Georgian populations from South Ossetia and the unilateral recognition of the independence of the two breakaway territories are just as likely to threaten the interest generated in more than one European country by the initial international initiatives of the new President .
Russia has everything to lose by returning to a period of political isolation in Europe and in the world .
Finally , the West as a whole would do well to assess the unprecedented damage already caused by the American attitude of adventurism and the European attitude of follow-my-leader in this part of the continent .
The limitless expansion strategy of NATO , the bombing of Serbia , the recognition of the unilaterally proclaimed independence of Kosovo , the support for the installation of the anti-missile defence shield on European soil , not to mention the extreme glorification of the region 's leaders who should , perhaps , be more cautious when making anti-Russian and pro-Western statements , all these choices are evidence of a short-sighted policy worthy of the current White House , but not worthy of a European security policy .
This strategy of militarising international relations and causing political confrontations has failed before our very eyes .
In addition to sending in European observers under the aegis of the OSCE , the EU 's priority should therefore be to prevent any escalation at any cost so that , as quickly as possible and without any signs of arrogance , it can explore the possibility of drafting a new pan-European treaty for security and cooperation which would be legally binding and which would encompass all the problems that have currently been shelved : territorial integrity , inviolability of borders , the fate of conflicts that have reached a stalemate , non-use of force , disarmament and even security of energy supplies .
This challenge is certainly more difficult to tackle now than ever before but , without such a perspective , I fear the worst is yet to come .
In adopting our position , let us remember that today , the first of September , is the International Day of Peace .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I come from a country whose history is marked by war and suffering .
Poland supports endeavours for peace everywhere .
It is imperative that this goal be achieved .
The East European countries , the so-called ' Baltic States ' , inspired by their leaders , want the European Union to show that Russia will pay some unspecified price for its military action in Georgia .
This can be depicted as a classic example of political orthodoxy which assumes that Russia pursues nothing but imperial goals .
This traditional mindless attitude to Russia , full of empty platitudes , seems to be humiliating because it can be perceived , for example by Russia , as a clinical example of a response by a few hot-headed politicians .
The European Union needs Russia as much as it needs Georgia , if not more .
Therefore , it is imperative that the European Union should not be a party to this conflict or take sides with either Russia or Georgia .
The European Union must show the world that its policy is independent of the United States and , at the same time , is a friendly policy based upon a full partnership .
Russia is the EU 's third-biggest trading partner , accounting for half a trillion dollars in European goods .
Can we afford to risk that kind of relationship ?
There is no doubt that the European Parliament is a genuine co-legislator with the Council under the codecision procedure .
However , is it really an equal partner in the matter of the EU 's foreign affairs ?
Minister , you spoke to us after everything seems to have been decided on Georgia .
Let me ask then : is the voice of the European Parliament supposed to mean nothing ?
What is this debate for when everything has been arranged and done ?
on behalf of the NI Group . - ( PL ) Commissioner , there is a strong link between the outbreak of fighting in the Caucasus and the issue of Kosovo .
I am one of those who opposed the carve-up of Serbia . From the outset we highlighted the fact that the unilateral decision by the Kosovo Albanians , supported by the United States and by many European countries , would amount to opening Pandora 's box and would re-ignite similar disputes the world over .
The Georgian situation is one such case . President Saakashvili of Georgia took the decision to attack civilians in Ossetia .
It should be recalled that Abkhazia and Ossetia are nations that have occupied their respective homelands for centuries . They have developed their own culture and identity and have on several occasions fought for their independence , which Stalin deprived them of before the Second World War .
Serbia and Georgia constitute an excellent example of how some are more equal than others in the international arena , and of how international law is always interpreted by the strongest allies .
Furthermore , the European order has been destroyed , with the support of many Members of this House .
Let us restore peace and the rule of international law to Europe !
Let us restore the European order !
I call on the countries that supported the carve-up of Serbia to withdraw their recognition of Kosovo , and on Russia to withdraw its recognition of Ossetia and Abkhazia .
If the partition of Serbia recognised by the United States and by most Member States of the Union is deemed to be a good thing , how can a similar operation in Georgia be condemned ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I can but appeal to you to be less hypocritical .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) I understand that my big mistake , Mr Watson , was to have spoken from this podium .
If you only have that to reproach me for , I can make amends , because the last time I was here , I spoke from this podium and I was not Head of State .
When all is said and done , everyone can make a mistake .
There are a number of questions which I can try to answer and others which I truly cannot .
It is clear , Mr Daul , that we all want , particularly in relation to this crisis - and this is one of the priorities of the French Presidency - to successfully implement a European defence policy .
What does ' successfully ' mean ?
It means , in any event , that we must restart the process that allowed us , in Saint-Malo , to at least reach an understanding . We must then build on this with a common purpose .
We will do this , or so I hope .
In fact we must do this , but not because this crisis merited a military response .
Not by any stretch of the imagination !
To have considered a military response to Russia 's invasion of Georgia would have been worse than anything .
In fact I do not believe that the vessels which arrived in the Black Sea were an appropriate response , as some of these vessels were carrying missiles .
In my opinion , that was not what we should have done , but the French Presidency had the opposite opinion .
In fact , in order to enjoy a solid European defence , which we do need , the Lisbon Treaty must be accepted , which brings us back to our own institutional difficulties .
We absolutely have to find a way out of this institutional crisis .
In my honest opinion , I do not think that NATO is the right response in this situation .
It is in fact the wrong response as , if we had voted for the Membership Action Plan ( MAP ) in Bucharest , strictly speaking this would not have made any difference because I believe that no one was ready to make war on behalf of Georgia . I say this without any cynicism .
I say this because this was the opinion that was truly unanimous at the start of all the meetings and conversations that we had .
This does not mean - because we have said so - that neither Georgia nor Ukraine have the right to become members of NATO .
There is also something else to be considered .
It is hard to say this at the moment , so I will be very discreet , but there is one country , Russia , which for 20 years felt that it was badly treated .
I believe that , in one way , in particular here in the European Union , this was somewhat true .
We were unable to find the language to speak to Russia .
Perhaps we would not have been successful anyway , but I believe that we did not sufficiently realise that changes were happening because , after all , Georgia , 20 years ago , was itself also in the Soviet orbit . It was also a Communist country .
On both sides there has been a truly incomplete exercise in democracy .
I believe that , as with all countries , the problem will arise later on for Ukraine and for Georgia , but I truly do not believe that this was the response .
On the other hand , you are right : we must strengthen our relations with Ukraine , as mentioned in this document . This is also true for Georgia .
We will talk in a minute about a privileged partnership .
To Mr Swoboda I would say - and this is an anecdote - that I wanted to go and see Stalin 's house in Gori , because that is where his house is .
He was born there .
You could say that he drew small red circles on the map to mark where there could be autonomy or , in any event , communities where there could not .
He was very familiar with the region and already Ossetia and Abkhazia did not get on with either the Georgians or the rest of the region .
We did not need this crisis to find out that there were conflicts in the area .
What is worse than the Balkans ?
The Caucasus .
What is worse than the Caucasus ?
The Balkans .
I am not sure , but I think what is happening there is actually very widespread . If you go back just a bit further , if you think about what happened in Chechnya , which I strongly condemn , you can see that the allies of the Chechens were the Abkhazians against Georgia .
We should leave all that in the past , although it may be necessary to return to it .
You have said , and I agree , that nothing justifies this reaction .
Nothing .
However , we must look at how this series of provocations has arisen because , honestly , the stories are so different that it all becomes very difficult .
When we were in Moscow negotiating this document , we were asked how they should have reacted . Should they have left their own to die and allowed the bombings ?
Do not forget the initial figures .
I am not going to discuss these because I really have no way of checking them , but the Russians straightaway talked about 1 000 to 2 000 deaths which is no doubt untrue because the only people who went there , namely Human Rights Watch , talked about a few hundred .
In fact they reported hundreds , or even dozens .
I am not sure .
In any event , it was a reaction that theoretically was justified by the very high number of victims and , once again , I went to listen to the refugees in North Ossetia and the accounts were dreadful : grenades in basements where children were hiding .
I have not made this up . Perhaps this was not true but there is a tone of voice that does not lie .
I have seen many refugees in my life .
These were scared witless .
They had travelled for two days on this road through the tunnel .
This must also be checked .
You are absolutely right that we need a neighbourhood policy , but that is exactly what the Turks are trying to do at the moment .
The Turks have put in place what they are calling a regional platform and they want to set up talks between Russia , which has already agreed , Azerbaijan , Armenia , and - it is they who are responsible for this - obviously Georgia and Turkey .
I think that this is a good idea and , on behalf of the Presidency , I have agreed to meet them very shortly .
Mr Babachan should have been here today so that we could find out how to exchange our experiences , but I do agree with your analysis of the need for a neighbourhood policy .
Mrs Benita Ferrero-Waldner must also agree with me that this is what we should do .
They are our great neighbour .
If they cannot find ways to talk to Russia , then we will certainly have great difficulty , all the more so as you heard Mr Medvedev say yesterday that sanctions could be applied in both directions and that he also knew how to do it .
Sanctions do not amount to the same thing when one side supplies the gas and the other side does not want to receive it .
We must therefore look realistically at the situation .
It is he who turns the tap , not us .
Mr Watson , as regards the figures you gave , I agree with your sentiment .
What has Mr Saakashvili done ?
When we had our discussions with him , given that I have met with him on two occasions , he said that - actually we should not go into that discussion because I would certainly be biased and I do not have enough information - but he said that he had been obliged to respond to the provocation .
He had watched the other side prepare the batteries , and in particular the Grad rockets .
They had arrived and set up in the Georgian villages around the capital of Ossetia .
Who do we believe ?
I do not know .
In any event , some advisors have said that things did not happen at all like the international press told it .
There is no one really credible in this whole affair .
As an observer , you know that the problem has not been solved .
We have tried .
Javier Solana says that we must call them observers . We are therefore calling them observers and in the text they are termed observers .
Peacekeepers are something else because that would need the full withdrawal by the Russians of all those who took part in the battle .
The resolutions on both Abkhazia and Ossetia indicated that there should be two-thirds / one-third .
Two-thirds were responsible for keeping the peace , the Russian peacekeepers , and the rest were Georgians .
Each accuse the other and they both accuse the peacekeeping forces decided by the OSCE and by the UN of having participated in both sides , right from the start of the battle .
It therefore seems to me that this cannot continue and sending in peacekeepers is a bigger operation which we will try to set up . However , for the time being , it is going to be difficult .
We need an international conference to resolve these conflicts that have reached a stalemate .
For the moment we should try to have a conference on Ossetia as that is the most urgent , and then on Abkhazia .
As regards passports , I do not know who raised this problem of passports .
Yes , passports were distributed , very widely , and therefore the people that I met , the Ossetian refugees , felt like Russian citizens , which is clearly very perverse .
They felt like Russian citizens , they were welcomed in Russia and they were defended like Russian citizens .
When you realise that apparently the same happened in the Crimea , you can only feel very concerned .
We must therefore tackle this problem with the Russians in an extremely subtle but firm manner .
They are distributing passports to populations that they deem to be Russian .
However , this cannot be said without remembering that the borders of Russia were fairly arbitrarily drawn by Mr Gorbachev and Mr Yeltsin , at great speed and without taking account of history .
I am not going to go into this problem . I do not want to dwell on the fact that Kiev was the capital of Russia and that the Crimea provides access to the seven seas .
However , if you thought that the Russians were going to abandon the only tunnel passing between North Ossetia and South Ossetia , in other words crossing the Caucasus , then you were mistaken .
We must understand these contradictions of history and also these contradictions of geography , but not give satisfaction to one side or the other .
The Presidency of the European Union has not made any moral judgements about either side . It has been said that this action was excessive , that this was not the way to solve the problem , that this town should not have been bombed at night and that such a heavy attack should not have occurred in reply .
However , once again , we need to know something about how this happened .
Mr Szymański , you said that only three points have been implemented .
That is not bad as no one else has tried to do even one apart from us .
Three points have been implemented and these were the three most important : ceasefire , withdrawal of troops and access to humanitarian aid .
If that is all we have achieved , then we need not be ashamed .
I believe it was very important to start with these .
As for the other three , we should wait for 8 September because , after that , no pressure will be spared . We will decide all together what we should do .
That means the 27 countries of the European Council and also Parliament which we have got into the habit of consulting in the meantime .
In fact Jean-Pierre and myself have got into a constant habit of consulting you and talking to you .
Nothing is taken for granted .
If , on 8 September , we find that movements have begun , then alright .
However , if nothing has been done , we must take another look .
That is absolutely clear .
Aggression cannot pay .
Of course it cannot pay , but who should pay the price ?
I like the sermonisers who say , with regard to the Russian army , what did you expect ?
What should have been done ?
I note that the most resolute people and a number of those who will in fact tomorrow visit Georgia and who were very decided in their thundering replies will not do anything at all .
I believe , like Francis Wurtz , that for a very long time Georgia has been encouraged to prove that it is , how should I say , robust and virile .
I believe that this was not good advice because encouraging a country to prove itself to be vindictive , or in any event decided in its resistance , when it is not given the means , does not sit very well with me .
I felt , together with the government , that , not only were they very unfortunate , because there were victims and because Georgians were in the streets not knowing which saint to pray to , but that there was also something like a feeling of abandonment among them .
They were promised so much , they were promised a lot , and these promises were not kept .
As regards the Nabucco pipeline , of course there are explanations like that .
It is a pipeline ; it is oil that passes through it .
Obviously all that must be taken into account , in one sense or another .
This brings us back to what you said .
I would point out , Mr Daul , that , in reality , that is not the only priority of the French Presidency . There is also energy and this is one way of truly focusing our attention - and this is in the text - on energy and on renewable energies , of course .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , what are we doing now ?
We have done what we could , namely to try and halt the war .
Perhaps this was not perfect , perhaps the document is not perfect , perhaps it was quickly written and perhaps a struggle had to be fought between the two delegations in order to arrive at some sort of coherence .
It was not at all perfect .
However , in the end , it has worked for the time being .
It is not sufficient , but it has worked .
I completely agree that there are other difficult places , such as Nagorno-Karabakh , Nachichevan and others .
There are plenty of places - and I do not think that the Russians are interested in these in the same way - such as Nagorno-Karabakh , but also other places , in particular the Crimea .
There can be no doubt of this .
It is not insulting the Russians to say that we are watching what is happening .
That is actually our duty .
As regards NATO , I will say something else very cautiously .
At the Bucharest Summit , we - the six founding countries of Europe - voted against the MAP . In fact , in the end , we did not vote , we did not even have to vote , because there was no unanimity .
We therefore did not have to vote .
The explanation was really very difficult and the six founding countries said that this is our neighbour . We must take into account that we have not been able to build or maintain adequate relations with this great country and that we do not want to leave it with a siege feeling , a kind of permanent siege .
I believe that we were right .
Now we are talking about anti-missile batteries set up in Poland and also in the Czech Republic . It is true that this is also not the way to dialogue , although they are not aimed towards Russia .
However , what is important , without doubt more on the side of Iran and our policy towards Iran , is absolutely keeping the six together . Perhaps this policy could be conducted with Russia , and this is very important , because I believe that we would have a lot to lose by not retaining these channels of partnership .
How can we control the actions of Mr Saakashvili ?
I do not know , but a town cannot be bombed at night .
I believe that a town should not be bombed at night .
Once again , I do not know what the level of this bombing was , but how could they have expected any other reaction from Russia having done that ?
I do not understand .
I should just like to make a quick comment on the François Mitterrand quotation .
François Mitterrand actually said : ' Nationalism , to a point , is about culture and is what forms a nation . Too much nationalism is war . '
I wanted to correct that .
In response to Francis Wurtz , I should like to go back to the words ' Cold War ' , which he did not use but which he implied , because each time we hear all around : ' are we returning to the Cold War ? '
However , this cannot mark the return to the Cold War , firstly because the historical circumstances are totally different .
There may be animosities , but I agree that we must absolutely condemn this expression .
On the other hand , the need not to talk , but to re-form two blocks , one against the other , has been much mentioned .
A number of the Members of this noble House , and in fact their countries , think like this .
We must tackle this idea head on .
I absolutely disagree with it .
It is absolutely the opposite of what we should do and would clearly resemble Cold War , minus the ideology .
That does not mean that we must absolutely accept all hyper-nationalist statements as we have done .
We must find a way to talk and maintain these channels .
That is what we are trying to do .
I would remind Francis that several of the proposals were made by Mr Medvedev in the security treaty that you mentioned , although he does not seem likely to apply this straightaway .
Perhaps he will do so at a later date .
He proposed this on 5 June to you all .
He received the reply that it was interesting and that it was essential to take him at his word .
However , we were immediately caught up by a small wave of panic .
The European Union apparently needs an independent policy from the US which is itself a great independent country .
Mr Wojciechowski , that is what we have done .
The European Union needs an independent policy from the US and from Russia . It needs an EU policy .
That is what we have tried to do .
The initial reaction of our American friends when we decided to get involved was not very kind .
They thought that we should not do so but , very quickly , they realised , on the contrary , given that they are very pragmatic , that this was exactly what should be done .
As a result , they were , shall we say , cooperative as it was Mrs Condoleezza Rice who got the six-point agreement signed .
They were then extremely critical , not of the six-point agreement but of the fact that the Russians had not abided by it .
This I can understand .
We were also critical .
My final point is about Pandora 's box and Kosovo .
I wanted to talk to you about this .
There is an intellectual tendency to compare Kosovo to Ossetia , with which I really cannot agree .
We cannot say , just because there is a small population which feels , due to some particular nationalist urge , the need to be liberated , that this is the same thing .
No !
Firstly , in the Caucasus , people are in the habit of tearing each other to pieces in a truly violent manner with there being a great deal of profit in murder over the centuries .
This is not at all the case with Kosovo and Serbia . What was different with Kosovo and Serbia was the unanimity of one group , 98 % of Kosovars , and in particular the international decision .
This was not because we bombed Serbia through NATO .
In fact this occurred after nearly two years of the Contact Group , in which Russia was involved , and a Rambouillet conference which lasted over a month and at which everyone was in agreement except for Mr Milošević .


What triggered everything , and I will end on this point , was the decision by Mr Milošević in 1999 at Kosovo Field , at Obilić , to declare that there would be no more autonomy , to hound the Kosovars out of the administration and to bring in Serbians from Belgrade to replace them , such that Mr Ibrahim Rugova , from the Democratic League of Kosovo , had to set up underground schools and clandestine hospitals .
This is totally different .
The process was accepted by international opinion because there had been a whole international approach .
The Finnish President , Martti Ahtisaari , produced a document that everyone at the UN accepted and that said ' the parties are not able to reach an agreement ' .
I am about to finish . There are some hatreds that cannot be overcome .
I am sorry , I sensed - and I am being very careful in what I say - in the words of the Ossetians about the Georgians , something which resembled that undying hatred which is based on tens of years and centuries of opposition .
This does not mean that one day this will not happen , but it will take time and several generations , I believe .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner : ' Le nationalisme , c 'est la guerre ! '
This is an exact quote from François Mitterrand 's speech to the European Parliament , with no abbreviation .
I think we can learn from this , and the lesson to be learned is European integration .
That means no longer attempting to settle past accounts , but starting afresh in order to make war and dictatorship an impossibility in Europe once and for all .
I should like to voice my most heartfelt thanks to the French Presidency for its rapid intervention to end the war and for bringing about a European Council decision today which is an expression of unity .
Unity is the most important signal that we can send out .
It is a signal that we will not accept violations of international law , that we will not accept war and the invasion of foreign countries , and that we will not accept the destabilisation of democratically elected governments or the invasion and occupation of another country .
It is important , therefore , to make it clear that there will be no negotiations on the partnership and cooperation agreement until there is compliance with the fifth principle of the ceasefire agreement - namely a return to the lines held before 7 August - and that an evaluation of compliance with all six principles of the ceasefire agreement must now begin and continue in the run-up to the forthcoming summit scheduled to take place in November 2008 .
It is important that we make clear that certain things will not be accepted , but it is also important - so that we do not slip into an escalation spiral - to make it clear that lines of communication must remain open .
Above all , we must reinforce our own capacities , and that means reinforcing our friends ' capacities as well .
It means providing immediate infrastructural assistance to Georgia without red tape .
It means participating in peace missions in Georgia and in initiatives carried out by the OSCE and the UN .
We must make it clear that negotiations on a free trade agreement are the right path to pursue , as indeed are the proposals that we have made here in the House in line with the Polish-Swedish initiative or our proposal for an ' EEA Plus ' .
This applies not only to Georgia but also to countries such as Moldova and especially Ukraine .
I think these are clear signals which enable us to move forward in a positive way .
If in so doing , we could recognise that we could do this so much better , if only we did not always have to bale out a situation which others have caused , if only we had a European foreign policy which , under the Treaty of Lisbon , would give us appropriate mechanisms and increased preventive capacities to stop this situation from arising in the first place , that would be a policy that we should pursue .
This crisis should clearly demonstrate that , as the European Union , we must strengthen our own capacities if we want to prevent war and move towards a positive future .
( NL ) Mr President , I endorse the words of many fellow Members that the reaction today of the European Summit to the events of the past month is the right reaction .
We have spoken with one voice and at the same time maintained our composure .
However , the EU - and this is also made clear in today 's statement - has let it be known in no uncertain terms that what happened there , especially the Russian reaction , is not acceptable and that the disproportionate reaction of Russia to the military developments in Georgia must be condemned .
At the same time all parties have stated that the use of military force is not the right solution and I consider that also to be an implicit criticism of the actions of the Georgian Government which started the military activities .
This reaction also shows that we believe , and rightly so , that we do not solve problems in Europe in this way , that this is not in accordance with the security agreements that we have and which were made in the past on the problems with South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia .
I also distance myself from the statements of the Russian Foreign Minister , Mr Lavrov , that the way Russia reacted has set the tone for Russia 's new foreign policy in the surrounding region .
I think that the European Union should do everything it can to persuade Mr Lavrov and the Russian Government that this is not the way that we in Europe try to resolve issues or press our interests .
Cooperation is the watchword , not unilateral action .
I remember discussions over the past few years about the actions of the Bush Administration .
I hope that we will not end up having the same discussion with Russia .
That is why it is so important that the Council today , under the leadership of the French President-in-Office , has called again for attention to be given to this issue and has put the emphasis on the six-point plan , especially the return to the previous military status quo .
By doing that he is laying the foundations for an international mechanism to keep the peace and particularly for an international debate about the future status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , and he is dissociating himself , and rightly so , from the recognition by Russia of the independence of these two separatist regions .
That is also our opening position for a mission to Moscow that will take place next week at the highest level and which will again have to put pressure on Moscow to implement those six points .
In these circumstances it goes without saying that our position is that , as long as there is no clarity about implementing this agreement , as long as there is no agreement , we will not engage in any further talks about the new partnership agreement .
This crisis is placing great demands on the European Union .
It is right that we take the lead in the search for solutions .
There is no alternative : NATO cannot do it , the OSCE is too weak , America is not in the position that we are in , and the UN cannot play a mediating role due to the blockades in the Security Council .
Today 's summit was of one mind , let that remain so .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in fact find ourselves commenting on decisions already taken and , given the widely differing information on fatalities , crimes and possible war crimes , I believe the European Union ought to propose that the investigation be an international one , if necessary with the involvement of the International Criminal Court .
Apart from that , as for the reasons why we have reached this point , Mr Kouchner said that some people had given Georgia too much encouragement to flex its muscles and issue threats .
This is undoubtedly true , but in that case let us say that some people also discouraged the Georgians from feeling European . We , in the European Union , are those people , because the European inclination of Georgia and its people is a fact that we have ignored .
Hundreds of them signed a Radical Party appeal at the end of the 1990s calling for a European future for Georgia , which we have denied them .
That is why , and I am concluding , the suggested international conference ought to involve the unrepresented peoples of the entire area and examine that area 's European prospects , both political and strategic .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , today 's summit meeting is focused on offering assistance to Georgia .
That is necessary , but it is also Russia 's duty to participate financially in Georgia 's reconstruction .
What else must happen so that the European Union can properly assess Russia 's role in events and take action to ensure that nothing of the kind is ever repeated ?
Firstly , it must be acknowledged that this was planned aggression on the part of Russia , and that it started with the systematic provocation of Georgia over many months .
If Russia 's aggression and recognition of the independence of the separatist regions are not met with an appropriate response , then that will be a clear signal that it can act in the same way again in the future .
After all , there are many Russian citizens in the EU states , too , whom the EU is willing to protect .
There are many things that Russia needs from us , but we consistently lose the initiative .
Firstly , we should freeze the agreement on the visa facilitation system with Russia .
At the same time , such an agreement should be concluded with Georgia .
Secondly , until Russia has fully released the occupied territories , the operation of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement must be suspended .
Thirdly , the so-called Russian peace-keeping forces must be replaced with international peace-keepers , respecting Georgia 's territorial integrity .
I also suggest that the International Olympic Committee be called upon to announce a new competition for the organisation of the Winter Olympics in 2014 , since holding them in a totalitarian state will only lead to problems .
We should not be worried or fearful about the suspension of so-called dialogue .
At the moment the dialogue has turned into the expression of one-sided offers on our side and infringement of the rules on the Russian side .
We need to understand that only strong action can make Russia opt for a position worthy of a 21st century state .
Russia is just one state .
It is not special .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I represented you in Georgia when I was sent there by our President from 12 to 17 August .
I gave our full support to the Georgian people and reassured them by saying that the European Union would not abandon them .
I therefore thank the Presidency for the efforts that were made to act very quickly in Georgia .
Resolving this conflict is clearly a test for the European Union to which it has finally responded , but at what price ?
At the price once again of innocent citizens because these events were in fact inevitable .
How long have some of us been preaching in the wilderness ?
Even those who are today saying that we must aim for integration and offer the prospect of accession to the European Union previously said to us : ' wait , be reasonable ' .
Now we have a war between Russia and Georgia .
When we said that this was not a conflict between Georgia and Abkhazia and South Ossetia , but that it was a conflict between Russia and Georgia , no one wanted to listen .
Now we have one war behind us .
Therefore these events were inevitable , particularly if you go back to other events or other times before the 11th .
Let us go back to 2005 when Russia vetoed having border guards on the Russian-Georgian border .
No one replied and even France - please excuse me Mr President - even France refused when we called for OSCE forces on the border .
No one reacted .
When the Russians violated Georgian airspace , we again had no response and the situation escalated .
Now this regrettable war has occurred and we must not only rebuild , but also resolve the conflict .
Of course we must have a conference on reconstruction , but we must also have a conference to resolve the conflict .
I would ask you perhaps to use what happened in Kosovo as a model , in other words to put in place an international civil administration , together with peacekeeping forces .
What Georgian citizen could now agree to the Russian army playing the role of policeman ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to start by voicing my thanks for the objectivity of this debate ; it is certainly more objective than the extraordinary meeting held by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on 20 August .
Let us be blunt .
Georgian President Saakashvili ordered a military offensive .
That was what actually sparked off the war and triggered a spiral of violence .
If we ignore that fact , we deny the real cause of the war .
The attacks , especially on the civilian population in Tskhinvali , are to be roundly condemned , along with the military response , especially the military response by Russia and the attacks on the civilian population , particularly in the town of Gori .
Both sides have deployed cluster bombs in this conflict as well , which is unacceptable .
International humanitarian law and the law of war have been clearly violated by both sides in this conflict .
The message which I have heard very often , however , is that Russia is solely responsible for the current situation .
That is not the case , and I am pleased that the French Council Presidency has adopted a more balanced position on this point .
My own position remains unchanged : recognition of South Ossetia and Abkhazia are comparable , under international law , with recognition of Kosovo .
The Western countries recognised Kosovo and really opened Pandora 's box .
The West , NATO and the European Union are heavily implicated in the escalation of this conflict and the war in Georgia : the US redeployed Georgian troops from Iraq to Georgia and a number of Western countries - NATO countries , EU countries - have played a role in arming Georgia .
Even Israel has armed Georgia , and the arrival of NATO warships in the Black Sea is not necessarily a sign of peace .
We know that , in this war , geopolitical interests are also at stake ; I need only mention the oil pipelines in this context .
The conflict should not be used as a pretext to drive forward the militarisation of the European Union .
The EU has been successful as a non-military actor .
If we now take sides , the EU will lose its credibility as a mediator .
We are on the brink of a Cold War , and as for what lies ahead , well , it could go either way .
Today is 1 September , a day which is celebrated as an Anti-War Day .
We should be mindful of that : war is unacceptable and should never be supported , directly or indirectly , by countries in the European Union .

( NL ) Mr President , the display of naked Russian power on Georgian territory in this day and age is an attempt to legitimise two ethnic cleansing operations , in Abkhazia in the early 1990s and in South Ossetia last month , in August . It is also based on the mass issuing of Russian passports in these regions .
What can and should the European Union do about this brutal resurgence of imperialist ideas in Kremlin policy ?
We should offer a deeper and stronger European , even transatlantic , commitment towards our East European neighbours along the lines of the Swedish-Polish proposal for an eastern partnership .
I am grateful to Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner that she has spoken out clearly on this .
In addition , the current situation in Georgia makes it imperative that the Member States really do press on seriously with a common foreign energy policy , with energy diversification .
Naturally pipelines that are under the control of the sovereign states through which they run and which are not under threat are part of that .
Mr President , it is hard to avoid the conclusion that Europe has been impotent in the face of Russian aggression .
Whereas condemnation has greeted Russia 's effective annexation of parts of the sovereign state of Georgia , even the tone from within the EU has varied .
The message of ambivalence will not be lost on Moscow . It is hardly shaking in its boots over the divided mutterings of Europe .
Without a robust response to Russian aggression , I fear these matters will not end with Georgia .
Is Ukraine next , one has to wonder ?
And what will it take , with the EU now having made itself wittingly so dependent on Russian energy , to eventually permit an effective response ?
If the last few weeks have demonstrated anything , they have been an object lesson in the unworkability of a common foreign policy in this EU .
It has merely delivered the paralysis ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( ES ) Mr President , the European Council met this morning to decide its position on three challenges , as explained to us by Mr Kouchner .
These are : firstly , the disproportionate reaction , violation of international law , and invasion and ongoing occupation of a sovereign State ; secondly , the disregard for a peace plan signed thanks to the diligence of the Presidency of the European Union , and , thirdly , recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia which , by curiously invoking the precedent of Kosovo , has been rapidly recognised by Venezuela , Belarus and Hamas : ' A man is known by the company he keeps ' .
Today 's response from the European Council to these challenges is very clear : we are at a crossroads in our relations with Russia .
We have to be serious , Mr President , because we cannot continue in this way .
The prestige and credibility of the European Union are at stake . The EU cannot simply sign the cheque for these great modern dramas .
Despite the excellent work of Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , we , as the European Union , are not just here to pay for the damage and destruction wrought by the Russians in Georgia or by the Israelis in Palestine . We must have a proper foreign policy .

I would ask you , Mr Jouyet , to ensure that , on the 8th when the President of the Council of the European Union , Mr Sarkozy , visits Moscow , purely in the interests of ensuring consistency in the principles that we apply and value in the European Union , he gives a clear warning and a blunt and credible message that flouting international rules and law and violating the territorial integrity of a sovereign State will have a cost in terms of relations with the European Union .
This is important as there must be consequences , Mr President , and , in this respect , there is a lot riding on this .



( FR ) Mr President , this summer there have been various attempts to force our hand with , in addition to this tragic drama , two immediate consequences : firstly , the almost immediate acceptance of the anti-missile defence shield by Poland - even aimed towards Iran this is a problem - and secondly , the commitment of the European Union to finance the reconstruction of Georgia , although we very well know that the foreign affairs budget will not allow this as it is dramatically underfinanced .
You said this , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , and I support you : we must find other sources of financing , otherwise we may not be able to deal with this situation .
I therefore believe that any escalation must be prevented . My Group and I are in favour of clear , albeit firm , relations with Russia , particularly in terms of energy issues , human rights and international law .
However , we are against any return to the Cold War .
I would also warn against the hurried entry into NATO or the European Union of countries which cannot yet offer the necessary guarantees .
I invite the French Presidency , which I congratulate on its rapid action this summer , to consider the idea of the Union for the Black Sea , along the lines of the Union for the Mediterranean .
Finally , I say to my counterparts in the East , particularly in the Baltic States , we are no longer in 1938 but in 2008 . We will not allow history to falter .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr Kouchner , ladies and gentlemen , in January this year , as rapporteur on the South Caucasus , I became aware of the danger of an unrestrained arms race and stressed the importance of a peaceful resolution to the conflicts inherited from the Soviet era .
We suggested organising a three-plus-three conference , in other words the three countries of the Caucasus plus the European Union , Russia and the US .
Since then , as recalled by Mrs Isler , we have proposed to grant the same visa rights to Georgians as to Abkhazians .
We are now all well aware of what has happened - a military action and a disproportionate response - but the fact remains that two countries which had said that they wanted to abide by European values , by becoming members of the Council of Europe , have flouted these principles by using violence .
This is unacceptable . This must be denounced and cannot be forgotten overnight .
Europe , which has important relations with both countries , must play a careful and considered role to ensure that they return to a more reasonable policy .
This is why it was important to speak with one voice and I am very happy that this was possible , even without the Lisbon Treaty ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
?
I must remind Members that the time allocated to them was determined by the political groups .
You agreed to one-minute speeches , ladies and gentlemen , and that calls for exceptionally well-disciplined interventions .
I therefore beg your understanding when I need to interrupt speakers .
( IT ) Mr President , the Ossetia and Abkhazia of today are yesterday 's Kosovo .
None of the many governments now calling for peace in Georgia can deny their own responsibilities : by recognising Kosovo , the US and most of the European countries set a precedent which was bound to destabilise the Caucasus region .
Owing to the expansion of NATO right up to Russia 's borders , the US is politically , even more than militarily , responsible for having encouraged Georgia to mount its surprise attack during the night of 7 to 8 August .
Indeed , when attacking South Ossetia , Tbilisi thought it could count on protection from the United States , including military protection .
It was an unjustifiable attack , which struck at civilians and shattered already highly fragile agreements .
The Russian response had been prepared well in advance and was only awaiting an opportunity to unleash its full force .
No governments are innocent in this affair !
The sole victims are the civilian populations , whatever their allegiance , forced to abandon their homes and subject to all kinds of violence .
We are witnessing a war where the nationalist aspirations of local leaders are overlaid by a clash of great powers over control of energy resources : the real reason for the conflict is the gas and oil pipelines running westwards from central Asia .
Indeed , both the route through Turkey to the Mediterranean and the one from Georgia across Ukraine into Poland run through the Caucasus .
It is no accident that the US asked Poland in particular to accommodate its missiles pointing to the east .
Europe must work towards a peaceful solution , calling both for the withdrawal of Russian troops from Georgian territory and for the people there to have the right of self-determination .
The EU must first and foremost assist the refugees and refrain from any political action likely to worsen the situation even further .
Georgia 's entry into NATO must be flatly refused , the US fleet should be called upon to withdraw from the Black Sea , and Poland should be asked to reject the installation of the US missiles .
We must be certain that our aid is not used to purchase weapons and that the refugees are not used as instruments of war by the conflicting parties .
( FR ) Mr President , many speakers , starting with the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Bernard Kouchner , deplore Russia 's recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
Certainly this decision has led to some serious consequences for the countries of the Caucasus and for Europe and could do so in the future for Russia itself .
This is because recognising the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia could give ideas in the future to North Ossetia , Chechnya , Ingushetia , Dagestan and others which currently form part of the Russian Federation .
Whether in the Caucasus , Tibet , Africa or elsewhere , one of the challenges of our times is to find a balance between the aspirations of certain peoples to autonomy , on the one hand , and the inviolability of borders , on the other hand .
Without this inviolability , the peace to which true patriots aspire could be seriously threatened .
However , we Europeans are also open to criticism .
We have heard talk of respect for international borders , but we set a precedent in Kosovo , whether Mr Kouchner likes it or not .
To say that there was an international decision on Kosovo is a joke because the UN never authorised war against Serbia .
Russia has withdrawn from Eastern Europe , which not so long ago was ruled by the implacable Communist dictatorship . It has withdrawn from the Baltic states , from Ukraine and from the republics of Central Asia .
The more it has withdrawn , the more it has become encircled .
The Warsaw Pact has disappeared but we have not offered any response other than the ceaseless expansion of NATO .
We are now reaping the rewards of this !
( FR ) Mr President , I must first of all congratulate the French Presidency on this achievement .
I believe that we have come a long way from Europe 's position on Iraq to its current attitude towards the crisis in the Caucasus .
Congratulations .
Thanks to its Presidency , the Union has been more effective and quicker off the mark than Washington .
All this is positive , but questions do remain : firstly , how can we minimise the suffering of the population ; secondly , how can we ensure that the Russians respect the rules and what strategy do we adopt , in the longer term , with regard to Russia ?
I greet the measures and the text by the Council with moderate optimism and satisfaction .
It contains all the main elements of condemnation and action , including the more generous offer in terms of Community assistance and a potential ESDP mission .
But I would say to the presidency that it is just an hors d 'oeuvre .
( FR ) It is just an hors d 'œuvre or an entrée .
We are waiting for the main course which will be peace and stability in the region , and the European Union 's long-term strategy in this region of the Caucasus .
We need to deploy all efforts to make Russia understand that it has the choice : either to cooperate with the EU as a responsible partner assuming its obligations and commitments and fully respecting the six-point Sarkozy plan , or to expose itself to the condemnation of the international community , which may evolve into ostracism , and eventually into isolation encompassing a set of appropriate measures to be taken if the need arises .
We , the Union , also have a choice - either to be satisfied with our verbal actions and avoid measures which Russia would understand , or to revise , if necessary , our policy towards Russia , making clear that we can be both assertive and respectful in the event of non-compliance by Russia with the rules which we expect ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Kouchner , Russia 's actions amount to an attempt to revert to the imperialist policy of the former Soviet Union .
They are an attempt to impose Russia 's own political vision on an independent state .
How should Europe respond ?
In my view , we should begin by addressing Russia with one voice and making it abundantly clear that there can be no question of reverting to the policy of spheres of influence .
There can be no return to imperialist policy , no repetition of previous actions , and no reversion to the use of force in international relations .
We must speak with one voice as we convey this message to Russia , and do so in a clear and unambiguous manner .
We need to make it quite clear to Russia that aggression does not pay .
Secondly , the Union must launch two types of long-term action .
The first would involve drastically reducing its dependence on Russia for energy .
I do not wish to be blackmailed by Russia over gas or oil , and I am sure the same is true of everyone else in this Chamber .
We do not want our political activity and the defence of our principles and values to be dependent on the supply of gas or oil .
The second type of action is strategic in nature and amounts to making an offer to states that were formerly part of the Soviet Union .
Not only should Georgia be involved but also , and most especially , Ukraine , along with other countries .
What we have on offer is definitely more attractive than what Russia is proposing .
I am very pleased that these views have been enshrined in the conclusions of today 's Council , and I think this is the right course of action for the future .
( PL ) Mr President , I am sure we all hoped and dreamt that Russia would begin to develop , become democratic and respect certain principles which are also the foundations on which the European Union is built .
Those hopes and dreams must now be consigned to oblivion .
The current situation is entirely different . I welcome the statement that talks on the partnership agreement and the EU-Russia Summit will be suspended until such time as Russia fulfils the commitments entered into by virtue of the documents signed .
Furthermore , I believe the suspension should be for longer and that within the Union we should reflect on what kind of a relationship with Russia we actually want .
Can we really go on referring to a common area of security shared with Russia ?
Can we really consider Russia to be our strategic partner , when it espouses values so radically different from our own ?
I should now like to mention another issue , namely our energy security .
To give one example , we keep reiterating the importance of the Nabucco pipeline .
It has become a mantra .
Now is the time to go beyond mere words and provide financial support for that project .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council was quite right to send a very clear message to Moscow today , namely that we Europeans uphold the rights of peoples and will not sacrifice them to geopolitical pacts or accords .
Moreover , we have a moral duty towards our own populations , especially those which endured many decades under the heel of Soviet imperialism , to defend these principles of freedom .
However , those - such as Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi - who kept open a channel of dialogue with Moscow also did the right thing , so as to explain Europe 's way of thinking and to warn of the risk of re-entering a climate of Cold War , not just from a political point of view , not just from an economic and political point of view , but also and above all from a historical point of view , in that as time passes there is the prospect that Europe can of course include Russia or can exclude it once and for all .
It is therefore very important to open up and maintain a dialogue .
Europe , the peoples of Europe , do not want a Cold War because Cold War reminds us of death , persecution ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution is the most positive achievement since the ceasefire agreement and contains most of the demands made by Elmar Brok and myself , on behalf of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , after our visit to Georgia .
However , this is not enough .
The European Union still has a role to play and our credibility is at stake .
The resolution must be followed by resolute joint action , as Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has made clear with her encouraging statement today .
We must implement this resolution down to the last dot and comma , just as we are demanding Russia 's full compliance , down to the last dot and comma , with the six-point plan .
What is more , over recent weeks , we have seen how important the European Union is and can be , but we have also seen where our weaknesses lie and where we have to take action - including preventive action - to remedy them .
Yes , we can be mediators , but if that is what we want , we must have a common European foreign policy , a pro-active foreign , security and defence policy .
We have also felt acutely , over recent weeks , the lack of a common position - indeed , the lack of political will to achieve a common position - and , even now , the lack of a shared resolve .
The absence of the Lisbon Treaty is weakening us .
Reconstruction is not enough .
We must invest in these countries ' independence and cut the ground away from nationalism .
Engagement by the EU is more important than the prospect of NATO membership .
Commissioner , you have said , very eloquently , that there can be no more ' business as usual ' towards Russia , and that our policy needs to be reappraised .
We must invest in economic , democratic , social and educational stability .
It is not just about money .
We must also expand our Neighbourhood Policy and put forward practical projects such as those you have announced today .
We look forward to that .
Mr President , the main problem we are facing does not concern the answer to the question of who is right and who is wrong ; who is the aggressor or who is the victim ; what is a sovereign right and what is a disproportionate reaction .
The real problem is that we have no real means to impose a status quo ante or to exert efficient pressure on a country like Russia to revise a certain policy .
Moreover , we cannot ask Russia to observe any provision of international law which we have not already breached before .
A world in which every crisis is dealt with on a sui generis basis is not a world of order , but of disorder .
What we see around us today is not the beginning of a new Cold War , but the end of the unipolar order .
It is a geopolitical confrontation at global level which takes place within an unregulated international environment where the unilateralists are clashing .
When the unipolar order is dead and the multipolar order is not yet born , anarchy and the rule of might prevail .
The only reasonable thing we must do is to convene an international conference for security and cooperation , where all the global and regional players , together with the local stakeholders , should negotiate and redefine and reinvent the principles of international law in international relations , the role and powers of international organisations , the procedure for dealing with local crises and the system of security guarantees which could meet the specific opportunities , challenges and dangers of our times .
Meanwhile , we must accelerate the process of economic integration , political association and institutional approximation with our eastern neighbours such as Ukraine and Moldova .
Let us hope that the European Union will be up to these expectations .
( Applause )
( ET ) We have already discussed here today the need to send international peacekeeping and civilian missions to Georgia .
As a member of the South Caucasus delegation I support this wholeheartedly , all the more so given that in early spring , speaking in this very spot , I drew attention to the urgent need for these very measures .
History has made many of our countries multi-ethnic , including Georgia .
I am concerned about the potential for a very grim scenario .
Specifically , a number of days ago , Russia recognised Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
As though pursuing that theme , North Ossetia 's Minister for Population talked about South and North Ossetia merging under Russian law , in other words of South Ossetia becoming part of Russia .
In the view of a number of countries , there is a clash between two keystones of international law here : national self-determination and territorial integrity .
We know that we must take the Helsinki Final Act as our starting point , but my question to the Council is : ' What steps are being taken to prevent the violation of the territorial integrity of a sovereign State ? '
( PL ) Mr President , the outcome of the European Council could be described either as a glass that is half empty or as one that is half full .
The important thing is that agreement was reached and that the Union spoke with one voice .
It is , however , disappointing that the Council joint position does not go far enough . It falls short of what most of those who expressed their opinion in this House would have liked .
During the Russian offensive in Georgia , the Russian media reported how Mr Putin found time to travel to Siberia and sedate a tiger that was threatening local people .
This incident is a good illustration of Russia 's behaviour and of the treatment it metes out to Europe .
Moscow has not been entirely responsible for sedating the European tiger , however .
In this context , how should the North Stream and South Stream projects be assessed , together with the support they have received from certain Member States of the Union ?
Lack of solidarity and subservience to an aggressor always encourages the latter . This is particularly true when certain partners pay for the benefits enjoyed by others .
The current pronouncements about the Union 's unity with regard to Russia , the emphasis placed on the Eastern partnership and the other statements made are certainly encouraging . If we content ourselves with words alone , however , the aggressor may strike again .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to pick up on a few practical points from this evening 's debate .
First of all I would pay tribute to the French Minister for having been bold enough to make some highly important assertions in this House .
I fully endorse everything the French Minister said . I agree with absolutely everything .
I shall not repeat any of his words because tomorrow 's press will already be full enough of what he has stated here , but I must say that the position outlined by the Presidency of the European Union is a very strong and very precise one .
What I wanted to say is that I believe the European Union has made a step-change : we can say whatever we like in this auditorium but we are not the makers of EU foreign policy and do not have powers to intervene in it ; only the European Council can do that .

The European Council - as far as I can judge from my brief experience in this House - has demonstrated what Europe is making : a step-change .
Today 's European Council has shown that the European Union really does exist , that even though the Lisbon Treaty is not yet in force , the EU is capable of addressing itself to extremely important issues .
I should also like to express great appreciation for what has been done by the French Presidency , by President Sarkozy , as well as by Chancellor Merkel and Prime Minister Berlusconi , in this crisis .
I believe that the united response passes over the comments made by the British Prime Minister , who may have duly fallen into line today , but whose earlier statements to the press were far from welcome .
I believe , and I am concluding , that the step-change is this : the European Union exists !
Let us proceed cautiously with accessions to NATO and the EU .
Let us see how things stand .
The French Minister is quite right .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like first of all to acknowledge the speed and effectiveness of the French Presidency in brokering a truce between the parties to the conflict .
The six-point plan must now be brought to life , including , of course , the withdrawal of Russian troops to their positions prior to the outbreak of the conflict .
The Georgia issue , however , is not an isolated issue as there is a whole series of interlinked conflicts and problems throughout the Southern Caucasus .
It is therefore essential for the European Union to apply itself far more effectively and intensively than previously to the entire region of the Eastern Mediterranean and Transcaucasus .
In other words , it is essential to strengthen the eastern dimension of our policies towards our neighbours through real measures .
Since I am a Member from a country which has not yet ratified the Lisbon Treaty , I should like to invite the Governments of the Czech Republic , Sweden and , of course , Ireland too to work hard on the ratification of this document , because it is the prerequisite for more unified and more effective common foreign and security policies enabling us to deal with the challenges , including the challenges coming from the East and from Russia , and to solve these problems .
( PL ) Today is the anniversary of the outbreak of the Second World War .
That war was immediately preceded by a secret pact between the Soviet Union and Germany , and by the policy of appeasement adopted by the countries of Western Europe .
In 1939 it was naïvely believed that sacrificing selected smaller states would satisfy the aggressor .
I am recalling all this due to the war in Georgia . Georgia has become the first target for attack in the course of contemporary Russia 's pursuit of the imperialist tendencies that it inherited from the Soviet Union .
Russia is using Georgia as a testing ground , to establish how much Member States of the Union are prepared to put up with .
It does not expect them to stand firm . In view of the armed conflict , the European Parliament must not confirm Russia 's expectations .
We must adopt a common , unambiguous and determined stance .
Georgia is entitled to count on our diplomatic and material support .
The European Parliament should send its own observers to Georgia , to verify information concerning ethnic cleansing .
We must do all we can to stop expansion and prevent our tragic history from repeating itself .
Mr President , we are witnessing the collapse of the ' end of history ' paradigm , but this should also mark the end of the era of wishful thinking , replacing peace through speech with peace through strength and solidarity .
Russia has placed itself in the category of unstable , unpredictable states .
It can no longer be seen as a reliable partner , and clearly does not share our common values .
By invading Georgia it has challenged the fundamentals of the international security system , trying to replace it with the model of ' might is right ' .
Everything now depends on EU actions - not just reactions .
No ' business as usual ' entails taking concrete steps , because Russia will only understand if we act .
I propose the following measures : firstly , a genuine international peacekeeping force - Russia cannot play the dual role of peacekeeper and invader ; secondly , freezing the PCA negotiations ; thirdly , putting on hold the Nord Stream and South Stream projects ; fourthly , freezing visa facilitation ; and , fifthly , cancelling the Sochi Olympic Games .



If nothing concrete is done , Russia will not only never release Georgia from its hold , but will also follow the same pattern elsewhere .
The first priority of the democratic community is to set firm limits .
Today , we have to answer the same moral challenge .
If not us , then who ?
If not now , then when ?
( Applause )
( ET ) In spring during the Georgian elections I met , in the town of Gori , a Georgian woman who had been forced to flee Abkhazia 15 years previously .
Today she has become a refugee in her own country for the second time .
What a tragedy .
It is also tragic that here today , in this Chamber , we have so many different interpretations of what has happened , and for that reason I think it especially important , above all else , to send an independent research commission , an international commission , to Georgia to establish what really happened .
This conflict is not between Georgians or Ossetians , this conflict did not begin on 8 August , it is not only Russia and Georgia 's conflict , it is a conflict of values and it involves us all .
( FR ) Mr President , I believe it is important to congratulate the French Presidency , President Sarkozy and Mr Kouchner who is here today , not only because they have adopted , in this crisis , a very firm attitude towards Russia , but also because they have managed to maintain the unity of the European Union , a unity which unfortunately did not exist in 2003 .
I would join with those who say that this issue , grave though it is , is not only about Georgia and the illegal occupation and invasion of that country .
I would say to the Commissioner that it is also about the EU 's relations with Russia .
It goes to the heart of what used to be described as the common values we share .
I personally find it very difficult to see what common values I share with a country that uses force , military aggression and a propaganda war to accuse the occupied country of being the invader and aggressor .
It appears that the Cooperation and Partnership Agreement is likely to be on hold for some time unless Russia withdraws its troops .
The question then arises of what we will do if Russia were to refuse to withdraw its troops .
We are told we must have dialogue , but what kind of dialogue can you have with a partner who does not respect the values you are trying to defend and support ?
It seems to me that , from a historical perspective , we want harmonious relations with Russia , but not at the price simply of surrendering the values we hold dear .
I agree with Mr Kelam and others that there are already consequences for Russia , with massive disinvestment on its markets , because international investors now regard Russia as a very uncertain place in which to invest .
However , Nord Stream and South Stream also have to be re-examined .
We cannot simply go ahead with these as if a Russian monopoly on energy supply was perfectly normal .
The Winter Olympics in Sochi also have to re-examined ; there cannot be an Olympic truce .
The Russians will recognise the consequences of our taking resolute action and not simply being driven by their agenda .
( Applause )
( ES ) I should like to say two things very quickly .
Firstly , I think I am right in saying that Mr Jouyet previously regretted in the press the influence of US conservative sectors , or certain conservative sectors , in the ' No ' vote in the Irish referendum .
I believe we all now regret the extravagant praise of neo-con policies in the Caucasus crisis .
In this respect , many can be held responsible .
Tbilisi is responsible for the incomprehensible decision to take military action .
Moscow is responsible for deciding on a brutal and disproportionate response .
Washington , with a happily retiring President , is responsible for having fuelled years of tension in the region .
Secondly , I believe that Europe has a fundamental responsibility which can only be met by building , not soft power or hard power , but political power which depends on the unity of all the Member State governments .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
For many years , Russian power politics have primed the tension in Georgia , which has degenerated into a brief but destructive war .
The Russian military forces have violated international law and invaded the territory of a sovereign state .
The Kremlin has crowned this process by recognising the independence of the two breakaway provinces .
This has given a new dimension to the international political stage .
It is a dangerous situation , partly from the perspective of the states that border Russia and partly because Putin and his men have created a dangerous precedent for themselves .
Why is it important for the international community to unite ?
Russian politics have now come to a standstill and have gone down a dead end , so we must make the most of this moment .
The EU must press for the sending of neutral , international peacekeepers , thus relieving the peacekeeping forces that have now lost their credibility and authority .
Our decision to facilitate visas for Russians should be reviewed , and at the same time the visa requirement in respect of Georgia should finally be eased .
Georgia is an integral part of our neighbourhood policy and so we have an obligation to ensure the maximum support necessary for rebuilding the country . Thank you very much .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Saakashvili adventure is the result of an unpardonable error of judgement : namely , to think that Russia would not respond to military aggression , because military aggression is what took place .
Russia is no longer what it was in 2000 , and will no longer withdraw either tactically or strategically .
The first thing to do is face the facts : Europe and its unity have been seriously damaged by this error .
We cannot allow ourselves to repeat it , and we cannot allow anyone else to force us to repeat it .
Some people believe that the entry of Ukraine and Georgia into NATO should now be accelerated , but I would ask anyone who believes that to think hard , since such a decision would do nothing to enhance our safety ; on the contrary , it would be jeopardised .
As we now know , Russia will react , if not in equal measure , then certainly with counter-measures .
We would soon run the risk of having a crisis much bigger than that of August on our hands , and in a country like Ukraine at the heart of Europe .
Wisdom dictates that we redo a number of calculations , since they were wrong , and that we sit down at the negotiating table with Russia on a basis of reciprocity and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the day before yesterday I had a long dinner conversation with one of the wisest heads of Europe , Otto von Habsburg .
He said that , based on his broad knowledge of the facts , European governments have been enormously corrupted , as it is well known that Russia is using a new secret weapon against the West - namely global bribery .
Today 's Council meeting might shed more light on that dark corner of European politics .
If the Council and our Parliament , the last fortress of political conscience in Europe , do not demand immediate withdrawal of Russian occupation forces from Poti and the buffer zones established by the occupier , then political disaster would appear to be looming for our fading Europe .
Those zones are most needed by Russian and Ossetian smugglers in order to prevent Georgia having any control at the internal borders between the puppet Ossetia and the still independent Georgia .
The idea of giving the occupier until the EU-Russia summit in November to build fortifications is totally wrong , and points to the fact that Otto von Habsburg is probably right .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , our discerning and determined position is eagerly awaited .
The United States , due to the wishes of the Russians but also due to the current election period , cannot act as the catalyst of a global political situation in this area neighbouring the Union .
We , the European Union , have a unique historical opportunity to build our foreign and security policy and develop Europe through its achievements and experience .
We must not waste this opportunity .
The necessary condemnations do not offer solutions .
Even if Pandora 's box was opened with Kosovo , with a recognition defying the rules of international law , let us return international law and respect for human rights to the heart of the solution .
Let us be firm and act politically . Let us adopt a clear , common and firm position towards Russia , but one which is aimed at finding a solution and a partnership , because we should be clear-headed in our approach to Russia in 2008 .
Let us propose , under the aegis of the European Union , a regional conference on the resolution of the situation and on the future of the partnerships .
It is with this determination for a single voice of the European Union that we will minimise the destructive venom of nationalism which always , inexorably , leads to war .
( PL ) Mr President , today the Council reached agreement concerning Russia .
This may be deemed success of a sort , though many were disappointed that Russia was treated so gently .
We must now await Moscow 's reaction .
No doubt the Russian press will quote those parts of our debate in which the Council 's representative and certain MEPs blamed Georgia .
In public , Moscow will express strong criticism of the Council 's stance , yet in private it will be delighted .
I would say to those in power in Moscow : do not rejoice prematurely .
Europe no longer considers you a reliable partner that keeps its word and respects international law .
Europe is seriously considering whether it can be dependent on Russian oil and gas .
Europe has not dealt with you too severely today , but the ranks of your supporters have been significantly depleted .

( HU ) We are completely agreed that we should condemn Russia for awarding citizenship , and we should condemn it for the excessive military role that it has assumed , and for recognising Abkhazia and Ossetia ; at the same time , we should also condemn Georgia because the Georgian leadership should have known what its own geo-strategic room for manoeuvre was .
At the same time , we agree that there should be peacekeeping forces , but we are not talking about what the basis would be for a lasting solution , and this would only be extensive autonomy for the Abkhazians and South Ossetians under the Ahtisaari plan .
We are not talking about the minorities that are affected , but we are talking about everything else , so I believe that it is not only the conflict that has frozen but also , in many respects , our thinking .
We should find a long-term solution for this problem .
( NL ) Mr President , most of the attention has been focused on the Russian military intervention in Georgia .
The possible use of cluster bombs and the occupation of a port outside the disputed area are just cause for anger .
That does not apply , in my opinion , to the protection of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union , these two regions have not in practice been part of Georgia .
Most inhabitants of these two small states do not want to be subject to Georgia under any circumstances , just as most of the inhabitants of Kosovo do not want to belong to Serbia under any circumstances .
They would , unfortunately , be second-class citizens in those countries .
For these people equal rights and democracy are only possible if their secession ceases to be a matter of debate and they have a guarantee that they will not be subject to military attack from outside .
To sum up , there is very good reason to criticise Russia , but not on account of the fact that it has now recognised the de facto independence of these two small states .
Kosovo could not be a unique case ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) The events in Georgia paradoxically took place in the month of August , just like in the former Czechoslovakia 40 years ago , when my country too was invaded and occupied for many a long year by the Soviet Army .
Fellow Members , we must not forget that Russia has shown by its actions that it has not put its past behind it .
Just as in 1968 , it has not hesitated to send in tanks to achieve its political goals .
Once again military force is destabilising countries which are trying to free themselves from Russian influence .
Today it is Georgia , tomorrow it could be Ukraine .
I am convinced that the EU must be even more resolute in its opposition to Russia 's stance with regard to recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
I am convinced that the EU 's response must be to intensify cooperation with Georgia and especially with Ukraine , not only with words but also by clear and meaningful actions .
Mr President , Georgia is not a simple episode in international politics .
It is the beginning of a chain reaction with important consequences .
First , it indicates Russia 's military comeback , which will have to be reflected in the new European security strategy under preparation .
Second , this apparent reconquista indicates Russia 's desire to use its newly acquired energies in making good its losses from the 1990s and pay back for the accompanying humiliation , rather than willingness to contribute to the shaping of the future world .
Third , it highlights the weak position of Europe due to increasing energy dependence on Russia and the delay in ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Fourth , it can either restore or further damage transatlantic unity .
Fifth , it demonstrates that international legality needs to be strengthened both in concept and in respect .
Sixth , it makes clear that the Black Sea area needs much more attention and involvement from the EU and therefore that it requires more than a simply synergy .
Mr President , I support democratic Georgia 's right to seek security in the west and I disapprove of Russia 's disproportionate aggression and continued occupation of the country .
The EU must increase its aid to Georgia for reconstruction , fast-track an EU free trade agreement and press ahead with visa facilitation .
Georgia should also be allowed to go on the path for NATO , eventually for full membership .
We must use this opportunity now , through the EU 's common external energy security policy , to break Moscow 's stranglehold on Europe 's oil and gas supplies .
Germany and Italy are both building pipelines in joint ventures with Gazprom .
To balance this , the EU should also support the White Stream pipeline project which will transport gas from the Caspian Sea to Europe through Georgia and Ukraine - both governments supporting this project - thereby circumventing Russia .
Targeting Gazprom 's monopoly and Russia 's use of the gas weapon as our long-term response will hit Russia hard .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will be brief because Bernard Kouchner has already spoken twice and I know that you too have a lot of work to do .
As this debate comes to a close , I should firstly like to thank you for your constant involvement in this matter .
The resolutions adopted , the fact that Chairman Saryusz-Wolski convened the Committee on Foreign Affairs on 20 August and the fact that Mrs Isler Béguin - as she pointed out - went to the conflict region and gave a powerful testimony on behalf of this institution and , beyond that , on behalf of the European Union have confirmed the European Parliament 's involvement in this crisis .
This leads me to say that I have been surprised to hear certain comments about the European Union : firstly , that it has not reacted ; secondly , that it was powerless , and thirdly , that it adopted a position of weakness .
If the European Union was not influential , if it did not play a role in this crisis , then I should like to know who did ?
Who was powerful ?
Who proved themselves either militarily or in any other way ?
I saw no power other than the European Union taking action and it was during this crisis that the European Union was possibly seen in a new light as a partner and as a power .
Everyone has their own responsibilities .
The European Union has its responsibilities which are not the same as those of NATO or the US .
However , through its values and its means - to which I will return - the European Union has fulfilled all its responsibilities .
People say to us : ' Russia does not have the same values as the European Union ' but , between us , that is old news .
It is not a scoop .
We know that Russia does not have the same values as the European Union .
If it had the same values as the EU , other questions would be asked about Russia .
All the questions asked about Russia concern what type of relations we want to have with this neighbour , what type of partnership we want to build , what type of dialogue we want to have , how we can encourage Russia to fulfil its duties and assume its responsibilities and how can we steer it towards an approach more in line with international law .
These are the questions .
As for myself , I have never believed that we have the same values , whatever respect I may have for Russia , and I have known Russia for some time .
The third thought you have had , and you have all had this thought , is that we cannot go very far , despite a rapid reaction and despite what has been done today , because we do not have the instruments needed , because we will only have these instruments if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified and because this crisis has perfectly demonstrated how much we need this Treaty , how much we need to strengthen our foreign policy and how much we need , also , to strengthen our defence policy .
We must be very clear on this and several of you have rightly underlined this .
I now come to the European Council .
Today 's European Council forms a starting point .
It did not cover everything and it cannot cover everything in relation to the management of this crisis by the European Union and the relations between the European Union and Russia .
Today was about reviewing the situation on the ground and assessing the consequences for relations between the European Union and Russia .
It was about showing that we are united and that we are active in this conflict .
This European Council has enabled us to show that we are united , that we have acted and that we have firm positions . I would remind you of these : condemnation of Russia 's disproportionate reaction ; support for Georgia in the financial , humanitarian , economic and political spheres ; confirmation of the strengthening of the relationship between the European Union and Georgia ; implementation of the six-point conflict resolution plan including - and several of you have stressed this point - the existence of an international monitoring mechanism ; commitment of the European Union on the ground by sending a Special Representative ; strengthening of the eastern partnership , particularly with regard to the Black Sea area and Ukraine , which was explicitly underlined in today 's conclusions , and an energy policy which is more diverse and independent and better organised at European level .
I have understood everything you have said this evening .
You can be sure that the French Presidency will remind everyone of its wish to have a much more diverse , independent and better structured European energy policy .
You can count on the Presidency in this respect .
This is a starting point because it has been decided that an important journey should be made by the President of the Council of the European Union , the President of the Commission and the High Representative , on 8 September , to Moscow and Tbilisi . It is in that context that we must assess the subsequent actions that we will need to take .
Finally , we have agreed on the fact that all meetings on the partnership agreement should be postponed until the Russians withdraw to their previous positions .
This is therefore a starting point .
Our aim today was not to solve everything but to show our unity and our determination and for this we need the support of the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am the final speaker , so I will try to be as brief as possible .
As I am the last speaker , however , I should like to highlight a few key points from this debate .
Firstly , I am sure I do not need to remind you that it was on this day , 1 September , in 1939 that the Second World War began .
Today , on that anniversary , we are debating a new war which has broken out , but this new war was one which we - the European Union - have been able to stop very quickly .
In my view , that is a very important point .
That is why this has been a lengthy and wide-ranging debate , but it has also been a good debate .
We had a good debate in the European Council too , with sound conclusions .
In my view , the European Union 's credibility has played a key role here : credibility and unity .
As the President-in-Office of the Council and I have both said , this was a major test for the credibility and , indeed , the unity of the European Union , but it is a test which we have passed with flying colours .
Assistance for Georgia is important , as we have heard .
We have said that there is a need for humanitarian aid and reconstruction assistance , where we will be looking to Parliament for support .
I should like to thank you , as of now , for your support and will of course be coming back to you with more precise figures .
Above all , however , I am thinking about the visa agreement .
We are aware , of course , that there is discrimination taking place here : Abkhazians and South Ossetians , many of whom have Russian passports , are in a more favourable position than Georgians , but I would also point out that many of the individual Member States have a role to play here , and let me emphasise that the same applies to a free trade agreement .
I would remind you that we had already identified three issues in relation to the strengthening of the European Neighbourhood Policy , but these did not really strike a chord with the Member States at the time .
Mobility was one , the second was the issue of economic partnerships , and the third was enhanced security , which means , of course , that all conflicts , actions and consequences have to be discussed in the case of Russia too .
We are at a fork in the road - a crossroads - but the future will mainly be determined by Russia , for it will be Russia which will be called to account here , just as we have said today : there will be no more negotiations on the new agreement without a withdrawal of troops .
Russia has it in its power to comply with what we have said today .
I very much hope that a good solution will be found on 8 September .
Beyond this , there are two main consequences : the Neighbourhood Policy Plus , or whatever we call it in future , must be strengthened at regional and bilateral level ; this means going beyond Georgia and involving Ukraine , Moldova and , indeed , other countries as well .
This is something we have often talked about , but I am hoping that now , I can perhaps count on more support from the individual Member States .
Finally , let me say a word about energy policy .
This is another issue which has been of particular concern for me over the last 18 months , and I can assure you that it will continue to be a very important issue for me personally in future too .
That brings me to the end of my quick resumé of what has been a lengthy but extremely important debate .
( Applause )
? The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
As a Rapporteur for the Black Sea region , I have always insistently emphasized the major challenge that unsolved conflicts represent for the regional stability , as well as the need for a EU firm and deep involvement in the above-mentioned region .
Russia 's actions in Georgia are regrettable , dangerous in the context of regional and European stability and , implicitly , unacceptable by the international community .
Therefore , it is imperative and urgent for the EU to pass from promises to action , and to demonstrate firmness both in its actions in Georgia and in re-examining its relations with Russia .
For ensuring stability in the Black Sea region , three key principles should guide the EU action .
First of all , all decisions should be based upon compliance with Georgia 's territorial integrity and the international law .
Secondly , this formula for managing the conflicts in the region should be re-examined in order to accelerate and increase the possibilities for their final settlement .
This supposes the EU 's active involvement in peacekeeping operations in Georgia , as well as in the process of managing and solving the other conflicts in the region , i.e. the Transnistrian conflict .
The EU efforts to ensure its energy security should also be increased to the maximum , including by the development of the Nabucco project .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Jouyet , Mrs Benita Ferrero-Waldner , I must firstly thank my fellow Members who have congratulated the French Presidency of the European Union and welcomed the actions of Nicolas Sarkozy in this difficult conflict between Russia and Georgia .
It could take for ever to determine the borders of the former Eastern Roman Empire with , to the west , the Balkans and Kosovo and , to the north , the Caucasus , South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
What must guide the European approach is respect for people . I suggest that , given how serious the situation in Georgia has become , an extraordinary meeting of the Committees on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments of the Member States should be envisaged because it is we parliamentarians who represent the people .
It is finally becoming clear that the ' Black Sea Synergy ' introduced at the end of 2007 by the European Commission is not sufficient .
It is now urgent for the Union to propose a truly ambitious neighbourhood policy with the countries bordering the Black Sea , starting with an economic free-trade area .
in writing . - ( RO ) The EU is not entitled to allow the Georgian scenario to repeat in other conflict regions as well .
The events in Georgia represent a serious test for the EU capacity of response and involvement in the frozen conflicts regions of the former Soviet area .
It is necessary that the EU examines the possibility of sending to Georgia a European Union civilian observer mission to monitor compliance with the cease-fire agreement .
Russia 's disproportionate counterstroke in South Ossetia had a negative impact on the civilian population , as well as on the infrastructure , and was a serious infringement of the international rules .
This obviously indicates the need to strengthen security through the presence of a multinational and impartial peacekeeping force .
The EU should also seriously consider a more consistent process of cooperation with the Republic of Moldova and the possibility to provide , under certain conditions as regards Chisinau 's guaranteeing certain democratic standards , a much clearer European perspective for this country .
In order to strengthen good relations and avoid any conflict situations , regional cooperation between the countries bordering the Black Sea should turn into a multidimensional cooperation to be institutionalized , for instance by establishing the Union of countries bordering the Black Sea .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , in recent weeks we have witnessed an attack by Russia on a sovereign and independent state .
We have seen how land hundreds of kilometres away from the theatre of war has been occupied , and how the promises made to the West have been torn up .
I am convinced that Georgia 's European aspirations were half of the reason for Russia 's attack . The other half was the desire to control the routes through Georgia used to transport raw materials for energy .
It is our political and moral duty to support the people of Georgia and to make Russia understand that the time when it could act at will in its self-proclaimed sphere of influence has gone forever .
The latest events have made it abundantly clear that Russia cannot be a reliable energy partner .
Russia 's control of oil and gas has made us hostages to the Kremlin .
As a result , the main challenge now facing us is to free ourselves from dependence on Russian raw materials .
How to achieve this is currently a controversial issue .
If , however , we continue investing in ventures such as North Stream and South Stream , we shall be providing the Russian authorities with new and powerful ways of exerting pressure on the European Union .
The Russians will have no reservations whatsoever in using these to their advantage when the time is right .
in writing . - ( FR ) I must firstly thank Mrs Lambert for the quality of her work .
The report on which we must decide tomorrow has the dual merit of taking a very clearheaded look at the imperfections and problems of the Dublin system and of formulating proposals to improve the efficiency of procedures and the situation of asylum seekers .



I should like to stress a number of points that , in my opinion , are fundamental : the need to reinforce the rights of asylum seekers and guarantee these in the same way across the whole EU territory ; the fact that detaining asylum seekers should always be a decision of last resort and duly justified ; the need to ensure better distribution of asylum applications as the current system places a disproportionate burden on those Member States situated at the external borders of the EU ; the need to take measures against Member States not guaranteeing an in-depth and fair examination of these applications , and finally , the importance of family reunification and a broader definition of the ' family member ' concept , to include all close relatives .

in writing . - ( RO ) The great gain of today 's extraordinary meeting of the European Council is the unity of Member States .
We must not enter the situation of a Cold War again .
The Russian Federation should receive a unitary message from the EU : It must comply with the sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries , withdraw its troops from the frozen conflict regions by complying with the international conventions and treaties it signed and must not establish its foreign policy on the capacity of energy supplier .
This unity of Member States should also be seen in the Union 's future actions : - a common energy policy based on the creation of new transportation routes to use different sources than the present ones , the development of a set of Black Sea policies to increase the geostrategic and security importance of the region , as well as the active involvement and promotion of new mechanisms for solving the frozen conflicts in the region .
In this context , the review of the Neighbourhood Policy is absolutely necessary .
Countries such as Ukraine , Moldova , Georgia or Azerbaijan should be included in a coherent and accelerated mechanism that , in the case of meeting the necessary requirements , could lead to their future membership in the EU .
in writing . - ( HU ) Georgia - the illusion of freedom ?
We all know that the Georgian-Russian war is not about Georgia .
My fellow Members know , and the Heads of State or Government meeting in Brussels today know , that they are debating the possible sanctions .
In the midst of our work for ever closer integration of the European Union , the Georgian-Russian conflict has come like a bolt from the blue to remind us that force makes decisions even in the 21st century .
Over the next seven years , Russia may spend 190 billion dollars on arms and on developing its army .
It will not be afraid of deploying its army , updated using the dollars from oil and gas - August 2008 was proof of this , at least .
As a Hungarian who was once forced to be a citizen of the Russian empire , it is especially difficult for me to draw this conclusion .
Russian menace lives , and has already penetrated our everyday consciousness , not only through energy prices but also in the image of columns of tanks filing into Georgia .
At the same time , I trust that it is clear to my fellow Members and to those taking part in the European summit that it is not the peace of Georgia , Ukraine or Western Europe that is at stake in our current conflict with Russia .
We can lay down the framework and emphases for future dialogue with a common , resolute Union response - or we will have excessively cocksure Russian foreign policy as our bedfellow .
Those Member States of the Union that suffered from Soviet oppression twenty years ago know what this danger means , whatever ideological form it may be dressed up in .
The leaders of the new Member States therefore have a moral responsibility to protect their voters from the increasing external threat .
in writing . - Mr President , the Russian aggression against Georgia has provoked the world public to question the decision of the International Olympic Committee to grant Sochi , Russia , the right of hosting the Winter Olympics in 2014 .
Sochi is located on the coast of the Black Sea just 20 miles from the border of the Russian Federation and Abkhazia , and therefore in close proximity to a zone of conflict .
But there is another aspect that concerns me as well .
Just as in Beijing , people 's homes are getting in the way of the construction of Olympic facilities .
For example the construction in progress is wiping out a whole village called Eesti-Aiake or " Estonian Garden " in English , which was founded 120 years ago by 36 Estonian families , who migrated to the Caucasus region in Imperial Russia and who were granted lands there .
The Russian authorities are constructing stands , intended to be used for only 14 days during the Olympics , on the location of the oldest part of the village .
The compensation that will be paid to the families is said to be lower than the market price of the land .
Such outrageous actions violate the natural right to property and therefore should be condemned .
in writing . - The Georgian President , Mikheil Saakashvili , whom the opposition accuses of vote-rigging on a massive scale and widespread corruption , came to office by stirring up extreme Georgian nationalism and promising to force South Ossetia and Abkhazia , which are kindly disposed towards Russia , to become Georgian .
The United States of America has been Georgia 's best ally , but Israel has not been too bad for Georgia either .
The United States sent 130-170 military trainers to the country , Israel over 100 .
Iike Tomer , a code name , was a soldier in an elite unit in the Israeli army enlisted as a trainer by Defensive Shield , a company that sells military services run by General Gal Hirsch , the anti-hero in the war Israel lost against Lebanon .
He had this to say : ' By Israeli standards , the soldiers had almost zero capability and the officers were mediocre . It was clear that taking that army to war was illogical . '
An offensive that was illogical and unwise led to the total defeat of Saakashvili 's army of clowns .
The soldiers abandoned their heavy weaponry , leaving it in the hands of the Russian troops , and fled in a chaotic frenzy to Tbilisi .
Daring exploits of this kind do not deserve the support of the European Parliament .
It has the support of America 's neoconservative Georgia Lobby , which is headed by Randy Scheunemann , presidential candidate John McCain 's adviser on foreign policy .
He has been on both McCain 's and Saakashvili 's payroll at the same time , and during the last 18 months has received USD 290 000 in fees from Georgia .
I agree , however , that the Russians reacted too strongly .
in writing . - ( HU ) According to some people , the crisis in the Caucasus started with President Bush 's speech in Riga in 2005 , when he announced that a new Yalta Agreement was needed .
He could just as well have said a new Treaty of Trianon , since the misery of many small peoples and countries did not start with the Second World War but with the Trianon Peace Treaty that ended the First World War .
The recommendation of the then American President , Wilson , concerning the self-determination of peoples has only remained a dream .
Today , in connection with the crisis in the Caucasus , people are talking about the interests of great powers , about oil and about war , but they are saying very little about the right of self-determination of the peoples living there .
The most important task for the EU in such conflict situations could be to set an example .
Of the Member States of the EU , 11 ensure autonomy for minorities in some form or other .
This is 41 % of the Member States of the EU .
The objective is an exemplary policy on national minorities for every Member State of the EU : not in 41 % , but in 100 % !
A European Union with an exemplary policy on national minorities could even take more effective action in the Caucasus too .
in writing . - ( CS ) From the very start of the discussions about recognising Kosovan independence , we have been warning that such a step would start a spiral of events , the negative consequences of which can only be imagined with outcomes which are hard to predict .
Even on the floor of the Czech Parliament , the CPBM has expressed its disagreement with the Czech Republic 's recognition of Kosovo .
Those who have been playing with fire should not now be surprised that fingers have been burnt in another part of the globe , especially when their partner was such a problematic person as President Mikhail Saakashvili .
The solution to the current situation is the observance of international law , which is especially important for such a small state as the Czech Republic with its historic experience .
Evoking any kind of phobia through certain policies is in this situation simply wrong and dangerous .
The reaction of some NATO states and the change in relations with Russia needs to be contrasted , for example , with Russia 's part in the fight against international terrorism and also , for example , with the fact that 70 % of the supplies needed for the expeditionary force in Afghanistan are transported across Russian Federation territory .
NATO headquarters is clearly aware of this fact .
The situation will not be resolved by strong language and gestures , but by rational negotiations around the table .
in writing . - ( HU ) Forty years have passed since the Warsaw Pact troops crushed Czechoslovakia and overthrew the government that had set itself the task of making the Communist dictatorship democratic .
Unfortunately , Socialist Hungary also assumed a shameful role in the operation , together with the other Soviet satellite states , thus serving the raw , imperialist despotism of Moscow .
We ask the Slovak and Czech peoples to forgive us for this .
For us Hungarians this is especially painful , since twelve years before that , in 1956 , Soviet troops similarly drowned the Hungarian revolution in blood .
By crushing the Prague Spring , Moscow signalled that it could do whatever it wanted in its sphere of influence , which it had stolen from Europe at the end of the Second World War , and that there were no borders to the imperialist shamelessness and hypocrisy of Soviet Russia .
There is only one possible tool against this - the firm , resolute defence of citizens ' human rights and of the principles of democracy and national sovereignty , and action against aggression .
This is needed so that democratic Europe still has a clear message today !
in writing . - ( PL ) I believe great caution should be exercised when assessing the conflict between Russia and Georgia .
There can be no doubt that Russia violated the principles of international law when it crossed into Georgian territory .
I strongly condemn such a disproportionate reaction on Russia 's part .
It should be borne in mind , however , that the Georgian side is also to blame , because it initiated the military action .
Recourse to such action can never be the solution to a dispute .
The European Union has been called upon to perform the very important role of mediator in this situation .
I believe the Union was right to condemn Russia 's recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Georgia 's sovereignty and its territorial integrity must be respected .
In my view , given the present situation , it is essential for the European Union to send a peacekeeping and monitoring mission to South Ossetia .
The current situation demonstrates the need for ever-closer cooperation with the countries of the Black Sea area .
I voted in favour of adopting the joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Georgia .
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe it is very important that , at this delicate moment , Europe shows it is united and supports a unitary position regarding the conflict in Georgia .
Nevertheless , we need to continue to provide assistance and help the reconstruction of the affected regions in Georgia , support confidence-building measures , as well as the development of regional cooperation .
At the same time , it is necessary that Europe accelerates the development of the European energy projects ( such as Nabucco şi P8 ) .
Even if most of the attention is turned to Georgia , taking into consideration the geographical situation of Azerbaijan , I believe we should also have in view the need to establish an EU - Azerbaijan partnership for supporting and continuing the EU 's energy projects .
I would like to emphasize that the settlement of frozen conflicts in the Black Sea region can only be achieved within the limits and based upon the international law , in compliance with the territorial integrity of countries and their sovereignty over the entire territory , as well as in compliance with the principle of border inviolability .
I support the Council 's position , according to which the European Union is ready to commit , including through a presence on the ground , to support all efforts to ensure a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict in Georgia .
I believe that only through dialogue and negotiation could we achieve the desired results .
Evaluation of the Dublin system ( continuation of debate )
Let us resume the debate on the report by Mrs Lambert on the evaluation of the Dublin System .
( SV ) Mr President , this is a huge change of topic but , if we do not resolve the crisis in Georgia , we will need an even better asylum and refugee policy in Europe .
I would like to start by thanking Mrs Lambert for a very thorough report .
I also support the amendments tabled by Mrs Roure and Mrs Lefrançois .
The Dublin system and the choice of first-country-of-entry for people entering the EU really need to be evaluated , especially regarding the problems this involves for the countries which receive refugees .
Here I am thinking of the Mediterranean countries , but also of Sweden , which is the European country which has accepted the largest number of refugees from Iraq .
The EU should take greater joint responsibility , otherwise the Dublin Regulation is meaningless .
A year ago the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs went on a fact-finding visit to the Mediterranean .
The situation was appalling !
It was not improved by Sweden starting to send refugees and asylum seekers back to Greece , which had been heavily overburdened for some time .
Subsequently , the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats in the European Parliament adopted a directive on the return of illegal immigrants which contained inhumane rules , such as deportation after a wait of up to 18 months , which is particularly tough for children .
A common European asylum and refugee policy is necessary , but I feel that it is heading in the wrong direction and I am concerned about this .
I am worried that we are not accepting and are not prepared to pay more attention to children .
However , there is one thing to which we have paid attention and that is Commissioner Barrot 's talk today of a temporary suspension .
As a Swede , I would like to take the opportunity to highlight the municipality of Södertälje , south of Stockholm .
Södertälje has taken in more refugees from Iraq than the whole of the US and Canada put together !
In my view Södertälje must be included in the kind of trial the Commissioner referred to . Thank you .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , this debate is clearly very important and was interrupted , but that happens .
In any event , I too am convinced that equipping Europe with a truly harmonised right of asylum will be an excellent response to the problems that were mentioned during the previous debate .
I should briefly like to pick up on certain comments .
It is true that the current system is not ' fair ' in that asylum seekers , depending on the Member State to which they apply , do not always receive the same response .
You are right , Madam , to underline how certain countries have been much more open and generous than others .
We therefore need this harmonisation .
We also need to consider a number of issues that are of concern , such as the problem of unaccompanied minors .
We must also examine the problem of the detention of asylum seekers and , quite clearly , we must do this within the framework of a review of these texts , not necessarily to move away from the Dublin system but to perfect this European response to asylum seekers .
We must remain faithful to Europe 's tradition of a democratic and humanist welcome . That is why , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have found this debate extremely useful .
It definitely gives us food for thought and I will of course return before Parliament to present the texts that we are now going to prepare in light of the excellent observations that have filled this debate .
I must therefore warmly thank Parliament and you , Mr President , and I hope that , by the end of the year , I can return with draft texts that will enable us to significantly improve the situation with regard to the right of asylum in Europe .
I should like to apologise to the Commissioner once again for the interruption of the debate . Unfortunately , the priorities were established in such a way that we were obliged to depart from normal procedure and interrupt this particular debate .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I too would like to thank the Commissioner very much for what he has just said , and for his assurances .
I think it is clear , from what has been said tonight from all parts of the House , that there is need for not just an efficient but a high-quality system which is one based on joint responsibility : as my colleague Ms Segelström has said , there must be joint responsibility or the system is meaningless .
I think that the Council too needs to hear that message very , very clearly , because they , the Council , are the governments that are responsible for fulfilling their obligations .
It is true that some Member States , such as Sweden , are very good at fulfilling their obligations .
Others are not .
This means that the actions that the Commission can take to support them in that - for example , the use of the UNHCR , and the idea of the Asylum Support Office - become very important , providing they are adequately resourced .
That , too , is something which I think all of us involved in the budget system need to think about .
However , on behalf of my colleague Mr Busuttil I would say that some of us still remain to be convinced that the pressures on certain Member States are temporary rather than systemic , and therefore that the responses we make perhaps need to be more systemic - unless , of course , we foresee a rapid change in the world situation which would then have an effect on refugee flows .
So again I would like to thank the Commissioner and my colleagues for their warm words .
We will see what we can do to pass the message to Council , and we very much look forward to the proposals coming from the Commission later in the year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Common frame of reference for European contract law ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the common frame of reference for European contract law - B6-0456 / 2008 ) .
draftsman . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentleman , the Draft Common Frame of Reference ( DCFR ) has brought the work on European civil law to a head , at least for the moment .
It is , of course , a draft produced by legal scholars which has yet to be debated politically .
The goal of this debate , then , is to try and get a broad policy discussion going on the future of European private law .
The European Parliament wants to achieve a situation in which all stakeholders are involved in this debate but , in order for that to happen , we have to make sure that the academic draft , which is currently only available in English , is produced in other official languages as well .
Commissioner , the funds earmarked for translation have not been used up for 2008 yet .
We need these translations if there is to be a proper Europe-wide dialogue on the future of European civil law .
It is not enough just to get the forthcoming Commission document translated , although obviously that has to be done .
The Commission has started a selection process internally , trying to sift through the rules of the academic frame of reference and picking up what needs to be included in the Commission text .
We welcome the fact that all the relevant Directorates-General are involved in this selection process .
However , I would stress that the ' European contract law ' project should really be led by DG Justice and Home Affairs because the reference framework is not just about consumer contract law ; it is also intended to make it easier for SMEs to shape their cross-border contracts with other business partners who are not consumers .
Precisely because the Common Frame of Reference ( CFR ) needs to take account of the SME sector as well , over recent months the Commission has been holding workshops on selected problem areas in the business-to-business ( B2B ) arena , and the outcomes of these workshops need to be taken into account in the forthcoming Commission text as well .
In the resolution , we also say that the final version of the academic frame of reference could play a toolbox role ; indeed , it has already done so , in effect , simply by virtue of its publication .
The Community legislator will have to make sure that , in future , legal acts in the field of Community private law are based on the CFR .
The CFR can , at a subsequent stage , be turned into an optional instrument ; the parties would then be able to choose an alternative system of civil law to govern their legal relationships .
That is a step that will need to be taken in order to solve problems that are quite clearly still with us in the sphere of the internal market .
In order to give a boost to legal transactions in the internal market , an optional instrument will , however , have to go beyond general contractual law .
For example , besides rules governing the conclusion of sales contracts , there will have to be rules on transfer of property and on the rescinding of asset transfers which have no sound legal basis : in other words , the law of obligations .
Parliament is particularly keen to ensure that it is consulted and involved on an ongoing basis by the Commission throughout the selection process .
We will undoubtedly have to consider how , in future , the significance of this project can be enhanced , especially in the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The Commission needs to start considering now , though , what sort of mechanisms we need in order to ensure that the new Commission document can take account of future developments .
In the current selection process , the Commission must already start to consider , in its planning , the changes that will feature in the definitive version of the academic frame of reference .
All this shows that this CFR is taking us into new territory in European contract law .
The European Parliament , the Commission and the Council need to make a clear commitment to this project , which is likely to be the most important initiative for the next parliamentary term .
It is a project which offers benefits for everyone : consumers , because they will soon be able to go shopping all round Europe with the backing of European contract law , and companies , because with this greater legal certainty , they will be able to tap into new markets , and as there will be a uniform set of rules , they will be able to achieve substantial cost savings .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission as a whole welcomes wholeheartedly the interest that Parliament is taking in the Common Framework of Reference , or , as I will refer to it in short , the CFR .
The CFR is a long-term project to improve the quality and coherence of EU legislation .
Let me answer your questions in this connection .
First of all , I would like to say that the Commission indeed intends to ensure that the Commission CFR will be translated so that it can be discussed and applied in order to improve the quality of EU contract law legislation and to make it more coherent .
However , this reasoning does not apply to the academic preliminary draft .
The Commission CFR will most probably be considerably shorter than the academic draft .
Given the huge work which will already be necessary to translate the CFR , it does not make sense to spend valuable translation resources to translate parts of an academic draft which are not relevant for the purposes of the CFR .
The Commission is currently proceeding to select those parts of the academic CFR which are relevant for the final Commission CFR , on the basis of its policy objectives .
All the DGs concerned are involved in this selection process according to their field of competence , of course including DG JHA .
The final selection will be presented for consultation to the other institutions , including Parliament and stakeholders .
The Commission will indeed ensure that the outcome of the workshops which were organised in 2007 will be taken into account in the CFR .
The Commission has always conceived the CFR as a tool for better law-making .
The CFR should contain a set of definitions , general principles and model rules in the field of contract law .
The Commission has not yet decided which topics of contract law the CFR should cover .
In adopting the decision on CFR , the Commission will take into account the position of Parliament and the Council .
As I have already mentioned , the Commission will in all likelihood shorten the present academic draft and it will probably be necessary to amend the remaining text in order to make it useful for policy-making purposes .
Even if it is premature to say so , it is likely that the CFR should form a non-binding legislative tool .
The Commission understands fully that Parliament wants to be kept informed of , and involved in , the ongoing work on the CFR .
We welcome Parliament 's involvement in the CFR process and we very much rely on this involvement .
The Commission will continue to keep Parliament informed of developments in the most appropriate way , in particular through the Parliament working group dedicated to the CFR , and will consult Parliament and all stakeholders on the results of its preliminary selection process .
Once the Commission CFR is completed , the Commission will decide on the need for keeping it up to date and on the best possible mechanism to do this .
I would like to conclude by thanking you for Parliament 's support for the Commission work on this important dossier .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , our colleague Mr Meyer has correctly indicated the challenges of this issue .
I should like to say to the Commissioner that I do understand your technical answer on the translations , but what Mr Meyer said on this subject absolutely embodies the real issue : how do you go from university work to a political decision and a legal decision ?
I believe it is absolutely vital that everyone understands this because this draft Common Frame of Reference ( CFR ) that was presented to you at the end of last year must be considered in relation to all the work done on this issue , and not just the draft presented to you .
For example , it is clear that a choice must be made between the law of obligations and the law of contract .
There are several schools of thought on this but this is the choice that we must make and , to do so , there must of course be several proposals on the table .
Likewise , will the content of the CFR be restricted and therefore binding or will it be general and therefore much more indicative ?
As a result of all this , we need a range of information and it is of course essential that Parliament can do its work , and that it can do this at a very early stage .
That is why - and I will conclude on this very practical point - it is very important that many Members participate in the hearing that the Commission will organise with experts at the beginning of October and in the conference that the French Presidency of the European Union will hold in Paris on 23 and 24 October .
This subject merits open and transparent debate that goes beyond the experts and involves those responsible for the political decisions .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I agree with Mr Toubon 's observations , namely that the work of the academic group on the Common Frame of Reference is clearly very valuable and serious work .
However , how do we get from this academic work to political proposals ?
Perhaps the answer is , based on the use of a single language and , possibly , only one theoretical direction .
While recognising the internal work that has been done , Commissioner , I believe that we must move on to the next phase in which Parliament and the sectors concerned are involved , not just large companies , but also small companies , trade unions and other types of economic operator .
The PSE Group has tabled an amendment to increase the participation in this project at an early stage , for which we of course would need a translation of the text , albeit a summary of the text .
This text could subsequently form the basis of an optional element but , to do this , we first need to define what the content is .
To sum up , this debate must serve to inform European citizens that the Commission is working on a project . However , the Commission , given that it is only one of the European institutions , cannot keep this project to itself .
The time has come for the Commission to share this knowledge with the European Parliament and with the general public .
I repeat : trade unions , large companies , small companies , other economic operators and people in general .
Regulation of the contractual framework affects all European citizens and the drafting of a possible code of substantive law would require the greatest possible number of sectors to be involved which , without a translation into all the languages of the European Union , would seem impossible .
This would also be impossible without increased participation by other sectors .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Commissioner has answered some of the questions put by my colleagues .
However , this project is of great importance to all our institutions , and we are now coming to the politics of it , and the major issues concerning the democratic legitimacy of the creation of a CFR .
There has been a lot of consultation , with many working groups and many stakeholder groups , from which we can learn a lot , but now it is time for decision-making , and we need a process that is open , inclusive and coherent .
The Commission is rightly conducting a selection process before presenting a white paper .
However , that process needs to be as inclusive as possible , and we are obviously worried about the languages used , since if this were mainstream legislation it would be available in all the languages .
Can Parliament have an assurance that at white paper stage it will still be possible to change the selection if it considers that appropriate ?
This is at the heart of the conundrum we face .
Will the white paper kick off a legislative process , or something analogous to it , or are we going to deal with a separate legislative process each and every time in the future that we look at anything to do with contract law ?
It comes down to the question of whether it will be binding or non-binding .
The Council seems to think it should be non-binding and voluntary .
If that is the case , it is arguable whether we need a selection process at all .
You can keep everything open and have the political debate at every moment in the future that a contract law question arises in a legislative proposal .
On the other hand , if we are creating something binding now - which Parliament is well known to prefer , in the form of an optional instrument - then we have to have some very serious inclusive political debates now about content and coverage , leading us on to the next set of questions about a legal base and the involvement of Parliament as something more than a mere consultee .
( NL ) Mr President , I endorse what the previous speakers have said and I should like to highlight two points in particular .
One is how we guarantee that there really is an inclusive and democratic process of consultation , in which not only this Parliament , but also national parliaments play a role and in which all stakeholders can be consulted .
I am especially concerned about whether this consultation will be balanced and whether , for instance , consumer organisations , small and medium-sized enterprises , trade unions and others will be able to bring in the expertise and pay for it , so that they can also play a real role in this consultation process .
The Commission has a responsibility in this respect and so I should like to ask the Commission how they intend to support this .
I should like to ask Parliament to support an amendment that we are submitting on this point .
The other point concerns the breadth of the selection .
I ask myself whether we should really be ruling out certain things now in paragraph 12 .
It makes more sense to keep these things open at this stage .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed this debate with great interest , but have had the impression at times that the various joint meetings between the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection never actually took place .
Yes , Mrs van den Burg , we have noted - also among our colleagues in the committees - that it is extremely difficult , at the various events , to find the interest and expertise that are required for this important legal policy initiative in Europe .
In my view , doing so is not only a task for the Commission , it is also the job of parliamentarians to ensure that the relevant associations , trade unions , employees and SMEs are involved in this debate as early as possible .

However , I also take the view - and I fully endorse what Hans-Peter Mayer has said on this point , and Jacques Toubon also touched upon this - that this early involvement of the various stakeholders can , of course , only be successful if the legal bases are available in all the languages .
I am not surprised by the Commissioner 's answer and her withdrawal to the position that the available academic documents are no more than a technical basis for the development of the White Paper position .
Nonetheless , in this difficult process , I would say to the Commissioner that , in my view , it is indeed necessary to translate these bases of her White Paper recommendations as well , as this is the only way to ensure a meaningful debate .
I believe that the motion therefore points in the right direction and I would ask the Commissioner to take appropriate supportive action here .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , all the honourable Members ' remarks have been very well presented and very wise .
I would like to stress that the decision to translate only parts of the academic text is a political one .
That is because the areas which are not useful for the purposes of the CFR will not be translated .
I am sorry to repeat myself , but it is very important to stress that the CFR will be a toolbox by nature , and Parliament will be fully involved in the decision on which parts of the text are to be translated .
I would also like to inform you of the meetings tabled by the French presidency , which has scheduled two meetings of the Civil Law Committee for 5 September and 3 November , in order to discuss selection of the chapters of the draft academic CFR for the future Commission CFR .
As you can see , nothing is set in stone .
Both Parliament and the Commission can fully participate and do the job together .
The outcome of these discussions should be adopted as JHA Council conclusions in December 2008 .
That gives us sufficient certainty that the process is truly inclusive of all the interested parties .
With reference to Mrs van den Burg 's remark , I would like to assure you that the consultation process will be broad and inclusive .
I have received feedback from the academics , who have announced that they will translate their draft , which means that there will definitely be French , German and English versions .
This guarantees , besides the efforts of the Commission , that the project will certainly be available in those three languages .
The Commission has a clear interest in working together with Parliament , which has been so supportive of this project , and with the Council , to ensure proper scope , with translated versions of the already-completed academic part of the project .
I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
Certain issues relating to motor insurance ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Mladenov , on behalf of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on certain issues relating to motor insurance .
rapporteur . - Mr President , Madam Commissioner , colleagues , and interpreters who are staying this late on such an interesting day as today with the European Council discussing Georgia , I hope you will have a little time and energy to focus on another report which is , despite its technicality , quite important for all of us .
It goes back to an issue raised in this House when the fourth Motor Insurance Directive was adopted .
Back then , this House decided to ask the Commission to undertake a more in-depth study of a number of questions that were raised by Parliament but were not addressed in the fourth Motor Insurance Directive itself .
Namely these three sets of questions : the first being to look into whether the national penalty provisions are effectively implemented across the European Union ; then to look at how the claims representative system set up under the directive functions and whether there is a need to harmonise across the European Union ; and finally to look at perhaps the most important and controversial issue that is intimately connected to questions raised by consumers which is whether the current availability of voluntary legal expenses schemes for motor insurance in Europe should be converted into a compulsory scheme to cover cross-border accidents across the European Union .
Let me start with the last question because that is perhaps the most important question and clearly one of the questions which is of most interest to European consumers .
I myself when I went looking into this report was very much tempted to argue for harmonisation and to argue for compulsory legal expenses insurance across the European Union .
But detailed study suggested that that might not be in the interests of the consumers or in the interests of the European insurance industry .
It would , if that were adopted , raise the costs of motor insurance for consumers in many Member States .
It would create incentives for higher and unjustified claims to be made .
It would create many delays in addressing existing claims and it would create a very strong disincentive for people to go for out-of-court settlements .
Finally , it would create a very strong and unfortunate burden on the judicial systems of our Member States , something which I do not believe any one of us really wants to do .
So perhaps the other approach which this report suggests is the better approach and that is to increase awareness of existing voluntary schemes across the European Union .
Now , in many of the old Member States , they exist and function quite well and are now developing in the new Member States .
In the new Member States in particular they need to be promoted more , perhaps through including them in pre-contractual information on taking out such options across the European Union with a particular focus on new Member States .
As far as the question of claims representatives is concerned , the European Commission did undertake a study . We looked at that study very carefully .
We consulted with industry and we consulted with consumer organisations across the European Union , and national information centres have been set up in all Member States .
Through these national information centres , consumers can pursue their claims and can find the information that they need .
Now what we do need to do there is to make consumers actually more aware of the existing system rather than try to set up a new system on top of it .
Finally , on the question of national penalty provisions and whether to harmonise them or not , the report argues that we should uphold the principle of subsidiarity .
That means that existing national penalty provisions in European Member States have to be upheld . There is no need to harmonise .
There is , however , a need for the European Commission to monitor the situation in more detail across the European Union and make sure that , when national authorities do need help , they receive that help from the European Commission .
This is the gist of the report that we are debating tonight .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of my colleague Commissioner Charlie McCreevy , let me first of all congratulate the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee and the Legal Affairs Committee , and in particular Mr Mladenov and Mr Gargani , for their work in producing a thorough and consistent report on a number of specific motor insurance issues .


Mr Mladenov , I cannot agree more with you that this is also a consumer issue .
The Commission welcomes your support for the conclusions we draw in our Motor Insurance report of 2007 .
Allow me to address briefly some issues covered in this report .
Let me start with national penalties introduced in respect of the reasoned offer procedure .
The Commission welcomes the clear position you have taken in the report on this issue .
Indeed , your report seems to confirm our stance on the matter , namely that national penalty provisions , although not equivalent , produce the desired effect and therefore no harmonisation at EU level is needed in this respect .
The Commission will stay vigilant and take steps , if necessary , against those Member States which do not fully comply with the Directive 's provisions in question .
Therefore we can only welcome your call upon the Commission to further closely monitor the functioning of the mechanism introduced by the EU motor insurance Directives .
The motor insurance expert group , set up by my services a year ago , brings Member States ' representatives and stakeholders together and has proven to be a very useful tool to this end .
In line with your suggestion , the Commission will involve consumer organisations representing traffic accident victims in the process of assessing the effectiveness of the systems existing in the Member States .
Let me now turn to a second point : the legal expenses , which are very important for the consumers and for insurers as well .
Your report considers several pros and cons of a system where legal expenses would be compulsorily covered , EU-wide , by the motor insurance policy of the liable party .
As stated in the Commission report of 2007 , we are convinced that such a solution would be very unlikely to provide clear benefits for road traffic accident victims ; it might even lead to a distortion of well-established national systems of motor claims settlement .
In addition , premiums are likely to increase in those countries where either no or limited reimbursement of legal costs has been the practice so far .
I am pleased to see that your report reflects some of these concerns and that it gives preference to market-led solutions , such as the use of voluntary legal expenses insurance .
It seems to be evident , though , that in some markets this type of insurance cover is hardly used , and that better promotion is needed .
This is a mission the market should accomplish itself , as the Commission should not promote particular insurance products or particular lines of insurance business .
Finally , let me address the issue of the awareness of tools and mechanisms under the EU motor insurance directives .
The Commission agrees that there is room for improvement , especially in relation to the new Member States , as regards the degree of citizens ' awareness of the tools created by the EU motor insurance directives , such as the claims representative mechanism or the existence of national information centres .
The insurance industry can and should play a major role in this area .
The Commission has contributed to the information need of both traffic accident victims and motorists through the publication of a number of motor insurance leaflets placed on the ' Your Europe ' portal .
Many other information sources exist at national level , such as automobile clubs , motor insurance bureaux , claims settlement agencies and others .
In conclusion : Over the last years , regular reporting to the European Parliament on motor insurance issues has become a well-established practice and I am looking forward to our continued good cooperation .

representing the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Gargani , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his report and the good cooperation .
There are three points in particular which I should like to mention : firstly , consumers ' interests ; secondly , the principle of subsidiarity , and thirdly , relevance .
We believe it is far more in line with consumers ' interests not to convert voluntary legal expenses schemes for motor insurance in Europe into a compulsory scheme .
We do not need mandatory product bundling or product integration which would simply push up the price of insurance and restrict consumer choice .
On the issue of subsidiarity , I welcome the fact that the rapporteur is not attempting to drive forward harmonisation at all costs .
The countries in which some legal costs are already covered by motor insurance can continue with this type of scheme without other countries being forced to follow suit .
As to the issue of relevance , I would remind the House that we are dealing with an issue which , in numerical terms , is of only very limited relevance .
Cross-border accidents account for only around 1 % of road traffic accidents in Europe , and almost all of them are settled out of court .
I congratulate the rapporteur on the report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking my colleague Nickolay Mladenov for his truly excellent work on this very difficult issue .
His own-initiative report covers all the key problems and does so quite outstandingly .
Nonetheless , I would point out that this report is just one little piece of the puzzle in people 's everyday dealings with the EU .
Mr Karas has rightly pointed out that cross-border accidents account for a very small percentage of road traffic accidents and that most of them are settled out of court .
However , a major German weekly newspaper published an article last week which described how an ordinary citizen wished to re-register a German car in Italy , only to fail eight months later , having realised that it is simply not possible .
Citizens dealing with this type of problem on an individual basis feel extremely unhappy about it .
That is why the report , with its incentive for voluntary schemes , is the right approach .
However , the Member States have a role to play in determining whether harmonisation of compensation law in the European Union might not , in the long term , be a far better solution which is more in line with citizens ' interests .
Here in Parliament and especially in the Committee on Legal Affairs , we have dealt with the issue of non-contractual damages - in the case of Rome II , for example - on various occasions and it is now up to the Member States to look at which alternative solutions they can identify , if harmonisation of compensation law and the adoption of legal costs as damages is not possible for this House due to the issue of competence .
This is an issue which we will need to resolve in future .
That being the case , Mr Mladenov 's proposal is outstanding and deserves our support .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , motor insurance has been a success story of this Parliament and the long line of directives still actually represents some unfinished business - business which sadly involves an increasing number of our citizens as they exercise their rights of free movement across the Union .
Mr Mladenov 's report makes a very important contribution to the ongoing work .
It is clear that claims need to be simplified as much as possible and the three-month period has to be respected .
Accident trauma must not be increased by legal trauma .
We know that there are complicated issues of conflict of law that this Parliament wanted to solve in our approach to the Rome II Regulation .
We have now been assisted by the Court of Justice in its Oldenburg judgment , where the Court has read together the fourth Directive and the Brussels Regulation in the way we intended , allowing a victim to take direct legal action in their country of residence rather than going to the defendant 's court .
This will put pressure on the need for out-of-court settlements .
It is an important development .
It may in the short term create some difficulties but , Commissioner , you need to ensure that Member States respect this judgment and this interpretation of EU law .
The next step is to devise a system arising from the Rome II follow-up studies that ensures that victims are compensated fully in relation to their home country circumstances .
The story is ongoing but the achievements , likewise , are very far from being inconsiderable .
Mr President , first of all I want to join in thanking Nickolay Mladenov for a very important and serious piece of work .
His first major report for the Committee on the Internal Market will , I hope , be the first of many .
It has been very helpful that he has come in and looked at this issue with fresh eyes , representing citizens who are enjoying new entitlements through their membership of the European Union and who perhaps expect some of these issues to be dealt with better than in the past .
I want to build on some of the points that a number of my colleagues have made , particularly Diana Wallis and Andrew Schwab .
Diana and I have been involved in this area since we came to Parliament in 1999 , and therefore understand its importance .
I think it is fair to say that if Parliament had not consistently raised these issues with the Commission and said that the motor insurance regime , and particularly its cross-border aspects for mobile motorists , was deeply unsatisfactory , then I do not think that we would be where we are now , anywhere close to the fourth Motor Insurance Directive , and maybe looking for a fifth .
This shows how Parliament really can reflect the interests of citizens in what are complex cross-border issues , but ones that do not come into play unless people run into serious problems .
People have brought their problems to us , when they have had accidents in other countries and are unable to claim compensation for what are , in many cases , severe or even lifelong injuries .
I was pleased that the Commissioner , in line with her very strong commitment to consumers and the energy she has brought to this portfolio , wanted to seize this issue .
However , I would particularly highlight what Nikolay Mladenov says in his report about the need to step up the level of cooperation between the insurance industry , Member States and the Commission , in order to get better deals under existing legislation .
We are acting as a ginger group to put salt and pepper into the system , and I feel we are entitled to a bit more support from the European insurance industry .
( SK ) Like my fellow Members who have contributed to today 's debate , I too consider Nickolay Mladenov 's report to be correctly timed and very important with regard to consumer protection .
In the context of the increased volume of foreign automobile travel , especially following the enlargement of the EU and the extension of Schengen , many European citizens are becoming accident victims abroad and , through ignorance , often experience serious problems .
Before travelling abroad by car , citizens must be provided with basic information on how to handle claims .
It is important to contact the appropriate information centres which , pursuant to the Fourth Motor Insurance Directive , are to be established in every Member State .
The pre-contractual information package should include comprehensive information to consumers on how the claims representative system works and on legal expenses insurance .
Member States have established different systems and national regulatory bodies are better placed to guarantee the highest possible level of consumer protection in their national markets .
For this reason , I agree with the rapporteur that it is not necessary to harmonise national penalty provisions at Community level .
( SK ) I consider the creation of a network of claims representatives to be a benefit of the 2000 Motor Insurance Directive .
Their efforts will speed up the settlement of motoring claims .
As regards penalties for delays in addressing claims , I agree with the rapporteur 's view .
On the basis of subsidiarity , national regulatory bodies are better placed to guarantee the highest possible level of consumer protection in their national markets .
According to the available data , more than 90 % of all claims are settled out of court so , in this respect , there is no need for the Commission 's initiative to introduce compulsory legal expenses insurance across the European Union .
It would raise the costs of compulsory motor insurance and burden the courts with additional disputes , which could be settled out of court .
The voluntary nature of legal expenses insurance needs to be retained and , in the new Member States , citizens must be provided with more information on insurance products .
Mr President , as a legal practitioner who has dealt with cross-border claims , it is not all rosy in the garden as might be suggested in the report .
While I welcome the report , some of the kind of problems that I have come across are problems where there is legal cost insurance and where the claimants are finding it difficult to recover costs on the basis of it .
These claimants have gone through court procedures and expended monies in order to validate their claims and then find that , on the one hand , the insurer of the offending party which caused the accident is not paying the full costs of putting the case together , and on the other hand , their own insurance company , with whom they had insurance for covering legal costs , is also not paying up and is walking away from its responsibilities .
This is an area that we need to look at and be very careful about .
I had one case , for instance , where we had to pay EUR 30 000 for a forensic accountant 's report and where we were not allowed to recover the full cost of that report .
Although the person had their own insurance , they were not able to add their own insurance policy for costs and were not able to recover under that policy either .
That is a matter that we need to look at and make sure that it is properly monitored .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me thank you once more for the very useful piece of work which Mr Mladenov presented with the help of his colleagues .
It is very useful for the Commission as well .
The Commission is preparing a study dealing with compensation levels awarded to cross-border victims and this issue was raised by Mrs Wallis and some other colleagues .
We are aiming in this study at obtaining an objective , well-founded and evidence-based analysis of the issue .
The study is under way and the Commission is examining the second interim report .
Mr Harbour also mentioned that we need to be very concrete in our work and cooperate firmly on this issue to make the internal market more complete both for businesses and for consumers .
It is very important for this cooperation to be straightened up .
I am really more than glad to see that Mr Mladenov 's report is doing this through the good set-up of the pieces of his work and also has such nice and meaningful support from his colleagues .
Once more , congratulations and thank you .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and my colleagues for their very interesting and insightful comments on this report .
I am a firm believer that the best-protected consumer is the consumer who is best informed on their rights and can defend those rights based on the information provided .
We as legislators need to make sure that consumers receive information and are free to make the choice of whether to take certain protection against a certain risk or not , rather than to impose a uniform level on all of them .
Mrs Wallis , Andreas Schwab and Mr Burke raised extremely important points that go beyond the very limited scope of this report .
I am very happy that Commissioner Kuneva has said that the Commission will pursue a further study of many of the questions raised in this House .
I am convinced that Parliament will look very carefully at the study that the Commission produces , precisely to go back and look at the questions that Mr Burke has raised , which are absolutely valid and an increasing matter of discussion in many Member States , including my own .
Mr Schwab raised the question of a uniform approach to damages , which is a very valid question for all of us .
I hope that the Commission 's study will address that issue .
Let me also say a couple of things about the follow-up to this report .
I hope that the Commission will take very seriously its responsibility to monitor national authorities ' implementation of existing penalty provisions .
Indeed , when we were gathering information in order to put this report together , a small number of Member States were not very forthcoming in providing information on how the system functions in their societies , but we did manage to receive an adequate reply in the end .
Looking carefully at how the system functions and at how it can be improved in the future is an important task that I am sure the Commission will take very seriously in the months and years to come .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bowles , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
rapporteur . - Mr President , may I first take this opportunity to thank colleagues for their input , especially on one or two topics where we still have differences of opinion .
I think we have more in common than divides us and that we can reach a satisfactory outcome by not straying too far from the core subject .
The broad principles underlying this report on fiscal fraud are simple , and only fraudsters themselves would disagree .
The tax losses due to fraud are difficult to assess .
Fraudsters and tax evaders take care to hide their activity from the tax authorities , but estimates put the level of fraud at EUR 200-250 billion or 2-2.5 % of the total GDP of the EU .
My question is , do we put 2-2.5 % of our collective effort into resolving it ?
Since the answer to that question is clearly no , there can only be one conclusion .
It needs more effort , more attention and in particular it needs more collective cooperative attention by Member States .
Now VAT fraud , particularly the missing trade or carousel fraud , may be the largest single cause of tax loss .
It comes about simply because of the loophole in the arrangements for VAT under which it is not levied on cross-border intra-Community trade .
So VAT-free purchases can be sold on , the VAT pocketed and then the trader vanishes .
In complex carousels innocent traders can get enmeshed , and measures within Member States to combat fraud , such as freezing rebates , can damage innocent businesses .
This is a well-known problem in my own country , the United Kingdom .
So that is all the more reason to tackle the problem at its root .
Pragmatically VAT will have to remain a consumption tax based on accruing to the fiscal authority of final destination .
The report proposes that VAT should be levied on intra-Community supplies at the minimum rate , 15 % , with the importing Member State then levying its own domestic rate for subsequent stages .
The 15 % collected by the originating Member State then needs to be handed over to the Member State of final consumption by some method of clearing or settlement .
This now is technically feasible ; all the more so as we move inevitably to real-time recording of transactions .
And it does not have to be centralised ; it can be done in a decentralised or bilateral manner .
Regarding other ways of combating fraud and tax evasion , the exchange of information and cooperation are central to this and , dare I say it , a ' cash now ' attitude of ' What am I getting out of it ? ' in some quarters does not lead to progress and is a short-sighted view .
Payback comes another time when you are on the requesting end .
Tax authorities need to know about assets in order to help track down hidden income which may be undeclared or originate itself from criminal activity .
This is undermined if exchange of information between authorities is restricted .
Here we also need to act in the international dimension to be most effective .
Finally this brings me to revision of the Savings Tax Directive .
It is proper to revisit that Directive , for example to close loopholes such as using alternative legal entities like foundations to escape its provisions .
Withholding tax is not ideal , but here we are divided on whether it can be done without undesirable consequences .
These are the issues that we address in this report .
I commend it to you and I look forward to the forthcoming debate with interest .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the European Parliament and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mrs Bowles , for its very constructive report on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
In May 2006 , the Commission presented a communication aimed at launching a broad debate on the different elements to be taken into account in an anti-fraud strategy in the Community .
I am pleased that the European Parliament recognises and supports the initiatives taken and the approach chosen by the Commission in its communication .
Equally , I am pleased to see that the European Parliament invites the Commission to submit further proposals .
The report is a very useful and comprehensive contribution to the ongoing discussion about the fight against fiscal fraud .
The Commission fully agrees that fraud is not a problem that can be combated successfully at national level alone .
The Commission will take account of the numerous comments and suggestions made by the European Parliament in the context of its work on the current and forthcoming legislative proposals for conventional measures to combat tax fraud .
As far as actions foreseen in 2008 are concerned , I can confirm that the Commission is planning to present three sets of legislative proposals - one in October , the second in November and the third in December 2008 .
Those sets of measures include improved procedures for registration and de-registration of persons liable for VAT in order to ensure the swift detection and de-registration of fake taxable persons and to give more security to honest business .
The legislative proposals will also cover traders ' joint and several liability , the creation of a European network ( EUROFISC ) aimed at improving cooperation in order to detect fraudsters at an early stage , fixing conditions for VAT exemption at importation , mutual assistance in recovery , automated access to data , confirmation of the name and address of taxpayers in the VAT Information Exchange System database and shared responsibility for the protection of all Member States ' revenues .
By October , the Commission will present a communication setting out the coherence of the approach it will present , together with a timetable for further actions .
The communication will also address issues relating to a long-term approach , notably the necessity to examine the better use of modern technologies , which has also been underlined in your report .
The Commission is still open to examining alternative systems to the current VAT system , provided that certain conditions are met .
The report mentions , in this context , a reverse-charge mechanism and the taxation of intra-Community supplies .
The Commission has offered both of these radical options for consideration to the ECOFIN Council , but so far Member States have not shown the political will to take such far-reaching measures .
Regarding direct taxes , the Commission is working on the review of the Savings Taxation Directive , and intends to present the report on the operation of the Directive before the end of September , as requested by the ECOFIN Council of 14 May 2008 .
During the review process , we have been carefully analysing the current scope of the Directive and the need for amendments in order to enhance its efficiency .
The report will be followed by a proposal for such amendments to the Savings Taxation Directive that prove necessary and appropriate .
The Commission has also carefully taken note of the ECOFIN Council conclusions of the same date , emphasising the importance of promoting the principles of good governance in the tax area - that is transparency , exchange of information and fair tax competition - and the inclusion of related provisions in agreements with third countries and third country groupings .
Thanks to close cooperation with the Member States in the Anti-Tax Fraud Strategy expert group of the Commission , the idea of an anti-fraud strategy at EU level is taking concrete form .
The announced measures will be a big step forward , even if further efforts will have to be made .
Concerning your discussion on tax competition , you will know that we have been working in the Code of Conduct Group on abolishing harmful business tax regimes in the EU .
All in all , the Code of Conduct Group assessed over 400 measures by the present 27 Member States and their dependencies and overseas territories , of which over a hundred were considered harmful .
Almost all of those hundred have already been abolished and the remainder are set to be abolished , subject to the transitional arrangements .
The work conducted under the Code has been successful . It has led to the dismantling of almost all harmful tax measures in the Member States and their dependent or associated territories .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its constructive contribution to the debate on the coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , thank you for the good cooperation and your report .
I have four points to make .
Firstly , we believe that we need to stress that fiscal fraud is not something that can be combated in isolation and that a coordinated approach is essential , both among the individual Member States and with third countries .
Secondly , the planned pilot projects to fight carousel fraud are a good idea and we take note of these , but we would make the point that this must not lead to any deterioration in framework conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Thirdly , we expressly support the Commission 's proposals for amendment of the VAT Directive and the Council Regulation on administrative cooperation in this area .
Fourthly , I am pleased that the discussion on a general lifting of banking secrecy is something which did not command a majority in any committee and has now been resoundingly rejected by a large majority .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to add my own congratulations to those expressed to the rapporteur .
Combating fiscal fraud has been an ongoing issue for the House for years , and unfortunately , despite numerous initiatives and comprehensive support from Parliament , the Commissioner still has little to show in the way of success - although this is urgently needed - because of blocking , to a greater or lesser extent , by the Member States .
One would think that it would be in the interests of the Member States to make progress on fighting fiscal fraud , given that we are talking about recouping a figure in excess of EUR 200 billion a year - in other words , more than the EU budget - without any need to raise tax rates for honest taxpayers .
In any discussion of this issue , then , it is essential to underline that some of the responsibility lies with the Member States themselves .
The adoption of the report proved rather difficult , for problems initially arose with one particular issue in committee , but this matter has now been resolved .
Mrs Bowles showed a great deal of willingness to cooperate .
From our perspective , this was a difficult report because it has involved one amendment which we cannot support .
Even now , there are proposals to squeeze the very last drop out of the taxpayer and tax sources .
Whether this is a sensible option or will simply lead to new offences remains to be seen .
Above all , Amendment 4 , which was proposed by two of our fellow Members from the Socialist Group and is aimed at the repeal of the Savings Taxation Directive , is not something that we can support .
This , then , is our position : we fully support Mrs Bowles ' report in all other respects , but if Amendment 4 on the abolition of the Savings Taxation Directive gains a majority , we will reject the report in its entirety .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I too should like to thank Mrs Bowles for the quality of her work and for the result that we were able to achieve in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on such an important text as this .
I should like to remind my fellow Members that the public purse currently loses between EUR 200 and 250 billion due to fiscal fraud in the internal market .
These missing billions mean less public investment , fewer schools , fewer public services , more social needs that cannot be met and , of course frequently , in compensation , higher taxes for those honest and humble taxpayers who do not have the time to spend on tax evasion and tax shopping .
I am delighted to see that , on the issue of VAT , there is broad consensus within this House on putting an end to fraud and practices which take advantage of the fragility of the transitional system set up in 1993 .
We are all well aware since the Liechtenstein scandal that the biggest fiscal fraud is committed by those large savers who place considerable sums of money in third countries , often tax havens , to avoid tax .
The European Union has an instrument for fighting this fraud : the Directive on the Taxation of Savings Income .
However , as underlined by Mrs Bowles , there are too many loopholes in this Directive and it only covers savings income in the form of interest payable to individuals .
It is therefore currently far too easy to artificially set up a legal entity , sometimes with a single partner or shareholder , or to invent financial revenue that is not strictly interest in order to avoid tax .
It is therefore absolutely vital to widen the scope of this Directive , as proposed by the report , so that , at the very least , fiscal fraud is not so easy . This is in fact a moral imperative .
I must express my astonishment and disappointment at the amendment tabled by the PPE-DE Group which , due to both its timidity and its direction , ends up proposing that nothing should change and that , in terms of fiscal fraud , we should stick with the current situation .
Let us put these positions to the European people , in particular the German people , and let us see how the European and German people judge the choices made here .
I have heard big statements made in the media , particularly in the German media , about this issue of fiscal fraud .
Here , in the silence of the European Parliament , other choices are being made .
I hope that the European people will be the judge of these .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to highlight three issues in the course of this debate .
Firstly , it has been estimated that tax losses due to fiscal fraud relating to VAT and excise duty amount to more than 2 % of the European Union 's GDP . The losses total between EUR 200 billion and EUR 250 billion .
These are enormous sums of money . National incomes are reduced , and there is also an impact on the structure of the European Union 's budget income as the proportion of own income based on GNI is increased .
Secondly , despite this diagnosis , the solutions proposed in the report could do more harm than good .
I refer , for instance , to the solutions relating to intra-Community transactions , such as the reverse charge mechanism whereby the tax is paid by the recipient , not by the supplier .
I am also concerned about the proposal to unify VAT rates , which in effect means eliminating the reduced rates , and about the proposal to set up a clearing house system to apportion tax between Member States .
Thirdly , it would seem that what is really needed in order to combat fiscal fraud is closer cooperation between the fiscal administrations of the Member States .
This should involve swifter exchange of information , and perhaps even automatic access to certain data concerning VAT taxpayers and excise duty payers .


( DE ) Mr President , I rise for two reasons : firstly , because this is an issue - as Mr Langen has said - that has been on our agenda for many years and we really should be asking why no progress is being made , especially when it comes to VAT evasion .
Secondly , it is unacceptable to the vast majority of Europeans that here we are discussing tax evasion and fraud - taxpayers ' money - so hypocritically without addressing the problems here in our midst .
The European Parliament , as represented by many MEPs , is a hotbed of fraud .
We can read about it in the Galvin report and elsewhere , but attempts are being made to sweep this under the carpet .
I need only mention Chichester , Purvis or certain Liberal MEPs .
It is scandalous .
Unless we address the cases of fraud in our own ranks , we lack any credibility and have no right to criticise others .
I urge OLAF , but particularly the parliamentary administration and parliamentary groups , to establish clarity here .
It is outrageous that attempts are being made to hush things up , here of all places .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I am very pleased that a Community strategy is emerging for this issue , albeit slowly , perhaps too slowly .
I agree that the fight against fiscal fraud must be incorporated into the individual national obligations of the Member States on the one hand , but it must also be incorporated into the Community 's Lisbon programme .
My observations are as follows : first , I do not agree with the phrasing of the Parliament 's report according to which the strengthening of tax competition would distort the internal market unnecessarily and undermine the social model .
This reflects the obsession with stipulating minimum levels of taxation for every area of taxation that exists , which would in fact cause unfairness in addition to the impact of inflation , since it would hit those who have otherwise put their houses in order and are able to lower taxes .
Concerning indirect taxation that falls under the Community 's jurisdiction too , the policy of referring exclusively to minimum values without having us regulate the maximum is unacceptable .
I would like it to be noted that the hotbed of abuse occurring with excise duty is due to the increase in minimum levels , since it stimulates the spread of the black-market economy and the manufacture of home-made produce , which contradict all the Community 's policies .
Next , in the area of VAT , I am pleased with the policy of taking slow steps and with the experimental idea of the reverse charge , but resolute steps forward are also needed here .
In my opinion , given the level of technology we have today , this could easily be done for cross-border transactions within an internal market , and the supplier 's VAT for the destination country could easily be collected and transferred to the destination country .
In order to do this , of course , there must be improved willingness for cooperation between the tax authorities of the Member States , which is still lacking , and we can take a deep breath and achieve this now that the euro has been introduced and the Payments Directive has come into being .
Finally , I feel that it is important to take action concerning the operations of primarily offshore companies outside the Union , since the tax base is often channelled there before taxation and is then returned from there to companies in the Union through messy transactions in order to evade tax , and this is not in the interests of selecting a favourable tax location . Thank you .

( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Kovács , ladies and gentlemen , according to some estimates , fiscal fraud in Europe exceeds 6 % of tax revenue . It has a corrosive effect on confidence in tax systems , on the capability and fairness of treasury departments and on the wellbeing of citizens .
It is a breeding ground for the informal economy and organised crime .
Within the European Union , it affects the proper functioning of the internal market , distorts competition and harms the financial interests of the EU and also fulfilment of the Lisbon Strategy .
If tax were paid on the one-quarter of global wealth that is hidden in tax havens , according to data from the International Monetary Fund , the Millennium Development Goals of the United Nations could be covered with money to spare .
The European Union must be tough in its fight against fiscal fraud .
This can be done safely and responsibly , without imposing exorbitant burdens on our economy .
The increase in cross-border trade and the effects of globalisation demand that we be determined in promoting a European strategy against fiscal fraud . National actions are not enough .
This strategy must have an internal dimension , tackling problems posed by fraud in VAT and special taxes , and also tax evasion issues in terms of direct taxation , as well as an external dimension , by asserting the economic weight of the European Union .
We cannot disappoint those of our citizens who scrupulously comply with their tax obligations and who expect leadership from the European Union .
In this context , we demand that the package of measures against VAT fraud that the Commission will present next month is ambitious and that the report announced for the end of this month on the application of taxation to savings is useful for making definite progress in the fight against fraud in this area in Europe .
We welcome the general contents of the report produced by Mrs Bowles who we congratulate . We trust that this report will be adopted in plenary and that , if improvements are not made , then at least we do not go backwards .
( BG ) Ms Bowles , I admire your desire to overcome tax fraud at European level .
Consider , though , what this will cause to those who govern Bulgaria now .
If cases of tax fraud stop in Bulgaria I assure you that at the next elections the liberals from the Muslim party Movement for Rights and Freedoms ( MRF ) will not win even half of the percentage they win at the moment .
If the theft of public funds in my country is terminated once and for all , the socialists can no longer sponsor their campaigns or , respectively , their absurd initiatives .
As a member of the Attack party I will support this report of yours , for Attack is the only party in Bulgaria which works for stopping the syphoning of state funds and Attack is the party , whose platform includes the firm commitment to review all shady and tainted deals , which resulted in damages for the state budget and which have so far benefited not one or two political forces . Thank you .

( FR ) Mr President , please allow me first of all to say to Mr Hamon that his blackmail does not impress us at all , and I regret that he has clearly been the victim of a huge misunderstanding .
Mr President , while agreeing with the broad outlines of the report by Mrs Bowles , I believe that two points must be highlighted .
Firstly , the transitional system of VAT , which dates back to 1993 , is now showing its limitations .
I do not believe that we can any longer accept the continuation of this transitional system .
Fiscal fraud , which we all condemn due to its direct and indirect effects , is partly attributable to failures in the current system which should therefore be changed .
Obviously I am aware that there are certain problems .
That is why I recommend to the Commission that it promotes the solution devised by the RTvat organisation which should allow a tax loss of EUR 275 million per day to be avoided , while reducing administrative costs for SMEs .
The second point concerns the issue of tax evasion in connection with the Directive on the Taxation of Savings Income .
The report contains unjustified remarks that have led me to table amendments in order to rectify the situation .
The legitimate and necessary fight against fiscal fraud must not cause us to call into question the principle of tax competition .
I absolutely reject this as the two have no connection .
Furthermore , experience shows that the system of tax deduction at source for the taxation of savings is the most efficient system , rather than trying to impose , across the board , the information exchange system which has its own problems .
Finally , the demands to reform this Directive , in terms of widening its scope to all legal entities and all other sources of financial revenue , are also very badly thought out because they will simply have the effect of hounding savings out of the European Union .
That is why I want these points to be amended . If they are not amended , we will be unable to vote for this report .
( PL ) Mr President , fiscal fraud has been a global problem for some time now .
Estimates suggest that the losses incurred are in the order of 2 % to 2.5 % of GDP , which is between EUR 200 billion and EUR 250 billion at European level .
There is therefore an urgent need to coordinate action at Community level and to tighten up cooperation between Member States .
Article 10 and Article 280 of the Treaty establishing the European Community state that the Member States shall take all appropriate measures to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising out of the Treaty and to coordinate their action aimed at protecting the financial interests of the Community .
It is important to bear in mind , however , that although the free movement of goods and services within the Community 's market makes it difficult for countries to combat this type of fraud on their own , the actions taken should not hamper economic activity and place unnecessary burdens on taxpayers .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I want to thank the Members of the House for the comments and views they expressed during the debate .
As I said in my opening remarks , the Commission very much appreciates the contribution made by the European Parliament to the debate on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
The Commission has assumed its responsibility and will take further initiatives to strengthen the legal framework and administrative cooperation between Member States .
Member States certainly have to do the same .
Some of you have referred to the review of the Savings Taxation Directive , and I can assure you that the ongoing review is a very thorough one , where we are examining in detail whether the current scope is effective , and the pros and cons of extending it .
It is a complex matter where many factors have to be taken into account : efficiency from a tax compliance point of view ; the administrative burden for market operators , and also for tax administration ; the need for a level playing field both inside the EU and in relation to the outside world - to name just a few .
As I mentioned earlier , we will soon present the report .
It will be followed by a proposal for amendments to the Savings Taxation Directive , and we will do our utmost to strike a proper balance .
It is clear that there exists no single and global solution for eliminating tax fraud .
Each individual measure should bring an added value , but it is only their implementation as a whole which provides the tax authorities with an enhanced framework for combating tax evasion and tax fraud .
rapporteur . - Mr President , tax fraud is the business of the EU because fraudsters make use of cross-border loopholes , and that is what we are trying to close .
As the Commissioner says , the savings tax issues are complex .
I think it is possible for us to reach agreement through our voting that we do not pre-empt too much the more detailed discussions that we are going to have to hold on that topic when the Commission comes out with their further proposals .
Likewise I think that we can also avoid reference to tax competition where we are divided but which is not core to this report .
Therefore I think we can achieve some harmony amongst ourselves .
On all these fronts , colleagues and Commissioner , I do not think that inaction or tentative action is an adequate response .
2.5 % of GDP is at stake .
That is a huge chunk of the tax base .
As our colleague , Mr Sánchez Presedo , points out , that is possibly 5 % of tax .
If any politician here or in any Member State campaigned on the basis of putting up tax by 5 % to pay for nothing , they would not get very far .
So , and I say this to Member States in particular , getting prickly about exchange of information , doing the minimum , being fearful , is just the same as taxing 5 % for nothing , for that is what it costs the honest taxpayer .
That is the message that I wish to send in this report and I believe it is the collective message that this Parliament wishes to send in this report supporting the Commissioner in his efforts and urging him to be bold .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( ET ) Fiscal fraud is a problem for both the EU and the Member States , distorting competition and reducing the revenue base of the EU and the Member States alike .
One of the roots of the problem is cited as being the current transitional system of VAT , which is complex and outmoded .
It needs updating .
In that regard the EP proposal that the European Commission should put forward a decision on a new VAT system in 2010 is undoubtedly welcome .
The working out of a new VAT system obviously means ensuring that the current tax system is not replaced by a more complex and bureaucratic one .
It is obviously also important to stress that , before it is applied Europe-wide , it must be piloted to ensure that it works in practice because this will prevent many problems which may emerge later .
An equally important step in the fight against fiscal fraud is to update the availability of inter-State information , a process which would be assisted by the establishment of a pan-European e-tax administration information centre .
The balance between the public interest and the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual will not be disregarded when personal data is processed .
Finally , the term ' tax haven ' must also , in view of the point at issue here , be regarded as important .
I welcome the ideas set out in the report that the EU should make the elimination of tax havens at worldwide level a priority .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at midnight . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Social package ( First part ) ( debate )
The next item is the Statements by the Commission and the Council on the Social Package ( First part ) .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , two months ago the Commission adopted a renewed social agenda .
It is designed to help the Union to solve the social problems which Europe will have to tackle in the 21st century .
It contains an ambitious and cohesive set of measures in the field of social policy , enabling Europeans to grasp the opportunities open to them .
As has been said already , the renewed social agenda was discussed by Ministers for Labour and Social Affairs at an informal meeting of the Social Council held in early July at Chantilly .
I was pleased to receive a report on the very positive welcome of the renewed social agenda by Member States and I await with interest the conclusions which the Council should receive by the end of this year .
I have already had the opportunity to present this package to the Conference of Presidents and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
A suitable time has also arisen for an in-depth debate here in Parliament .
I am convinced that today 's exchange of views will help us to reach a consensus on the question as to what kind of social Europe we wish to build for European citizens .
I should like to remind you of developments up to now .
This complex package is the result of two years of joint efforts .
The Commission has been working with all interested parties , including representatives of workers and employers , civil society , Member States and regional and local bodies .
The package forms a cohesive whole , emphasising links to other areas , such as education , health , environment , the information society and the economy , and it clearly shows that economic and social objectives are two sides of the same coin and must operate in close cooperation for the benefit of the people .
It is an ambitious package , attempting to offer practical responses to the concerns of the people and to improve their living conditions .
It is also a very comprehensive package - the largest that the Commission has ever adopted in one go - with 18 initiatives presented together with the report .
In excess of another 20 relating to a wide range of topics are also under discussion .
Today we are looking at two measures : at a proposed directive to combat discrimination and at a revised directive on the establishment of European Works Councils .
First of all , however , I should like to say a few words about the basic principles of this package .
The renewed social agenda is based on three main principles : opportunities , access and solidarity .
We Europeans value the worth of individuals and want everyone to have an equal opportunity to achieve their potential .
This means removing the obstacles which people have to overcome and creating the conditions to allow everyone to grasp the opportunities offered while still respecting European diversity and avoiding discord .
Europeans ' faith in equality gives rise to a shared belief in social solidarity : solidarity between generations , between regions , between those at the top and those at the bottom , between wealthy and less wealthy Member States , and also with our neighbours and friends in other parts of the world , since solidarity is an integral part of the functioning of the European Community and of our relations with other countries throughout the world .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the extent of legal protection against discrimination differs at present in the EU depending on the reasons for the discrimination .
Discrimination is not , however , restricted to one area .
This is why we have proposed , as part of the package , a horizontal directive prohibiting discrimination on the basis of age , sexual orientation , religious belief and disability outside the employment field .
A horizontal directive will provide Member States , economic entities and citizens with the greatest degree of clarity and legal certainty .
This draft is a response to repeated calls from Parliament and meets the political undertaking which the Commission made upon taking office .
It is a flexible instrument based on principles already adopted in Member States and embedded in existing regulations .
I should like to emphasise that tackling all the reasons for discrimination in the same way does not mean that uniform rules have to apply in all areas .
In insurance and banking , for example , it will be possible to apply different approaches on the basis of age or disability .
However , such differences will have to be supported by convincing grounds and reliable statistical data .
Elderly people will still be able to enjoy preferential rates on public transport and at cultural events , and it will still be possible to restrict access to certain goods in order to protect people 's health , for example the sale of alcohol to underage youths .
The directive covers the supply of all goods and services and relates to both business and private individuals , but only insofar as the commercial supply of goods and services is involved .
The directive will also be proportionate with regard to the burden it imposes in accordance with the concept of proportionality embedded in both the existing anti-discrimination directives and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , which has been signed by Member States and the European Community .
The draft directive prohibits discrimination , but at the same time respects the other fundamental rights and freedoms , including the protection of private and family life and acts undertaken in this context and also the freedom of religion and the freedom of association .
Another problem to which I should like to draw attention is discrimination against the Roma , which the Commission has repeatedly condemned as incompatible with the principles of the EU .
The package contains a declaration of our renewed undertaking to ensure equal opportunities and to fight against discrimination and also a Commission Staff Working Document on Community Instruments and Policies for Roma Inclusion .
It is a response to the request from the European Council in December 2007 that the Commission should review existing policies and instruments and submit to the Council a report on the progress achieved .
According to the Commission Staff Working Document , the necessary legislative , financial and coordinating instruments are in place and are being used , but not yet to a sufficient extent .
The renewed social agenda includes several initiatives intended to improve the Union 's ability to react more effectively to changes .
We are convinced that European social dialogue and the European Works Councils have a special part to play in this context .
The European Works Councils Directive has been crying out for updating for some time .
At the present time , there are 820 European Works Councils in the Union , representing 15 million workers .
However , recent cases show that they are not quite doing their job and employees are often not kept well informed or consulted with regard to company restructuring .
The initiative therefore aims to strengthen the role of social dialogue within companies at the supranational level .
It is a balanced draft which should guarantee that employees ' representatives are kept adequately informed and consulted prior to decisions relating to circumstances affecting them and should also allow businesses to adapt to globalisation .
The Commission would of course prefer to give priority to a solution first discussed by representatives of workers and employers , but the fact that we did not manage to persuade them to come to the table for discussions last June forced the Commission to submit a draft on its own initiative .
We nonetheless value the joint letter which representatives of workers and employers sent to the Council and Parliament in August .
We appreciate the efforts made by both sides to reach agreement on this complex topic and I am also pleased that they decided to accept the Commission 's draft as a basis for further work .
I really hope that Parliament will bear in mind the practical proposals made by representatives of workers and employers when they come to the first reading .
I believe that we shall achieve a rapid resolution .
As far as it is able , the Commission will try to smooth the path as much as possible .
Now I must say a few words about the impacts of globalisation .
Company restructuring is sometimes unavoidable , but the impacts on employees and their families may be very painful .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund exists to help in such situations .
So far the Fund has helped 7 250 employees to find new jobs .
We can be pleased about this , but it must be ensured that the Fund is accessible to all those who might benefit from it .
The report contained in the social agenda package states that , of the EUR 500 million available annually , just 4 % was used in 2007 .
Thought must therefore be given as to how to improve the results of the Fund 's activities .
As regards workforce mobility , I should like to say that the 1996 Directive concerning the posting of workers supports the free movement of services and also offers protection against the abuse of workers and guarantees them observance of fundamental rights in the Member States to which they are posted .
Recent rulings by the Court of Justice on this matter have thrown up a whole series of questions .
The reactions to them are quite legitimate and we must together find an answer to them .
I am convening a forum to discuss this topic on 9 October , when this complex problem will be discussed with political bodies , representatives of workers and employers , representatives of European institutions and experts in the fields of law and the economy .
The Commission will of course continue to listen to all comments , but we do not as yet see any need to amend the Directive .
In any case , however , we shall ensure that there is no conflict between the fundamental freedoms embedded in the Treaty and citizens ' fundamental rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , this new social agenda affirms the undertaking of the European Union to promote a strong and real social dimension for Europe , a social Europe , which will meet the expectations of our fellow citizens .
Of course , this is impossible without including an educational dimension , which is very important .
In this context , I should like to mention the following three documents :
1 .
Council Recommendation on mobility of young volunteers across Europe ;
2 . Communication entitled ' Improving competences for the 21st Century : an Agenda for European Cooperation on Schools ' ;
3 . Green Paper : Migration & mobility : challenges and opportunities for EU education systems .
It is our joint wish to strengthen and deepen the social dimension of Europe .
The 18 measures contained in the package represent the first step in our efforts in this direction .
I know that I can rely on you , whose job it is to represent the voice of the people , to consider these proposals and political documents in depth and with care .
It is of fundamental importance for their future .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are here to talk about social Europe .
We shall talk about social Europe , and I am glad to be doing so today before the European Parliament , which is a key player in the institutional structure of Europe , an essential partner with which the French Presidency is keen to work as closely as possible .
I have said it before and I will say it again now : 2008 is to be the year in which social Europe is re-energised .
Something that I believe all our European players want to see .
The June summit in Luxembourg , the Chantilly meeting in July , are milestones along that route .
We were keen for the French Presidency to tackle the issue of revising the European Social Agenda , which Commissioner Špidla talked about just now .
This is a key issue which demands the ability on our part to define a social vision for Europe and to translate that vision into concrete action .
The discussions at Chantilly , in which Parliament took part through your committee chairman Mr Andersson , enabled us to reaffirm a number of common values which we all share , and it is precisely these that define Europe 's ambitions for social policy .
Those values are social dialogue , intergenerational solidarity , action against poverty and discrimination , equality between the sexes , social protection , occupational mobility , and the importance of services of general interest in guaranteeing social cohesion and social responsibility in business and industry .
Observed from Beijing , Washington , the Cape , New Delhi or from Brisbane even , these values give the European social model its originality .
Chantilly was an opportunity for us to remind the world that these values are central to Europe 's development strategy , to the Lisbon strategy .
In other words , Chantilly provided a reminder that this social model , these common values , constitute a European strength in our globalised world .
Why ?
Because the knowledge-based economy , the innovation economy , can only be built by focusing firmly on developing human capital and on lifelong learning .
Because the economy as a whole loses out when whole categories of the population are shut out of the world of work for long periods of time , cannot contribute to wealth creation and cannot access goods and services .
Because workers too are more productive when they have good terms of employment and social protection which cushions them against the hard knocks that life delivers .
Economic progress does not mean sacrificing social progress , far from it .
I am not alone in seeing the two as indissociable .
Without social progress , economic progress will run out of steam sooner or later .
So Europe must advance on both fronts : economic progress , yes , and social progress too .
Along with this conviction which we collectively reaffirmed , we took on board another fact : the European social model needs to change , to adapt to globalisation , climate change , demographic change and the growing diversity of European societies .
So we need to adapt our labour markets and introduce flexicurity , that is to say new securities and flexibilities for both workforce and employers .
And things are moving .
At first the term ' flexicurity ' frightened people , alarmed them .
But now it represents a European ideal aspired to by all players , including the social partners .
The word has become commonplace , an everyday term , which proves that things are indeed changing , that mindsets are changing .
Something else which must be addressed if we are to move our social model forward is the guarantee of social cohesion , with measures to combat new forms of poverty , specifically where they affect children .
It is time we joined forces to prepare our societies better for this demographic change , strengthening intergenerational solidarity and ensuring that people have access to high-quality social services of general interest .
This process of adjustment has been under way for a few years already .
Thanks to initiatives by the Commission , the Council of Ministers , the European Parliament and the social partners , we are making progress on specific initiatives which respond to popular concerns in Europe .
How do we allow freedom of movement for workers within Europe and at the same time safeguard the employment rights of those who move ?
How do we improve the management of restructuring operations by involving the workforce Europe-wide ?
How do we ensure that people are able to work and thus play a part in society and what can we do to counter discrimination more effectively ?
These endeavours will continue throughout the French Presidency .
Especially - and I say this in all honesty - since the upcoming elections mean that the second half of 2008 will be our last shot at securing results in this parliamentary term on a number of issues .
All of us will shortly be held to account by our fellow Europeans at the ballot box .
The people of Europe expect results here .
The reactions to recent rulings by the European Court of Justice are proof of that .
This is an area where the European Parliament can help us , along with many other areas which I will touch on briefly .
Firstly , revision of the European Works Council directive , which Vladimír Špidla talked about just now .
This is a major undertaking that will strengthen social dialogue in Europe .
The present directive applies to more than 14 million workers and 820 employers .
Revision of the directive will increase the number covered still further .
At Chantilly we brought together representatives of the European Trade Union Confederation and of Business Europe to hear their views on the revised text put forward by the Commission .
They were happy with the proposal as a working base and said they could negotiate to overcome points of disagreement .
They are now finalising a number of common proposals which they will announce in due course .
If this comes to fruition , if the social partners produce common proposals on revision of the directive , this will be helpful to our work , the work of Parliament and the Council .
So why not reach agreement at first reading as quickly as possible ?
If at all possible , by the end of the year ?
Concerning our second focus of work : I must of course mention the proposal for a directive on protection from discrimination beyond the workplace , which the Commission also adopted on 2 July .
This was much discussed at Chantilly and the Presidency opened talks on this text from the beginning of July .
Parliament will be consulted on this matter but I should point out that the Commission 's proposal , covering four grounds for discrimination , took account of the resolution which Parliament adopted last spring on the report by Elizabeth Lynne .
The third matter which also received a lot of attention was social services of general interest .
All the Member States are talking about these .
They are all talking about the same thing even if , admittedly , they are not all saying exactly the same thing .
But adoption of the Protocol to the Lisbon Treaty and evaluation of the Altmark package gives us an opportunity to think about the contribution which these services make to social cohesion in Europe , the need to ensure that they are of high calibre and the importance of giving them a sound legal framework .
We hope to work on a roadmap with the Commission , and with anyone keen to contribute , to identify a number of intermediate objectives so that progress on this highly important matter can be sustained .
Then , of course , there are the directives on temporary work and working time .
On both these , the ball is in the European Parliament 's court , for the second reading .
We must try to avoid conciliation .
Millions of temporary workers in Europe are waiting impatiently for the directive on temporary work to come into force and there is pressure on some Member States to settle the question of on-call time .
So I can only encourage Parliament to keep us informed of what happens , with due regard , here too , to the counterbalancing factors of which I am well aware .
But here too , people have expectations of us and all eyes are upon us .
I am also mindful , on the subject of mobility , of the need to reach agreement on the implementing regulation on the coordination of social security schemes .
The French Presidency needs the European Parliament 's support on these various issues in order to achieve concrete results .
Those results - you know this , but I will say it again - are keenly awaited by the people of Europe , who expect us to pursue our European social vision to the benefit of their everyday lives , to make Europe more a part of everyday existence .
We know today that we need not less Europe but more Europe .
We know full well today that we need not less social Europe but more social Europe .
We know full well , ladies and gentlemen , the challenges we have to meet .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Commissioner Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats sets great store by social justice .
Upholding European social models is one of our priorities in an increasingly globalised world .
And for this reason , as Chairman of the EPP Group , I welcome the Commission 's proposal on the new social package .
This text offers some answers to questions of fundamental importance to our societies , such as demographic change , globalisation and poverty reduction .
My group feels that the Commission should go still further and take more specific measures .
Alleviating poverty , getting population groups who are excluded from the labour market into employment , promoting worker mobility and improving workers ' education and training - these are things that call for a specific programme , concrete measures and strong commitment on the part of the European Union and its Member States .
Demographic change is a major challenge for our economies .
Workers over pensionable age , women , young people and above all persons with a disability - generally speaking everyone who has been out of the labour market for a long period of time - must be given a new chance .
We must help these people to find work or get back to work .
To that end we want concrete measures to promote lifelong learning .
Persons who are in work continue to face inequalities .
We are very concerned by the continuing pay gap between men and women .
That is something which ought not to exist in the Europe of 2008 .
Similarly , appropriate care facilities must be provided to help people combine work and family life .
We thus call on the Commission and Council to take specific measures here .
My Group is opposed to all forms of discrimination .
So we approve of the Commission 's declared intention to plug the loopholes which persist in the relevant legislation .
Action on discrimination against disabled people in particular must be intensified .
Ladies and gentlemen , we believe that the most effective instrument we have for upholding social models in this age of globalisation is economic growth .
But we are convinced that in order to attain the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy we must promote the cause of business and industry , because it is enterprise that basically drives job creation .
We must improve the image of the entrepreneur in Europe and encourage young people to set up their own businesses .
We must also encourage a competitive environment for our businesses , giving special support to small and medium-sized enterprises which are the leading creators of jobs .
With this in mind we urge all players in the field to work for more flexicurity in Europe .
The concept has proved its worth in those countries that have adopted it .
It allows businesses the flexibility they need to be internationally competitive , whilst protecting workers at the same time .
I welcome the Commission 's intention to promote social dialogue .
For us , partnership based on trust within businesses is key to their success in the marketplace .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the current treaties social matters are still essentially the province of the Member States .
That may , and must , change but until it does we have to abide by the subsidiarity principle .
We have no choice .
That does not stop the Commission from conducting impact studies , condemning inequalities and seeking to assess the social consequences of any new proposed legislation .
Indeed I urge it to do so .
The social and societal challenges we face are considerable : we need to reform our economies , adapting them to be more competitive , so that fewer people suffer exclusion .
There cannot be social progress without economic growth , but the economy cannot be competitive without social progress .
The EPP-ED Group is determined , now more than ever , to achieve results here .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , listening to the speeches delivered by the previous speakers - by Commissioner Špidla , by the President-in Office of the Council , Mr Bertrand , and by you , Mr Daul - one has the impression that all is well .

You are progressing nicely , and 2008 will be remembered as the year when the European social model was relaunched .
That all sounds very fine , but the reality is harsher .
Yes , the real picture looks quite different .
The real picture is one of gross social inequality in the European Union .
Profits spiral ever higher while wage levels stagnate .
The income gap has become an ever-widening chasm .
The loss of purchasing power that has hit ordinary people in the European Union , compounded by the drastic increases in energy prices , is a veritable impoverishment programme .
This is a problem that we must address in the European social model , and not just with fine words .
What you are initiating , Mr Špidla , is good , and we welcome it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we shall be dealing in detail with our views on the various proposals .
For this reason I can make a few basic remarks about what we expect of a European social model .
Fifteen years ago , if people in the European Union - in whatever country - had the feeling that something was going wrong , that some long-established national standard was endangered , they responded by looking to Europe to put things right ; they felt the need to rectify matters in the European framework , because people believed then that European rules in a European framework would provide protection transcending national boundaries .
Today , fifteen years later , just try telling anyone that we will put things right in Europe .
It would strike fear into employees , because they believe that this Europe , in its present-day disposition , can no longer guarantee them social protection .
If you take the time to analyse the Irish referendum and the voting behaviour of young people , you will see these people saying that Europe is a great idea .
But when they look at how it is organised and constituted today , they are not impressed with its organisation or its disposition .
Since we are entering an election campaign , it is only right to ask why there was such optimism fifteen years ago about the future of social policy in Europe , and why there is such pessimism today .
Our reply as Socialists must be that Europe is governed by the Right .
You delivered a fine Socialist speech , Minister ; what you said here was marvellous .
But what line did your government take in the Council on the Working Time Directive ?
( Applause )
Your governing party is a member of the European People 's Party , whose member parties provide the vast majority of the heads of government in the European Union .
In the Commission , they provide an absolute majority of the Commissioners as well as the President of the Commission .
The European People 's Party is the largest political group in this House , but , to hear you speak , one would think you had nothing at all to do with the stunted social development of Europe .
Europe is governed by the Right and is being guided in the wrong direction , and that must be rectified in the European elections .
( Applause )
You will have a good opportunity to get us back on track when the time comes to implement the measures you have outlined .
The European social model is one of our priorities , you said .
For our group , it certainly is !
What do people feel seriously threatened by in the European Union ?
Uncontrolled financial markets .
Uncontrolled hedge funds and private-equity firms that buy some company or other , cherry-pick its assets and dump its employees on the streets - simply to maximise the investors ' profits .
My honourable colleague Paul Nyrup Rasmussen has presented us with a very good report .
We need qualified majority voting on this issue , so that the Commission can launch an initiative for the regulation of hedge funds and private-equity firms .
Who is it that refuses to support such a move ?
You , the European People 's Party , whose representatives on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs are against it .
This is why we need to spell out very clearly that the struggle for the European social model is also the struggle for a basic philosophy .
Mr Bertrand rightly ascribed the success of the European Union to its having married economic progress with social progress .
That was always the underlying philosophy in Europe - for the Christian Democrats too , by the way .
For decades , these were two sides of the same coin , until the neo-liberal mainstream began to tell us in the early nineties that lower wages , longer hours and less say in company management were the basic recipe for faster economic growth .
For decades , of course , there have been people - and they are still present in great numbers today , even within the Commission - who attach more importance to horse racing than to the European social model but are responsible here for the internal market and who have been telling us , and still tell us - the prime example being Mr Trichet , who does so at every press conference - that wages in Europe are too high .
Perhaps they are in the case of board members at the European Central Bank , but not for ordinary workers in Europe .
We shall therefore have to ensure that a general change of political direction takes place , a change of direction that will actually put the European social model back where you want it , Mr Bertrand , so that every economic advance achieved by the European Union will also have a beneficial impact on the lives of all citizens of the European Union .
You are right , of course , in saying that the EU can only compete in the world , be it in Beijing or Brisbane , if we develop this internal market .
We want to do that ; we want an internal market that can perform .
We want an efficient and competitive European continent .
But the reason why we want it is to create wealth that accrues to everyone , not only to investors in major corporate groups , in large joint-stock companies and in the big banks .
As long as we have this philosophy in Europe that awards European prizes to people who boast , when presenting their companies ' performance figures at press conferences , of having made billions throughout Europe on which they do not pay any taxes in Europe , because their profits are European and not national and are therefore exempt from national taxation , and as long as we continue to put tens of thousands out of work to perpetuate this state of affairs and maintain our shareholders ' profits - as long as this remains the reality of the European social model , we can talk here as much as we like , but the people will never identify with this Europe .
We do wish , however , to consolidate the European ideal and to further the cause of integration .
For this reason , let me remind the House that a European social model is judged by its fruits .
The same applies to you , Mr Bertrand , in the Council and to you , Mr Daul , here in Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this social package is a welcome step forward in the building of a European community which cares for its citizens .
The people who cast votes against the European Constitution and the Lisbon Treaty sent a clear message .
The message is they will not give the European Union new powers simply because we want them .
Our people want to know what kind of European Union we are building .
This package is extensive and controversial , and we must make sure that people know the benefits that it will bring to their lives .
There is much to praise , as Commissioner Špidla says , in the European Works Council Directive and , of course , in the proposal on patients ' rights in cross-border health care , for which my group has fought so hard .
But I want today to concentrate on two specific measures in this package .
First , the revision of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which helps people who have lost their jobs to find new ones .
At present , a thousand posts must be under threat before a company can apply .
Liberals and Democrats welcome the proposal to lower that threshold and to simplify claims procedures , not because the European Union should plan work for Europe - that role is best filled by the internal market - nor in the belief that the EU should provide unemployment benefit - that is for Member States .
Rather , we welcome this proposal because it is based on a sound liberal principle : that employment is the best source of welfare .
With growth grinding to a halt and some Member States already in recession , this policy will help prevent a spiral of sudden job losses that create welfare dependency .
Second , the Anti-Discrimination Directive : my group has fought for this from the beginning of this Commission 's term of office .
The definition of discrimination will now cover the main spectrum of minorities - older people , gay people , disabled people , people of all faiths and none - and it will apply to clients and consumers , as well as employees .
This , too , is a liberal measure which will proffer practical benefits , the kinds that come from knowing you can do your job and live your life free from the tyranny of prejudice .
The draft directive should go further than it does .
There are still loopholes , still opportunities for discrimination to rear its head .
Why , for example , Commissioner , is it right to outlaw discrimination in the workplace , but to allow Member States to use discriminatory schoolbooks in the classroom ?
Nonetheless , Europe is breaking down the barriers of discrimination , piece by piece .
My group welcomes the commitment of the Commission and the Council to further that process , just as we insist on the full involvement of this House in framing the measures that complete it .
In February Mr Barroso brought to us a major package of measures to fight climate change .
Today , the Commission 's proposals on social policy demonstrate to its detractors that Europe cares for community cohesion and that liberal economic policies need be no threat to progressive policies for a healthy environment and a society served by solidarity .
Mr Schulz bemoans the predominance of centre-right governments in the European Union , but we live in a democracy and people choose their governments .
They are distinctly unconvinced by what the Socialists are offering .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Union for Europe of the Nations Group very much welcomes the European Union 's new social package .
The social dimension is what most distinguishes Europe from other world powers such as the United States or China .
In the west twentieth-century Europe was built to a great extent on social values .
It provided a valuable social model for the new Member States upon their accession to the European Union in 2004 and 2007 , since in many of them , after the recovery of political and economic independence at the end of the 1980s , capitalism sought to assert itself in its worst form , violating workers ' rights and showing no respect for human dignity .
In the 21st century we all have to contend with globalisation , which can be an opportunity but also a threat to humankind .
Brussels must therefore send clear signals to the Member States encouraging them to preserve and further develop the social gains that serve the interests of all citizens of the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I very much welcome what the Minister has said this morning , and hope that much of it will be echoed by the Council , although the evidence so far does not give us great cause for confidence that it will .
Many of us still see question marks hanging over our protection of the social aspect in the face of market dominance .
We are invited in this package to consider the impact of the recent European Court of Justice rulings .
Well , many of us have indeed considered them and consider them extremely worrying , when we are constantly being asked to justify measures on the basis of their not disturbing markets rather on the basis of their delivering a high quality of services and quality of workers rights etc .
This is evidenced in the social package , where we are now looking at recognising the fact that we have poverty among people actually in work , and that we are still looking at a growing gap between rich and poor .
While welcoming the sentiments on dealing with poverty expressed in the Commission 's package , what we are really looking for is concrete action .
We obviously welcome the horizontal directive on equalities .
That is something we have championed throughout this Parliament .
It is important for all sorts of reasons , not least because it now actually offers the possibility of full participation in society .
We also welcome many of the proposals on the Roma .
We welcome the Commission 's commitment and want to see all Member States responding positively , rather than entrenching prejudice and bigotry .
Training on equal opportunities is an important part of the skills agenda , especially for those delivering policy in the areas concerned .
We welcome the existence , at least , of the proposals on the European Works Councils , although we have a number of criticisms about what is in them .
As regards the mobility aspect of the package , we now also need to be looking at the impact of mobility in social terms : what happens to people , in particular the economically inactive who move and find themselves disbarred from Member States ' health-care systems ; what happens to people as they age , having moved to other Member States , and what will their future bring ?
We also welcome the proposal on ' New skills for new jobs ' , and trust this really will link in with the climate change agenda , which also needs to look at new skills in old jobs , because most of the workforce have now passed the stage of formal education , making lifelong learning crucial .
We must ask how we are going to deliver the skills we actually need in order to make our climate change targets practicable .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , three points from the present discussion stick in my mind .
The first is the desire expressed by the Minister for the Interior , Mr Bertrand , to make 2008 the year when the European social model is relaunched .
Then there are the words spoken by Commissioner Špidla , who said that the social package met public expectations within the European Union , and lastly there is your statement , Mr Schulz , that Europe is governed by the Right .
I believe that all three statements require critical analysis .
Firstly , how can the representative of the French Presidency declare the aim of making 2008 the comeback year for the social model when the French Government declined even to refer to social policy as a priority of its Presidency ?
In my view , the social package is far from meeting people 's expectations , because it simply does nothing at all to bridge the social divides in Europe and does not even take any action to halt the widening of these divisions , to freeze the situation as it now stands .
The process is set to continue in spite of the social package .
Lastly , Mr Schulz , I can happily give you a taste of your own medicine .
It was back in the 1990s , when Socialist governments were in power , that this development took root .
We should have expected you to say that , in the wake of Lisbon , there will be a new construct in 2010 , a new strategy which will focus sharply on protection of the European social model and which will reorder our priorities once more .
As for the social package itself , it does not come up to expectations .
It is high time we broke out of the situation in which the decline in proper employment is accompanied by a growing number of jobs from which people cannot earn their livelihood .
We must finally stop using mere job numbers as our criterion in the European Union and focus instead on jobs that pay a decent wage .
This social package contains no announcement of the inclusion , wherever necessary , of a social progress clause in all European treaties .
Nor is there any answer to the question whether those who play an important part in defending social rights within the European Union are to be given more instruments and more powers in the European Works Council Directive .
The proposal merely invokes the status quo and maintains the present line with no additions .
We reject this package as an excessively abstract and misguided approach .
In their subsequent contributions to this debate , members of my group will be commenting on the individual components of the proposal .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty was dismissed by the legitimate Irish referendum , so of course you need a big programme to divert attention .
Hence this new package .
Well , it is not really new .
It is a rehash of earlier proposals .
But it is big .
It has EU legislation , social dialogue , cooperation , funding , partnership , dialogue , communication ... and that is just one page .
Allow me to focus on funding .
A prosperous economy will provide the funds , but you have lumbered yourselves with the euro , where the ECB 's interest rate is trying to cover such diverse economies .
One size fits all , some say .
Actually it is one size that fits no one .
In the UK the Bank of England cannot get it right for all our regions .
Indeed , the weekend papers remarked that the economic North-South divide in the UK is now greater than ever before .
The EU is protectionist .
You are afraid of globalisation .
Do not fight it .
Do not combat it .
Join it .
Join the world market of an ever-growing population .
Encourage enterprise by slashing red tape .
Call a halt to the never-ending stream of directives and regulations which only hinder business .
Accept the rest of the world on even terms and the European economy will increase , bringing the greatest social package of all : more and better jobs .
In conclusion , one notes that it falls to the French presidency to kick-start this venture , but will they ?
According to EurActiv on 3 July , the Commission and the French presidency have both declared social policy a priority in 2008 .
But if we read the Deutsche Welle of 2 July , French President Nicolas Sarkozy has made it clear that social policy will not be a top priority .
Issues like immigration , climate change and energy will take centre stage .
So which statement do you believe ?
For my part I think the French will do as they always do and look after themselves .
For that I congratulate them .
I wish my government did the same .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , it is normal in this House for us to rabbit on about social policy .
Unfortunately the European social model is now no more than a myth , because the social reality in our country of France , and my own region in particular , Nord-Pas-de-Calais , is that we have a state of social decline , despair , social precarity and working conditions , mass unemployment and - something else that is altogether alarming and huge - a falling birth rate .
Our thinking is still based on the social model of the 1960s , that is to say a model that assumes full employment and a large workforce .
But for the last thirty years we have had mass unemployment and a sharply declining birth rate , which has taken us from baby boom to old folks boom and plunged the funding of our pensions into crisis .
We must stop thinking that we have to defend the European social model at all costs and get ready instead to reorganise it .
Our economic and historical analysis suggests that this should be done in two ways : first , we need a family policy that will bring the birth rate back up , otherwise we shall not be able to fund our pension schemes in the decades ahead and , secondly , we need a policy to re-energise the single market and get people back to work .
In order to re-energise the EU single market we must reindustrialise and , unfortunately , if we persist with our almost religious faith in free trade and uncontrolled liberalism , we shall be unable to do what we must do to make our businesses competitive on our own home market .
For these reasons our future efforts and our goal of improving social conditions must be rooted in this idea of national and Community preference and national and Community protection .
( DE ) Mr President , the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Employment has contributed to the creation of more and better jobs - a success that is being disputed by those who find it hard to come to terms with this Europe of change , outsourcing , rationalisation and takeovers .
No one who is constantly made to feel dispensable on a personal level can begin to relate to the export boom of the European economy .
As one of the countermeasures to this sense of insecurity , we need a coherent new social strategy .
The package on the table , however , is so comprehensive that it cannot possibly be implemented by 2009 .
This diminishes the credibility of what is essentially a commendable approach .
Commissioner Špidla , our aim cannot be action for its own sake .
This is all about sustainability .
Nor can our objective be the unadulterated electioneering in which Mr Schulz has just been revelling , but I see he has already left the chamber .
We bear a share of the responsibility for ensuring that people are not marginalised and that they do not withdraw into parallel societies or a world of make-believe .
This effort begins in schools , where the alarmingly high number of drop-outs must be sharply reduced in order to prevent any further widening of the gulf between those people who have qualifications and those who have none .
To this end we need motivating lessons .
Talents and skills must be nurtured from an early age - a profitable investment in every case .
Our strategy of lifelong learning will then provide the added European value , the widespread wealth creation that Mr Schulz found wanting .
So will our educational programmes - Socrates , Leonardo and Erasmus - which must be attuned to the world of work as a matter of urgency .
To that end , we must manage to work in tandem with SMEs .
Small and medium-sized enterprises provide most jobs , and they have training places to offer .
They must also , however , work hard to ensure that they do not stop investing in continuing education and training , otherwise our innovations will dry up .
One resource continues to be criminally neglected , namely older employees .
It is high time that their wealth of experience , creativity and resilience was available to our economy .
They are still well adrift at the foot of the demographic employment league .
Lastly , the cohesion of our society must be strengthened .
In the European Works Council Directive , for example , we need a tenable compromise between employers and employees .
We shall do what we can in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to contribute to the achievement of that aim .
We also need an inter-regional balance , and that is why we provide the European Social Fund , the Regional Fund and the Globalisation Fund .
There is one issue , however , that we still regard as extremely critical , namely that of non-discrimination .
We in the PPE Group reject the horizontal directive .
It would exacerbate the legal uncertainty that already prevails and further diminish the scope for national creative action .
If the social agenda in its entirety is to succeed , primary responsibility must remain in the hands of the Member States .
It is more efficient to coordinate and communicate nationally , regionally and locally , and it is time to start adopting best practices instead of merely observing or analysing them .
Then there would be a good chance of achieving the social and economic change we want and need and of bringing the European social model to life .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , this new social agenda comes late in the day and it is a feeble response to the precarious situation , inequalities and effects of recession currently plaguing the workforce and many of our fellow citizens in Europe .
With more than 70 million people in poverty , even where unemployment levels are falling , with precarious living and working conditions and the growth of atypical forms of employment , we really do need a solid social base , a Europe that protects us .
This is one of the focuses of the French EU Presidency .
And as you said , Minister , 2008 was supposed to be a come-back year , the year in which social Europe was re-energised .
Regrettably , your Government did not make the social dimension one of the four priorities for its Presidency .
As we approach the end of the European Commission 's term we have proposals , some of which , it must be said , do at last reflect things which the European Parliament and our Group in particular has called for : a genuine directive against discrimination in all areas , not just disability ; at long last the raising of moves to strengthen and revise the directive on European works councils , and measures to ensure that our existing principles and laws on equal pay for men and women are properly upheld in the Member States .
But just look at the shortcomings , the gaps in this new social agenda !
I will name two of them in particular .
One is the response to recent judgments by the European Court of Justice in the Laval , Rüffert and Viking cases , which weaken our resistance to social dumping in the European Union .
We think that the assurance given in the Commission 's communication , that the Commission will provide legal clarity and interpretative guidelines on this directive , is not enough .
Due note must be taken of the fact - and we have held Parliamentary hearings organised by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee - that the directive is inherently defective and that Union law must , by revising the directive on the posting of workers , make it clear that the Union 's economic freedoms , freedom of establishment , cannot stand in the way of fundamental workers ' rights , the right to collective bargaining , rights on pay , the right to strike in defence of their interests , if need be .
So we want the revision of this directive to be placed on the agenda and we want a social safeguard clause guaranteeing that in future no directive , no Union policy , no treaty principle can be applied to the detriment of workers ' rights ; so that where one country has a higher standard of workers ' rights than another , that higher standard can never again be lowered by invocation of the country of origin principle , as we saw with the first version of the services directive - the Bolkestein directive .
Secondly , Mr Bertrand tells us that social services of general interest , operations in the general interest , should be encouraged for the wellbeing of our social model .
But we have had no proposal for a directive on services of general economic interest .
We cannot properly protect social services of general interest and implement Article 14 of the Lisbon Treaty , which provides the legal base for such services to be commissioned and funded , unless the Council puts a request to the Commission and unless the Commission uses its right of initiative so that we can at last talk about a legal framework that will protect public service operations , guarantee the independence of local authorities in the local services they provide and give us the assurance that future Court of Justice rulings will not threaten this fundamental feature of the European social model , so that people feel , not as Mr Schulz said , that Europe works against their social model but on the contrary that the Commission and the other European institutions work to safeguard it .
( FR ) Mr President , the Commission may have carried out a slick public relations exercise with its ' package ' presentation of texts which are very different in nature and quality , but ultimately it has exercised its right of initiative on matters of major importance .
It is moving in the right direction and we should applaud that .
So the ball is back in our court and above all perhaps in the Council 's .
Everyone knows that Parliament will be quite tough and will look to produce innovative texts that reflect the needs of Europe 's citizens .
Will the same be true of the Council ?
It is perhaps doubtful , as we know .
I hope they will listen to you , Minister .
Bombastic talk that produces only ambiguous and non-binding texts seriously undermines the credibility of the work we do .
Let us take three examples among many .
I have long been one of those calling for an overall directive against all forms of discrimination .
For that we should take as the basis the Lynne report of May 2008 , which is far more ambitious than the Commission proposal .
Second example : works councils .
We shall take care to ensure that the text clarifies their international powers and responsibilities .
Consultation of the social partners is increasingly crucial in the case of restructuring operations by concerns which operate in more than one EU country .
We shall make sure that the workforce is consulted in advance of any restructuring and that works councils are able to give their views on matters which are often highly technical .
Third example : social services of general interest .
We have wasted enough time here .
Operatives in this field are confused .
There is huge legal uncertainty , damaging the quality of services that are essential to cohesion in our societies .
And here we are , about to waste another year .
It is irresponsible .
To me this is proof that the Commission 's work , which appears to cover a broad sweep of areas of activity , is not good enough because it knowingly disregards certain essential points .
I will end by insisting that the social package should be just one step along the way .
I am convinced that the open coordination method has gone as far as it can in some areas .
We must resolve to go for more cooperation but also more harmonisation , wherever possible .
( PL ) Mr President , the Council representative called for a more social Europe .
I would respond to the Minister with a call for more common sense .
That would be better .
The European Union can of course propose a great deal , but it must be stressed that social policy is an area in which Member States have sovereign powers of decision .
In short , what we need is less rhetoric and more concrete action .
The European Union is proposing as many as 19 interesting initiatives , of which only three are legislative proposals .
What is perhaps the most important proposal , that on cross-border health care , will not be discussed today .
That is very regrettable , and it is a pity that the discussion will have to wait until the French Minister of Health shows up at our sitting .
In conclusion , it must be stressed that EU Member States allocate as much as 27 % of their GNP to social policy , compared to 15 % in the USA .
The question is whether the money is well spent .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , it seems to have taken the ' no ' vote in Ireland , the victory of the opponents of a communal Europe , to shake the Commission out of its lethargy .
The fact is that the Commission has long been distancing itself from the interests of the Union 's citizens by pursuing its neo-liberal policy .
The demand for a more socially responsible Europe has long been on the agenda .
It is downright embarrassing to see the omissions of past years finally being piled on the table at the end of this term of office .
I also find it brass-necked that the whole thing is being sold to us under the fanciful title of a new social agenda .
The issues under discussion in July should have been dealt with long ago .
When we examine their substance , it seems as though the Commission has not yet learned its lesson after all .
Apart from two exceptions , today 's proposals say nothing of solidarity , equal opportunities , social balance or public participation .
On the contrary , they are largely another product of a basic neo-liberal attitude .
The Commission calls for more mobility of labour .
At the same time , it is seeking court judgments that would reduce the protection of posted workers .
As an afterthought it says that we shall resolve the problem in a forum .
Workers , however , need protection , not a forum .
Do you really believe it will help people who are being deprived of their wages every day if you tell them to wait until you have discussed their problems in some forum ?
Moreover , Commissioner , the amended Works Council Directive , which is nine years overdue , does not deliver on your promises .
Parliament will have to make numerous improvements to this draft .
For example , there is no provision at all for sanction mechanisms .
Let us move on , though , to the subject of solidarity .
The Health Directive ignores criticism by opening the door to more market-driven health services , thereby undermining the principle of solidarity in the Member States ' welfare systems .
It jeopardises solidarity instead of bolstering it .
There are few components of this package that truly reflect people 's desire for a progressive European social policy .
One that I should like to highlight is the new directive against discrimination outside the workplace .
This instrument , however , was first announced in 2004 , and parliamentary pressure is the only reason why the Commission has finally presented it .
It is clear that a majority of Parliament will support this directive too .
It will likewise need improving in many places , however , especially as regards the rights of people with disabilities .
On the whole , the name ' social package ' is quite simply a misrepresentation .
In my opinion , the Commission 's record on social policy tells a sorry tale .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , in recent years your policy , the fundamentalism of the marketplace , has dangerously increased inequalities and eroded the welfare state .
The package you have presented to us with fine words is but an empty tunic .
Of the 19 proposals only 3 are of a legislative nature and one of these , the proposal for cross-border health services , introduces the Bolkestein directive by stealth , since it adopts a neoliberal stance .
While you utter these fine words in presenting this empty tunic , the Sarkozy government is playing a key role in the Council by passing a deplorable directive on working hours .
This constitutes a major social regression .
Rather than try to create a good impression with your fine words and keep an eye on the Euro elections , which are looking awkward since the Irish ' no ' vote , you would do better to propose specific measures and allocate revenues from the Community budget .
A word to Mr Schulz , too , if he is listening to me .
It is true that right-wing governments have contributed much to the demolition of the European social model .
In several countries , Mr Schulz , as in your country , Germany , or in the Netherlands or Austria , they have teamed up with the Social Democrats to destroy the European social model .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to use my speaking time today to focus on the health policy agenda .
The current proposal for the Directive on patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare has been improved significantly in relation to the original proposal .
However , unfortunately no change has been made in connection with the fundamental grounds for all matters that fall under the internal market .
Consideration for the free market always wins over consideration for the people .
It goes without saying that we all want to be able to receive the best treatment as quickly as possible if we become seriously ill .
Unfortunately , the directive does not in any way ensure that this will be the case .
It ensures that the wealthiest patients from the wealthiest countries in the EU will receive the best possible treatment .
This means that there is a great risk of patients becoming divided into a group A and a group B. The patients with the most resources will have the opportunity to seek the best treatment in other countries , whereas those without funds or power will not have this opportunity .
The directive secures an entitlement to treatment in another country at the cost of that same treatment in the patient 's home country .
This also creates the risk of having A and B countries .
The cost of the same treatment will naturally vary from country to country .
The current directive allows market conditions to determine the outcome , but this is a high-risk approach .
When the market reacts , the losers will always be those who cannot cope under the prevailing market conditions .
( DE ) Mr President , in my view , a European response to constant waves of price rises and increasing poverty is long overdue , and indeed it is gratifying that the new draft EU-wide social package makes a start in the right direction .
The intention to facilitate access to health care in other European countries , for example , is to be welcomed .
In practice , holidaymakers , for instance , are all too often shamelessly exploited today , being presented with doctors ' bills for which they are only partly reimbursed , if at all , when they go back home .
Conversely , individual Member States owe each other millions of euros - mere declarations of intent are not enough in such cases .
Nor is it sufficient to beat the drum for causes such as a better balance between family and working life .
So that more people can afford to have children , it is essential to act against wage dumping and social dumping - a task which , sad to say , is being largely neglected .
It is a travesty that the EU decrees , on the one hand , that public contracts must be put out to public tender and that the clause requiring successful tenderers to pay at least the statutory minimum wage is then revoked by the European Court of Justice on the grounds of incompatibility with the directives on services in the internal market and on the posting of workers .
In this the EU has shown its true colours as a purely economic community that fobs off the socially underprivileged with peanuts and empty words .
Empty catchphrases can no longer pacify the citizens of the EU , nor can they cushion the impact of a falling birth rate and increasing poverty .
Maybe you can say what you like on paper , but people are undoubtedly tired of empty promises .
Mr President , let me start by thanking Martin Schulz for reminding everybody that the centre-right is the largest grouping in this Parliament , that the centre-right has the largest number of Commissioners and , indeed , that the centre-right has the largest number of governments in the EU Member States .
I would remind him in turn that there is a reason for that : the reason is that it is what the people have decided .
The people have decided this because they have recognised the growing gulf between the rhetoric of the left and the reality , and they have rejected it .
I would also remind him , as a good democrat , to remember that the people are , of course , always right .
Turning to the social package in general , on our side we welcome the thoughtful comments of the Commissioner and his initiative regarding the revised Social Agenda , in particular the theme which reminds all of us that the EU is about people , about giving people more and better opportunities , and in particular equipping and empowering them to cope with the challenge of change .
I would just like to pick up three points very briefly from the excellent contribution from my colleague , Joseph Daul .
One is the important role here of the Member States , of subsidiarity .
Many Member States have different approaches , but all of them should take heart from the themes and the direction that he has outlined .
The second point is about the importance of jobs .
Harlem Désir talked very appropriately about the rights of workers .
We respect the importance of the rights of workers , but my political group would also highlight the rights of non-workers - those people who currently do not have a job , who have been frozen out of the job market for whatever reason , and who want to have a job .
They are increasingly important , especially in these difficult times of global credit crunch where unemployment is likely to get worse before it gets better .
So we have to make certain that everything that we do helps the creation of jobs and helps more individuals into those jobs .
The third point concerns small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which he also mentions .
I noted in yesterday 's Financial Times that there was a reference to the agreement within the UK regarding temporary workers , and the SMEs said that they had not even been consulted about that .
The point I would make is not a UK point , but there is a genuine problem - and I say this to the Commissioner - of really involving SMEs in the consultation process , because SMEs are not only the largest number of employers but they also have the largest number of employees .
We know from the problem of referenda - on the Lisbon Treaty , for example - that if you try to impose something from the top , it does not work : you have to connect with the people , and more people work for SMEs .
Finally , concerning European works councils - to which both the Commissioner and the President-in-Office have referred , and on which I am rapporteur - certainly my political group will recognise the reality that there has been welcome agreement from the social partners .
I personally do not like the agreement very much , but I absolutely welcome the fact that there is an agreement and I believe we in Parliament should try to build on that , as we will also try to build on the agreement regarding working time and temporary workers ; we wish to move fast , because we want to deliver real social progress rather than just make pretty political speeches with an eye to the next election .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
The Commission 's preliminary announcement of the social package filled the Social Democratic parties and citizens who feel responsible for resolving social problems with hope .
Accumulated debts and the series of questions that have just been asked have given an almost surprising picture of how little we have progressed despite our efforts and how many unsolved problems there are .
It is a fact that the economic growth of the last fifteen years has not closed the gap between rich and poor , but has actually widened it .
However , the rivalry of poverty has taken on a new dimension .
Every country has its poor people , and the amount and quality of poverty is different in individual Member States , but we know that it hurts in the same way .
However many of the eighteen or so documents indicated in the social roadmap are drafted , the identification of European citizens with the Union can only be reinforced by what is specific and obvious and offers the opportunity for common progress instead of reciprocal tension between rival poverties .
I am pleased that , after many requests from the Council and the European Parliament , the Commission has prepared an assessment of the situation of Roma and of the practices relating to them .
Unfortunately , however , it does not outline the framework of a long-term Roma policy .
Another question is whether this document does enough to exhort to concrete action , whether it holds out the prospect of an accurate assessment or of Member States failing to take steps and deviating from the desired practice .
I feel that the proper resolution is lacking .
We are also pleased about the anti-discrimination directive .
The Parliament and the Commission were divided about having to regulate the prohibition of discrimination in a comprehensive directive , and in accordance with the social-liberal viewpoint we ultimately failed to classify the groups that are discriminated against .
We can expect the directive to enable the comprehensive protection of people and groups who are threatened in many ways .
There is a very great need for this , since hate-mongers , racists and those who want to give only to the worthy may also find supporters among the rival poor .
Voters are always right , but they may be misled by populism .
Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a member and also Chairman of the Civil Liberties Committee , I shall confine myself to the proposal for an anti-discrimination directive .
First of all we congratulate you , Commissioner , on finally getting the Commission to adopt a proposal for a directive which seeks to counter discrimination based on religion , belief , disability , age and sexual orientation .
Until recently we were afraid - as you know , we were anxious and we made our anxiety known - that you might limit yourselves to a mini-directive dealing only with discrimination based on age and disability .
You will not be surprised to learn that I find it unfortunate , on a matter as fundamental as this , that the European Parliament is merely to be ' consulted ' , but my distinct impression is that the Presidency is amenable to any proposals or suggestions which the European Parliament might make .
So we shall get to work straight away , Commissioner , and I myself can see three aspects of the text which we shall try to improve .
Firstly we need to be more precise on a number of concepts or the demarcation between some of them .
I am thinking of the area of ' objectively justified ' differences in treatment .
I have no quarrel with these , obviously , but these objectively justified differences in treatment must not be allowed to metamorphose directly or indirectly into discrimination .
That can happen very quickly .
Secondly , the directive must not be stripped of its substance by the overhasty inclusion of notions like public safety or public order , as I think is currently happening in one big country in the south of the European Union , which shall remain nameless .
Thirdly , we must try harder on the question of sanctions .
When you write in Article 14 ' Member States shall lay down the rules on sanctions applicable to breaches of the national provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive ' , Commissioner , that does not get us very far .
In short , I trust that this directive , the repository of so much expectation , does not turn out in reality to be a big mini-directive , big on principles but very small on details .
( PL ) Mr President , economic growth should serve to improve the material situation of our societies .
However , in putting comfort and security first , we are liable to forget that the social model of the economy means in practice greater bureaucracy .
If we also forget that the surest foundation for social policy is economic growth , we may lose ourselves in fine-sounding slogans that have no connection with reality and may also , like the provisions on non-discrimination , breach the principles of subsidiarity and common sense .
How can we break the vicious circle ?
The new social agenda is only a partial answer to this challenge .
It talks too much about rights and privileges and too little about the fact that they cannot be guaranteed without a well-organised effort and responsibility for the economic effects at each stage .
From each according to his means , to each according to his needs .
That is a utopia that is bound to result in a shortage of goods and services of suitable quality .
Mr President , following on from my colleagues I would like to speak about the fight against discrimination .
First of all I would like to thank the Commission for its courage in coming with a horizontal approach in the draft directive on equal treatment outside the workplace .
We have to take into account that some Member States keep blocking the adoption of this necessary document .
Nevertheless , there is room for the European Parliament to make improvements .
I do not understand why there is an opt-out for private persons as regards supply of goods and services .
The existing Race Directive does not include such an opt-out .
Unfortunately , multiple discrimination is also not appropriately addressed in this draft , so I hope that we will all work on this directive further .
( FR ) Mr President , 51 years into their lifetime , the EU institutions are only now discovering the social dimension .
The discovery is only relative , because social concerns are conspicuously absent from the French Presidency 's priorities ; it is disturbing to institutions so close to the world of business and which confuse the general interest of the peoples of the Union with the private interests of money markets , and it is a discovery inescapably prompted by the Irish , Dutch and French ' no ' votes and the many social movements supporting wage demands in the Union .
Yes , the Commission and most of this House find themselves obliged to recognise that the Union is populated not only by shareholders and consumers , but also by the workforce , whose labour creates Europe 's wealth .
As a result the Commission finds itself obliged to dig out and dust off the directive on European works councils : this was a worthy initiative but its substance is poor .
European works councils must be made into a genuine forum for social democracy , giving employees the power of action they need to influence the strategy choices of their employers .
Yes , Europe urgently needs true social democracy to prevent bad moves such as raising working time to almost 70 hours a week .
So for the sake of the workers , let us move faster , much faster .
( SV ) Mr President , at this sitting we will be debating the renewed social agenda , the millennium goals and much else besides .
In a couple of hours we will vote on cultural programmes , the labelling of organic products , and requirements for harmonising taxation , all issues in which the Union should not involve itself at all .
This concentration of political power means that the distance between those governing and those governed increases .
Indignation is rising among citizens .
The establishment is forced to take increasingly tough measures to ride roughshod over the will of the people .
It would be far better to produce a report about what we mean by the term subsidiarity and have a thorough debate about that .
We should do that before we try to regulate centrally how the social partners should behave in 27 different countries .
In my own country there is great anger over the fact that the EU and its judges can take the liberty of controlling the establishment of a labour market system other than the one which has grown up amid considerable national unity over the past 70 years .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the proposed directive on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment , which prohibits any kind of discrimination outside the workplace , is a superfluous regulation which we should not discuss at all .
I should like to point out that discrimination is already prohibited by three EU directives , the UN Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms , the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
Equal treatment is also governed by the Amsterdam Treaty and the Lisbon Strategy .
I should also like to point out that the directive requires two very dangerous things .
It requires positive discrimination and it requires the principle of transferring the burden of proof from the prosecutor to the defendant .
This is contrary to European legal traditions and may give rise to injustices and new wrongs .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that the European Union is still a democratic and civilised area , where people with real abilities receive recognition , and an area which offers a helping hand to the weak .
However , human capabilities , either innate or developed through education , are individual and different in every person and thus logically unequal .
If we try to eliminate inequalities of this type through regulation , then we are arrogantly overlooking cultural diversity and interfering with the natural development of society , and worst of all , we are putting equality above the freedom of choice .
The directive on equal treatment should therefore not come into being at all .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , this social package will only be able to bear fruit and be effective if we are able to agree the substance of the key initiatives .
It is obvious that unemployment is the greatest of all social ills which we must combat .
It is what most destabilises a society and is at the root of other , lesser evils .
Therefore , the best social policy is one which helps create jobs .
We must move right away from the false dilemma between solidarity and competitiveness because they are not incompatible .
However , in order to construct a healthy , effective social policy and eradicate poverty , we need growth and stability .
Therefore our social model needs to come to terms with the new reality .
Globalisation also brings opportunities : those who adapt come out as winners , those who do not as losers .
Europe is facing neither a classic crisis of growth nor cyclical problems but profound changes ; the welfare of future generations depends on our wisdom to take good decisions today .
Population ageing and demographic decline have already reached Europe ; they are not a threat but a reality : closing our eyes to them will not help at all .
What answers can we give today to the many consequences of the trend ?
Very few .
For example , we do not have the tools or the incentives to make flexible , planned retirement possible which will allow our people to work beyond the average age at which people leave the labour market .
Achievement of a uniform level of protection against discrimination and exclusion is crucial but the mass of European legislation does not guarantee that discrimination has been eradicated ; accordingly , work to eradicate these bad social practices needs to start in schools .
School failure and drop-out rates are a tragedy of our times and may well be for the future .
We have much riding on this area ; this is where we have to focus our minds , focus the added value the Union can bring , to end the situation and put a stop to it .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , we do not need to abandon our social model , but renew it , giving it greater flexibility , greater mobility and greater security so that the most vulnerable are not left by the wayside .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Špidla for the fact that we have a social package at all because , as I have said many times before , his task in the Barroso Commission cannot be easy .
The package itself actually illustrates the tensions inside the Barroso Commission , between those , on the one hand , who want to stick to the neoliberal agenda come hell or high water , and those on the other who see an urgent need to make Europe matter to its citizens .
Our people need to be assured that Europe is part of the solution , and not part of the problem , when it comes to tackling the issues raised by globalisation , demographic change , climate change and other global challenges .
If that is what we need to do , I am sad to say that this package simply is not up to the task .
It is a grudging package of too little , too late .
Even the good elements are spoiled by the knowledge of just how grudgingly they were included .
The horizontal directive to combat discrimination is a good example .
It is in the package , but we all know just how bitterly President Barroso opposed its inclusion , right up to the 11th hour .
The European works council directive proposal is another example .
The content is extremely weak when compared to the earlier communication from the Commission to the social partners .
I think that the neoliberal forces in the Commission and their allies here need to wake up and recognise the reality we face .
Many millions of our citizens are living in fear , poverty and exclusion , and more and more have joined them during the Barroso years .
All in all , I see this as a belated attempt by President Barroso to persuade the Left here that he has a social conscience , and that he is worthy of support for a second term as Commission President .
Well I am not fooled , and many of my colleagues are not fooled either .
As I have said , it is much too little and much too late - much too late , in fact , to guarantee safe passage of the sparse worthwhile elements before the election next year .
President Barroso is insulting the intelligence not only of the Left in this House but also of the millions of citizens out there who deserve better .
Mr President , the Commission 's first year report on the European Globalisation Fund states that over 13 000 redundant employees in eight Member States are being helped .
3.7 % of available funds have been distributed .
Obviously it is very slow .
The Commission 's suggestions are to simplify procedures , broadly promote the programme , spread best experience and expand the duration of assistance , and I welcome these measures .
The fund was established to show solidarity with the redundant employees of companies failing due to globalisation .
Therefore it is most important that these funds reach real people who need help .
They shall not be distributed among intermediaries , trainers or brochure publishers .
In one year we will find out what the actual results are .
It is not how much money has been distributed , but how many redundant employees found new jobs .
I call on the Commission and Member States to establish proper criteria and benchmarks in order to evaluate the results achieved .
We must ensure efficient use of the European budget .
( PL ) Mr President , I am pleased to see that the new social agenda includes the revision of the directive on European Works Councils in the package of future activities .
We recently debated the problems caused by the lack of precision in the provisions of the directive , whose purpose was to ensure employees ' rights to information and consultation .
The directive on part-time work and combating poverty among workers in full-time employment is also exceptionally important .
I am hopeful about the emphasis on the situation of young people , their access to education and health care , and prevention of their exclusion .
The professional mobility of future workers is their chance in life , but it is also a chance for the economy .
The emphasis on the protection of patients ' rights is a fundamental requirement in the protection of public health provision .
However , the green paper on health sector employees which we are awaiting will be important for the implementation of these measures .
( PT ) Mr President , this so-called social package merely sows illusions regarding the seriousness of the social inequalities affecting the 80 million or so people who live in poverty , including the ever-increasing millions of poorly paid workers with insecure jobs and the millions of unemployed , while the scandalous profits of economic and financial groups and multinational relocations continue .
The real causes of this situation have been overlooked - the perpetuation of the neoliberal policies the proposed health services directive would intensify , the job flexibility the working time proposals would exacerbate , and the attack on public services and production sectors strategic to development .
We therefore call for a genuine social package that rejects the new proposed working time directive , promotes a reduction in the working day without loss of pay , revokes the stability pact and the liberal Lisbon Strategy , changes the European Central Bank 's criteria and false independence , creates an employment and social progress pact as an alternative , promotes investment and support for micro and small enterprises and public services , and respects the dignity of working people .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ' people are those who determine the value of things ' : so said the ancient Greeks .
Thus if people take responsibility for implementing this package presented to us today , if they can harmonise the old measures and proposals with the new , then these people will in fact not be used as resources , but will be active agents as employers , employees , the unemployed , those engaged in small and large businesses , men and women , the young and the elderly .
There will be no discrimination in the EU over democracy and subsidiarity , no jingoistic verbiage about who is in power , or about right- or left-wing affiliations , as has been heard here .
Next to me is my colleague Mr Őry , who tells me that in his country the socialist government is fighting against social benefits .
We cannot therefore blame the global crisis ; we must see things positively .
We must face our own , demographic crisis , in the best possible way .
Let us remember the old commitments , the Barcelona decisions on the harmonisation of family and professional life , the European Alliance for Families , the European Youth Pact , the common immigration policy and the enhancement of mobility in education and training for job mobility .
There must be respect for the diversity , traditions and language of migrant employees .
Social discrimination has to be opposed , and the rights of the weak and disadvantaged , and of children , have to be upheld as we in the European Union have championed them .
Poverty must be fought , so we shall devote the year 2010 to the struggle .
We must strengthen the social and territorial cohesion of our regions through dialogue , goodwill and transparency in the use of financial mechanisms .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I add my voice to those of my fellow Members who view this agenda as a step forward , albeit a very modest one which is clearly very far removed from the needs facing us today in Europe .
Therefore , Commissioner , I regret to say that you were wrong to state a moment ago that this agenda dispels public concerns .
The public are concerned and with very good reason when faced with a European Union which does not resolve the basic problems they worry about every day .
The agenda has a very grand title , the agenda for the 21st century .
Regrettably it has one feature which has already been condemned : it is an internal commitment to the contradictions within Europe , with those of us who want more of Europe and those who would like there to be less of it ; it is therefore a forest of empty rhetoric and a desert of specific content .
Only three directives are being summarised by the European left , and in fairly critical terms .
Are these Europe 's ambitions for the 21st century ?
No , Commissioner .
Debating social problems is not only our ambition .
The European Union , not just Europe , needs answers and it is very difficult for those answers to be achieved if , as the agenda states , they have to be found at national level .
There are some answers at national level and there should be other answers at European Union level ; the construction of the internal market should go hand in hand with rules which give it a human face , which prevent social dumping and which implement each and every one of the powers enshrined in the Treaties .
It is all very well to debate the problems but it would be better to resolve them and not create new problems with measures such as the working time directive .
Commissioner , Europe needs stronger initiatives ; Europe needs a much more go-getting agenda in order for it to be close to the public and I hope that at the next elections , and this is not an entirely rhetorical matter , the Europeans who are seeking other policies give European politicians a new , more social face .
Mr President , I welcome the long-awaited proposal on completion of the anti-discrimination package , which means that we can finally end the hierarchy of rights .
A European Union in which some Europeans are more equal than others has failed in its mission .
I completely concur with the wise words of Gérard Deprez : the directive needs substantial improvement .
It contains far too many escape clauses , which risk codifying existing discriminatory practices rather than ending them .
Family law and public order are , and remain , a national competence , but in practice they are being used - or misused - as a pretext for discrimination , mainly against homosexuals .
It is a shame that the Commission seems to be condoning this .
Freedom of religion is a fundamental right and one that I will defend ferociously , but it is an individual right : it is not a collective right for certain groups that entitles them to discriminate and not apply the law .
Finally , I would like to add that , ironically , this package seems to provide a higher level of protection against discrimination on all grounds apart from gender discrimination .
The gap between the directive on gender discrimination and this directive will have to be closed .
Mr President , the debate on the social package requires us to be critical , as , quite apart from the timing , which arouses suspicion about the hidden agenda , we also fundamentally disagree with its content .
The package has arrived at a time of increasing reaction and popular displeasure with the social face of Europe .
We are not the ones saying this ; none other than EU data are painting a gloomy picture of the future : such is the prevailing mood among European citizens , especially young people , and it is constantly getting worse .
Perhaps the package is aiming to restore citizens ' trust before the Euro elections .
We on the left cannot accept the contents of the package , since its legislative rules strengthen market liberalisation , as is the case with the proposed directive on cross-border health care , which is based on the previous Bolkestein proposals .
At the same time , the Commission 's proposal on cross-border health care is leading to class-based health segregation : the rich and educated are being given the option of shopping around for health care wherever it is in their best interests .
A more social Europe needs a broader philosophy , not the announcement of measures that scratch at the surface of the problems involved and remain within the narrow confines of the EU 's character today .
( DE ) Mr President , Europe is more than a common market .
Besides being an economic entity , Europe is a community based on common values .
I understand the European Union as a response to globalisation .
In a globalised world , a certain social framework at European level provides essential protection .
That is the idea behind the European social model , and it is an idea that I support .
On the other hand , however , we must also succeed in international competition .
In the Lisbon Strategy we emphasise our goal of developing the Union into the world 's most competitive knowledge-based economic framework .
To that end we must focus most of our attention on small and medium-sized businesses , for they are the pillar of economic development .
We must also accept that it is legitimate to ask how our rules affect these firms .
The anti-discrimination policy is a good example .
It goes without saying that I am opposed to discrimination , but in my view , and in the view of another 261 Members of the European Parliament , a comprehensive framework directive is not the right way forward ; in particular , it is not the right way to protect the victims .
We shall achieve the exact opposite and are more likely to marginalise these people .
A great deal of legal uncertainty has been created for the Member States and for European citizens .
At the present time , numerous Treaty infringement proceedings are pending against 14 Member States for failure to implement the four existing directives .
The first thing we should be doing is to implement the existing legislation before creating any new rules .
A new anti-discrimination directive will simply not give us the clarity that Commissioner Špidla promised .
The new rules raise many questions .
Who , for example , can invoke the right to freedom from discrimination on grounds of religious or ideological beliefs ?
Does that right extend to Scientologists or members of right-wing extremist groups ?
Is every restaurant , however small , now required to have a wheelchair ramp in order to guarantee unhindered access ?
The draft directive may provide for exemption from disproportionate measures , but how are such measures to be defined - by a national law or by a court ruling ?
Imprecise , amorphous instruments like the framework directive are impractical and , most importantly , do not help victims .
That is not the idea behind the European social model .
It will not work like that .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , at the time I was rapporteur for the social action plan presented to us by Mrs Diamantopoulou and completed under the previous French Presidency under Mrs Aubry .
What concerns me , ladies and gentlemen , is how European social ambitions have systematically crumbled away .
To my mind there are clear political reasons for this .
It is noticeable how the Commission always stresses that social policy must remain a national matter .
Commissioner , the social package contains very interesting working documents and statements , but only four legislative initiatives .
However welcome , that is certainly a very meagre result !
As if protecting social rights , creating a social level playing field , is no longer a European responsibility in the Europe of 27 .
Together with the EPP and the social organisations , we expect , on top of this social package , at least stronger legislation in regard to posting that protects social rights , better legislation to eliminate the wage gap between men and women , a framework law to protect social services and binding commitments in the fight against poverty .
What we need is a real social pact , with a coherent vision and a serious commitment to a social Europe , so that at least we show citizens that Europe is more than just a market .
I hope , Mr Bertrand , that we can for now count on the support of the French Presidency in this fight .
Mr President , for years I have campaigned with others for comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation to outlaw discrimination in access to goods and services for disabled people and older people .
I know that employment is covered on all grounds already , but for years we have been promised action and then nothing has happened .
Today we can say that we are on the brink of achieving that legislation , not just covering age and disability but sexual orientation and religion , as I called for in my report .
I would like to thank the Commission for bringing this forward and Commissioner Špidla in particular for his tenacity .
We know that the proposed legislation is not perfect and we will want to see changes .
It would also have been better if it had been subject to codecision .
But , having said that , I am delighted to be able to stand here and say that we are at long last on our way to seeing all EU citizens treated as equals .
Mr President , the so-called ' social package ' that the European Commission has presented is a failed attempt to defuse the indignation the Commission 's unpopular policy has aroused among employees .
It fails to stem the rising tide of doubt about itself and the structure of the EU , as also expressed by the resounding Irish ' no ' vote .
Working-class people and the poor find themselves in the line of fire because of a long , harsh , anti-popular attack by the EU , which aims to increase the profitability of its own cartels .
Working-class people and the poor have to put up with the deregulation and privatisation of public bodies and services of strategic importance , the complete breakdown of labour bargaining , the undermining of collective employment contracts , the widespread implementation of flexicurity , temporary flexible forms of employment and the extension of the Bolkestein directive to cover the health authorities sector .
The Council has decided to partition working time into active and inactive segments .
This obliges employees to work 65 to 77 hours a week .
The institution of heavy and unhealthy labour is rendering hundreds of thousands of Greek workers useless .
According to the formal statistical data from the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work - Mr President , please bear with me for a few moments , as the information I am about to impart is very important .
Let me point out the following : according to the formal data , every 4 ½ seconds an employee has an accident and every 3 ½ minutes an employee loses his life .
There are 7 million accidents every year ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by dealing with two points from the debate .
Firstly , Europe is not governed by the Right , but by the Liberal Centre-Right .
I must point out that we had a Social Democratic Government in my own country , and five million people were unemployed when it left office .
Today we have three million unemployed , which means that two million people are back in work today .
That is real social policy ; that is social progress .
Secondly , as a Member of this House , I personally feel angry when we ourselves speak so badly of our European ideal .
Europe is a social project today .
When I think that the single market is creating millions of jobs and is giving people prosperity and good prospects and that our cohesion policy , our European Social Fund , is providing us with billions to practise solidarity on a European scale , to be a model of European solidarity , I must urge everyone , in spite of all our problems , to refrain from denigrating our own project .
I should like to devote special attention to the discrimination issue , because we are dealing with it in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
Everyone rejects discrimination .
It poisons our society , and Europe must set an example in the fight against discrimination .
Everyone in this House , I hope , will endorse that view .
Nevertheless , questions may be asked .
Firstly , does the directive constitute a proportionate measure ?
The issue of the burden on small businesses has already been addressed .
Secondly , what about the implementation of the present legal provisions ?
An evaluation has already been made on paper , but what is the position on the ground with regard to the application of the existing directives ?
That question has to be asked before any new directives are created .
Thirdly , do we really have gaps in European legislation ?
Does Europe have sole responsibility for social policy ?
All Member States of the EU are democracies , and they all have structures built on the rule of law .
We must therefore ask whether there is any compelling need for Europe to be nicer , kindlier and more convincing in the realm of social policy .
Can we not just rely for once on subsidiarity working and the Member States managing to cope with their own tasks in these fundamental areas of activity ?
( PL ) Mr President , social Europe is a splendid goal , and a great deal has already been done towards achieving it .
Nevertheless , the existing inequalities and the new challenges facing the world create the risk of permanent social divisions in our societies at many levels : between children from rich and poor families , between the well and less well educated , between men and women , between immigrants and those who have been Europeans for generations , between persons of different sexual orientations , different ages or in different states of health .
I could give many other examples .
The struggle against inequality in and outside the workplace is a fundamental task for us .
The European Union and the Member States must respond to real needs , create real opportunities and new hopes in the interests of all the citizens of Europe .
The new package of Commission initiatives in the field of the European social model is a long overdue and incomplete supplement to activities undertaken at national level in the struggle to improve the standard of living of European citizens , reinforce their rights and combat discrimination .
I am hopeful that the new directive on equal treatment , which as a socialist group we have long been demanding , will enable us to say we are really combating all forms of discrimination .
Revision of the directive on European Works Councils , which is at present fulfilling its role as an instrument for social dialogue , is a positive element in the social package .
We still have to contend with incomplete protection of workers in the drastic restructuring processes imposed by globalisation .
Legislation on social policy is also of enormous importance for the political awakening of Europe and Europeans and the restoration of faith in a common project , especially in view of the institutional crisis and the imminent elections to the European Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , the long and lively debates we have had on the European Globalisation Fund ring in my ears to this day .
Our fellow Member Mrs Bachelot , with whom I worked on this fund along with Mr Cottigny , persuaded us to take some extremely important decisions .
And what do we see today ? Barely 4 % of the aid budgeted for this European fund was distributed in 2007 .
You have already indicated , Commissioner , verbally and in writing , that you plan to revise the criteria .
Is this revision of the criteria adequate to deal with the issues ?
No , it is not !
When 96 % of this aid is not being used , we really have to ask the basic question : is our aim in adopting this decision on the European globalisation fund appropriate ?
We face demographic challenges , as you said , and we face many economic challenges , given the reality of globalisation , of technology .
I urge you Commissioner , on this Globalisation Fund , not only to revise the criteria but also to look at the very purpose of what we are doing here .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot conceal my disappointment at the statements from the Council and the Commission .
Many words were spoken about the European social model , and some of the Commission 's proposals overshoot the mark , in my opinion - my fellow group members have made several points about the anti-discrimination directive .
When it comes to the nuts and bolts of legislation designed to protect workers , however , the Council and the Commission bottle out .
The President-in-Office did , however , refer to the compromise adopted in June on agency and other temporary work , but somehow or other - I believe it was out of shame - the Council and the Commission managed to adopt the Working Time Directive .
What the Council adopted in June , I have to say , is by no means a glorious chapter in the history of Europe 's social model .
Before I entered Parliament , I was a doctor on the staff of a hospital , and I know that many salaried doctors and many other employees were initially pleased when the European Court of Justice ruled that time spent on call constituted working time .
I also know , however , that there are difficulties in implementing this ruling and that time spent on call may have to be weighted on the basis of costs and frequency of call-outs .
What the Council has done , however , in virtually reversing the ruling of the Court of Justice and even ignoring the improvements that the Commission 's proposal had made to some aspects of the previous legal position is unacceptable .
We need a compromise , and this Parliament pointed the way at first reading with proposals such as the use of a quotient .
But if a doctor is on call in a hospital , for instance , and a patient with a life-threatening condition could arrive at any moment , that cannot be regarded as a rest period , which would be possible under the Council 's compromise .
This is another area where further improvement is needed , otherwise the whole debate on the European social model will serve no purpose .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , current economic and social circumstances call for a strengthened social Europe .
Whereas 16 % of today 's European population is on the bread line , discrimination is still marked and generally widespread .
Economic policies increasing unemployment , and insecurity , deepen citizens ' crisis of confidence at the expense of Europe and its prospects .
In this context , the renewed social agenda represents a step forward in the field of social legislation after a long period of inertia .
Nevertheless , only three of the raft of proposals are legally binding while the rest are recommendations and non-legislative communications .
We are therefore coming to the conclusion that the new social package will have a limited effect on the lives of European citizens .
The intentions are good , as can be seen from the new draft directive against discrimination .
This represents an important success for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , since it supported the proposal for a horizontal directive in order to end the hierarchical system of Community protection from discrimination .
Nevertheless , the new social agenda appears to lack ambitious goals and clarity , and has serious shortcomings .
For this reason , clear policy measures , a halt to rapidly increasing inequalities , and the improvement of living and working conditions are required .
( HU ) Mr President , the Commissioner summed up his expectations beautifully in his speech , but the documents available to us do not reflect that .
There is a small , tiny semantic problem : discrimination must not be called the widening of opportunities .
I have been speaking only about the segregation of Roma children for four years .
In addition to this , half our children , several million Roma children , are classified as disabled .
What is this , if not discrimination ?
Omitting the topic of segregation when creating the Horizontal Directive is an unforgivable crime .
Commissioner Barrot should be involved in the work too , and Parliament 's demands should not be left out either !
We want , in at least four resolutions , a Roma integration package with legislation and a budget , and a group to coordinate the Committees in the interests of implementing any future programmes effectively .
Commissioner Špidla cannot resolve this matter by himself .
Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the document on the social package which has just been presented represents a major challenge for European development in the context of the Lisbon strategy , which European decision-makers adopted as the guideline for a worthwhile and unstoppable process aimed at integrating , modernising and developing our common home .
The package contains measures in the areas of employment , social affairs , education , youth , health , the information society and economic affairs , all fundamental aspects which directly affect the daily lives of us all , as European citizens , and which must therefore be the subject of thorough , coordinated and above all transparent study .
As a member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to emphasise the importance of and the need for this proposal which , in tackling the areas just mentioned , makes a comprehensive attempt to grasp , examine and resolve topics such as demographic change , globalisation and the importance of the human factor .
I am pleased that the Commission intends to review Directives 92 / 85 and 96 / 39 in terms of maternity leave as this is a move to improve the quality of family life for all those women who , whilst caring for a family , have to face the world of work on a daily basis .
I would like the Commission to answer a couple of questions in connection with the fight against poverty - and I am not talking here about third world poverty but about poverty within the boundaries of the Community - a problem which looms larger every year , affecting every single member of the European Community .
In this connection I would like to ask : what specific methodology will the Commission employ in order to resolve a problem which year after year , as I said , is systematically afflicting the European economies and , as a result , impacting directly on the standard of living of millions of European citizens ?
Secondly , I would like to know - and as a woman I feel directly involved in this matter - what action the Commission intends to take against the discrimination against women which still persists in society , even in 2008 , especially in the field of employment and specifically as regards salaries ?
What specific measures can be put in place to end this imbalance ?
In conclusion , I would like to thank Commissioner Špidla for his work in drafting this document .
I would like to thank the Council representatives and once again I would like to stress the importance of this social package in the context of the revised social agenda .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Minister , Commissioner , as well as welcome proposals in the field of anti-discrimination and cross-border health care , the social agenda of the Commission contains the long-awaited proposal on European Works Councils .
The Commission also opposes the review of the directive on posting , a directive that has come under fire after some very controversial judgments by the European Court of Justice .
I want to touch briefly on both subjects .
First of all , the rights of European workers to be informed and consulted .
We all know what the problem is there .
Too little compliance ( only one of the three firms concerned has a European Works Council ) , information and advice rights are not sufficiently regulated and there is a lack of facilities .
I very much regret that the Commission has not proposed a policy of penalties for non-compliance .
In my view , too , the subsidiary provisions fall short of what is desirable and has been agreed in good models , namely several regular meetings a year , which can easily be arranged with the necessary training and support .
One meeting a year is not much more than symbolic policy and social consultation in the undertaking is much too important for that .
Secondly , the Secondment Directive .
In the first restriction by the European Court in regard to the working conditions in force in a Member State , it still seemed to be about a policy change in European law , initiated by the Court , without the support of the European legislator .
After the Luxembourg case , it is clear that the Commission too is deliberately bent on dismantling the principles contained in the directive .
What was once intended as a directive to protect workers against exploitation and unfair competition in the cross-border supply of services has thus , thanks to the Court of Justice and the Commission , become a threat to the obligations applicable in a Member State in regard to the working conditions to be observed .
The Commission needs to assume its legislative responsibility in this area again and make certain that in future Member States remain able to apply their generally applicable rules on employment law and collective agreements .
( DE ) Mr President , I merely have a list of questions to ask .
Why so little so late ?
Why did we declare last September that 2008 was to be the year of Social Europe but not regard social welfare as one of the priorities of the Council Presidency ?
Why did the Right wage such a lengthy struggle against social rights in the Services Directive if they are portraying themselves today as true advocates of social justice ?
Why did my committee vote in July against the Hamon report and in favour of the Handzlik report , the exact opposite of what has been stated here today ?
Why have these things happened ?
Please be honest and say what you are really doing instead of giving the public the opposite message .
I simply must ask you to do that ; it is really vital .
But why do you pursue such policies ?
Purely and simply because you on the Right have espoused the wrong philosophy .
You assume that people are there to serve the economy .
We Socialists take the opposite view , namely that the economy is there to serve the people , and we must fashion our policies accordingly .
( RO ) I was hoping these proposals would stimulate the reduction of social gaps between the European citizens .
Unfortunately , the package only faces us with another gap , the one between good intentions and the necessary instruments for achieving them .
This also happens where there is a European regulation requiring Member States to take action .
An example is the wage discrimination against women in the labour market .
There is legislation in this field , repeated commitments , yet without any improvement over the last eight years .
Even supposing that employers had understood the economic advantages of correct payment and their legal obligations , difficulties are insurmountable .
A system of non-discriminatory labour assessment to represent the common criterion for comparing different activities is missing .
Without it , the principle of equal pay for work of equal value remains an illusion , as well as the reduction of the industry gap .
Job classification systems are defective , if they exist .
We already have Court decisions admitting that , by using physical work as a basis , they ignore various abilities required for labour and create discriminations .
The method of open coordination has praiseworthy social objectives , but even the indicators measuring some of these objectives are missing from the list of common indicators .
The conclusion is sad : the lack of interest in gender issues is equalled only by the lack of political will for effective common regulations in the labour market .
( IT ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite all the analyses and studies , including those regarding the proper transposition of the anti-discrimination directives , the key elements are still effectiveness and innovation .
How is it possible to draft the projected new so-called ' horizontal directive ' , which at the moment is nothing more than an extension beyond the workplace of protection in a number of areas , when the question of positive action is still being regarded in terms of safeguarding non-prohibited measures rather than seeking new measures ?
There is a small - but too timid - sign of progress in the call for a renewed general commitment in this field , ending with the call for better application of instruments devoted to the Roma , as if invoking something which we have not managed to achieve .
Are we just writing rhetoric ?
In this context , I fear that we are !
For example , it seems pointless at this stage putting questions to the Commission and highlighting cases of discrimination or failures on the part of national or sub-national legislation .
Too often , indeed almost always , the response merely refers to the existence of European protective legislation : fresh water , no progress , silence !
Nonetheless , we are debating the cardinal principal of equal treatment and I am referring to cross-border posted workers .
Perhaps the new social agenda is a good exercise , but the package of proposed topics is more reminiscent of a puzzle , comprising cards not yet stacked at the end of a parliamentary term which has finalised a series of measures aimed at a genuinely innovatory project .
Talking of discrimination and stereotypes , Minister , please thank your President for the tie .
( CS ) Mr President , in light of the fact that the words ' too little too late ' have already been uttered many times when assessing the social package , I shall give my assessment : the mountain has given birth to a mouse .
My question is : ' what have you been doing for four years ? '
You have been putting forward socially unacceptable proposals , the culmination being the Working Time Directive so highly vaunted by the Council and the Commission .
As a result , there is no option but to regard the proposed social package , despite some of its positive aspects , as propaganda aimed at attaching the label ' social ' to the European Commission 's letterhead .
Most of the proposals need not be discussed at all , so it is nothing more than a flash in the pan .
It is quite easy to proclaim that the common market is for the people and not the people for the market and that , if binding rules are to be laid down on the behaviour of companies in the market , then it is necessary to lay down minimum rules on the position of EU employees , a minimum wage set as a percentage of the average wage in all Member States , the same treatment and the same wages for employees working in countries other than their own .
It is enough to declare that the Union upholds observance of the International Labour Organization conventions on maximum working time , freedom of trade union association and collective bargaining .
Competition between Member States as to who has the lowest taxes and wages and the least transparency in the position of trade unions will happily continue and the open method of coordination is just another ineffective way of dealing with something that nobody wants to do .
To those who criticise the French Presidency , I should like to say : ' Wait until the Czech Presidency .
You ain 't seen nothing yet . '
A few weeks ago , the President vetoed an act prohibiting discrimination , saying it was superfluous .
( DE ) Mr President , I feel compelled to say that this social agenda leaves me stone-cold .
Not a single nettle has been firmly grasped .
This surely cannot be a serious attempt to reform European works councils , since it makes no provision for more meetings or for sanction mechanisms in the event of infringements .
The absence of any willingness to reform the Posting of Workers Directive is equally unacceptable .
Commissioner , the lack of a clear position on working hours in a social agenda is further evidence that this Commission does not baulk at the idea of 65-hour working weeks either .
This no longer bears any relation to the European social model to which my group aspires and which we Socialists are seeking to establish .
May I also say to the Council that it is intolerable how you are putting management and labour organisations under pressure - to put it politely - over the European works councils .
My group will not have any part in this charade .
If Europe 's labour force is not to turn its back completely on the European Union , we must afford it better protection from the effects of globalisation and waste no time in paving the way for cross-border collective wage agreements .
( RO ) I would like to raise for discussion some ideas regarding the legislative package in the Social-European agenda .
I appreciate very much the European Commission 's initiatives in this field and those presented in its communication named " Improving competencies for the 21st century - European cooperation on schools . ”
In addition to these initiatives , I would like to propose to the European Commission to launch a pilot project for creating a European scholarship for children in economically and geographically disfavoured regions .
At European level , 19 million children and young people are subject to poverty and 6 million abandon high school every year .
In Romania , for instance , according to a Eurobarometer study , young people in the rural environment and those in mountain or isolated regions have a 5 % chance of attending higher education .
This percentage is very far from the European Union 's 85 % objective of young people who have access to secondary university education .
Member States lack the necessary financial means to remedy this worrying situation themselves .
Consequently , the European Union should fight by any possible means , such as legislation , funds , European policies , to promote the opportunities and access of all young people to education .
Mr President , the leader of the ALDE Group , Mr Watson , says that a job is the best social welfare .
Unfortunately there are too many millions of people in Europe working for less than what they might get if they were drawing social welfare .
The poor and the low-paid die younger , suffer more physical and mental illness , are hospitalised more , are imprisoned more , are excluded from participating fully in society , are denied full cultural , civil , social , and indeed secure lives , and their children are largely condemned to the same vicious cycle of deprivation - unless , that is , we as politicians pursue social and economic policies which are integrated and interdependent .
People must be treated as citizens , not as economic units .
Does this agenda achieve this ?
Regretfully , no .
This is not to deny the positive elements - for instance the horizontal directive on discrimination .
Nor indeed do I deny that Commissioner Špidla has struggled hard in a hostile environment to get this package approved .
We will work with him to make it better .
The Commission and the Council have nine months to prove their bona fides on social Europe .
The people will then give their verdict .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we are today discussing very important issues of employment , social rights and health protection .
All of this has a dimension in relation to the family , the basic unit of society .
It also concerns those with disabilities , retired persons and pensioners , as well as the very painful problem of unemployment .
Establishing a proper relationship between pay and work , together with dignified social security , is not some sort of favour .
It is a duty imposed on us by our concern for the future of Europe .
The funds allocated to social policy by the Member States must be better directed , as must the European Social Fund .
Our continent is now ageing very quickly .
But do we see the shortcomings of European policy on the family ?
What do we have to say about family incomes ?
Where is our solidarity with the poor ?
I use the word solidarity advisedly at a time when we are celebrating the 28th anniversary of the establishment of the Solidarity movement and trade union , which contributed to the great changes that have taken place in Europe .
( RO ) I am glad that today we are discussing the relaunching of the social package .
Europe needs social progress , Europe in general , with its old or new members .
The united Europe is dealing with the same challenges : demographic ageing , loss of jobs from the perspective of globalization , poverty among children
Commissioner Špidla , I welcome your approach of the issue of solidarity between generations .
We need a new stimulant in this matter , but I equally welcome the reiteration of the idea of solidarity between regions because it is here that we can measure most accurately social cohesion or its absence .
( SV ) Mr President , I apologise for my late arrival .
I had a meeting in Sweden late last night and have only just arrived .
I do not know what has been discussed already but let me start by saying that we naturally welcome the social package .
We think that it is a little bit late and that it could have been launched earlier in the term , but at least we have got it now .
It is clear that ambitions in the European Parliament are somewhat greater than those in the package , but I would nevertheless like to highlight three positive elements which we can work on .
I personally work a great deal with the judgments of the European Court of Justice and their consequences .
I welcome the more open attitude we are now seeing in the Commission , such as the forum which is now to be held .
I hope it will be a success .
Another positive thing is the ILO Convention , which is also linked to the judgments of the European Court of Justice , in that the Member States are urged to sign the ILO Convention .
Thirdly , the social integration programme , which will be presented in October and the fight against poverty , exclusion , etc .
I hope that we will be able to work on these issues successfully together .
They are incredibly important .
Mr President , if you have a market at European level - which we do , with the single European market - you of course need common rules for that common market so that it works fairly and efficiently , not least in the social field .
That is why we set employment standards and employment law and rules to protect workers ' rights - the Working Time Directive , health and safety legislation , the Parental Leave Directive , information and consultation of workers .
Yet the British Conservative Party - and I see that there is not a single member of that party present in the Chamber to discuss this at the moment - wants the United Kingdom to opt out completely from the Social Chapter of the Treaty , should they ever come back to power in the United Kingdom .
Do they think for one moment that the rest of the European Union would accept that one single Member State opts out of the obligations that we have jointly developed at European level to govern our market ?
Do they really think that sort of unfair competition , by lowering health and safety standards and weakening the rights of workers , would be acceptable ?
Of course it would not !
The British Conservatives are a recipe for disaster for Britain and for Europe .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , an impassioned debate , but a debate on social Europe , and the fact that we are having this debate is proof of a meeting of minds .
Our debate also shows how hard it is , nowadays , to separate the consideration of social issues at Community level from policy debates at national level .
It proves too , in a way , that we are making progress on European integration .
Some people have levelled accusations at the Presidency .
I shall not go into the detail of those accusations .
I am not here to argue - like you , I am here to move social Europe forward .
Is social Europe a priority for the French Presidency ?
The question has been asked .
The clear answer is yes , and , as you well know , on this we shall all be judged not by our aspirations at the outset , our initial ambitions , but purely by what we have achieved .
We know now that there is a greater likelihood of achieving those results , results that are positive , and positive for social Europe .
I am a firm believer in pragmatism .
On these various subjects , then , as President Nicolas Sarkozy said in his address to Parliament - works councils , temporary work - we are committed to getting the first one finalised , whilst the second is currently in Parliament 's hands , as I said .
And , I say again , we shall all shortly have to stand up and be counted .
I will not dwell on questions such as whether a conservative government might be more ' social ' than another .
I would just say that I myself , in France , am Minister for Labour Relations and Solidarity .
Because if you want to share wealth , you first have to create it .
And how do you create it ?
Through labour .
That is how you create wealth .
Nor do I want to mention that back then , in 1993 , when the famous working time directive was put forward , it was a French Socialist government and a Socialist minister - Mrs Aubry - who defended this directive and its opt-out .
And what are we doing today about this famous directive ?
Let us look at it realistically : does it or does it not represent an improvement on the current situation , where we are in a veritable no man 's land after 48 hours ?
Everyone knows it in all honesty .
Only it is important to say that whilst this directive may not necessarily embody the initial 1993 idea , which was to get rid of the opt-out , it now provides a framework and additional guarantees for today 's , not yesterday 's situation .
Can we say that ?
Certainly we can , because I believe that public debate and political debate should be instructive .
Either opt-outs continue , and are properly regulated , because we now know from the case-law to date that on-call time is a major issue .
Or we can be pragmatic , take the view that it represents progress and accept a revision which will resolve some issues and improve the position , even though obviously today 's outcome will not necessarily please everyone and I am well placed to appreciate that .
Then there is the matter of the Court rulings .
This is not about judging a judgment , far from it .
But we need to look at today 's situation in the light of the Court judgments .
What is the new legal position ?
And we need to hear the views of the states primarily affected .
I have discussed this with my opposite numbers .
The social partners must also give their views on the subject , and not necessarily separately .
Together would be far better , so that we can draw our conclusions accordingly .
As far as this is concerned the Presidency will bring no preconceived ideas to the debate .
Should the directive be revised ?
I have heard the question repeatedly and not only in this House .
The answer to it should , I believe , come after the debate and not necessarily at the start of it .
Otherwise that means one has preconceived ideas , and I do not .
On the matter of social services of general interest , it seems to me that all Member States are keen to preserve the organisation of the general service remit that is specific to each individual country .
But let 's face it , there is disagreement as to what should be done at Community level .
Some take the view that subsidiarity is the only answer , whilst others think there should be a Community legal framework .
This , clearly , is not going to be decided in a hurry .
Our proposal for a roadmap with the Commission is an attempt to ensure that these issues are addressed properly in line with the Union 's timetable .
Many other exciting topics have been raised .
On action against discrimination , the Presidency has promised to move the new directive forward .
Finalising this , as you know , requires unanimity of the Member States .
On a number of occasions I have heard the word availability mentioned .
That is most fitting , because efficacy requires availability .
We have to be clear about this now .
Is social Europe able to progress or not ?
For me the answer is a resounding yes , and we must move social Europe forward .
Are we not well into 2008 ?
We are , I agree .
Is it too late ?
Certainly not !
It is never too late .
Have we the desire to move forward ?
Obviously we do .
But the question is this : are we going to move social Europe forward together ?
Here , ladies and gentlemen , is where we must all stand up and be counted !
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the depth and passion of the debate has clearly shown that a social Europe is on the march again .
The debate has touched upon a whole series of detailed problems and I think that there is no need to respond to them individually , since there will be opportunities in future discussions to pursue the arguments and find an appropriate balance .
Nevertheless , I should like to respond to certain things more generally .
First of all , this agenda , since it is so wide-ranging , considers a social agenda and social policy to be a manifestation of a complex political approach and to be the consequence of a complex approach in a whole series of policies .
It is clearly a mainstream concept , in no way a social policy pushed to the side , with a series of undoubtedly interesting and technical aspects , but nonetheless clearly marginalised .
This agenda has put social policy at the heart of European politics .
Of course , the question arises as to whether this agenda , and I think this should quite seriously be dismissed , is not simply of technical political interest .
It is not , since the approach to it was formulated years ago .
It is also included in a whole range of European Commission documents which have also been discussed by Parliament .
It is not associated with any significant event , as the Irish referendum was , for example .
This agenda shows , among other things , that the Commission has been decisive in designing the agenda as a procedure which attempts to use all the instruments available to the European Commission at European level , legislation , the open method of coordination and all other methods .
It therefore contains not only legislative proposals , but also , of course , proposed communications and proposals for other documents .
I wish to emphasise that this agenda is realistic within the options that can be influenced by the European Commission .
The different proposals will undoubtedly be debated in Parliament and they will clearly be amended on many occasions but , nonetheless , they are real proposals which can be discussed .
The debate also raised the thought , albeit only partially , and I think I should respond to it , that the proposals in the field of health care are some kind of back door into the Bolkestein directive in the field of health care .
This is not the case .
These proposals are not designed as the free provision of services , but will facilitate Europeans ' access to health care .
These proposals undoubtedly include a whole series of very delicate aspects and it is clear that they will be discussed seriously and in depth but , nevertheless , their basic trend and consequence will be an improvement in health care for European citizens .
Another thought which I should like to emphasise is the idea of combating poverty .
This idea of combating poverty is clearly formulated and the debate has brought out the question : ' by what methods ? '
The agenda does not assume that there is just one effective method for combating poverty , but aims to attack poverty from different angles .
Attempting to limit early school-leaving combats poverty .
Attempting to open up access to life-long learning combats poverty .
The clearly formulated intention that retirement systems should emphasise equity and social effectiveness also combats poverty .
The issue of discrimination and the directives concerning anti-discrimination are also ways of combating poverty , since opening up access for people who are disabled , preventing discrimination against people who have grown old in service , and so on also combat poverty .
The question also arose about equal opportunities for men and women .
I should like to say that other directives cover equal opportunities for men and women and , in view of this , it was not essential to explicitly include equality between men and women in the proposed directive .
There was also a debate in relation to ILO conventions .
I should like to emphasise clearly that this agenda undoubtedly shows how strongly the Commission and Europe are engaged with the concept of decent work on a global level .
Just like the directive which will implement the agreement between workers and employers in the maritime field , it is a clear indication of how Europe views the different ILO conventions .
In all the documents , the European states are invited to ratify the entire collection as quickly as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate was deep and , at times , tough .
I think that it is a debate which indicates the significance of European social policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session , somewhere in Europe .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Mr. President , following the conventional statements according to which 2008 shall be the year of relaunching social Europe , the so-called social package represents a set of legislative initiatives whose convergence remains in the phase of intention for the moment .
Maybe the time has come for us to approach more firmly and diligently a set of matters whose direct impact on the citizens is greater than ever .
Under these circumstances , we need to undertake the mission of ensuring non-discriminatory living and working conditions for all the Community citizens .
First of all , in this context , resuming discussions on a Community minimum wage seems not only opportune but also necessary .
Secondly , the same thing is also valid for creating unitary conditions in all the EU countries regarding the Community labour market .
It is not right that , even today , the attitude of several EU governments toward the European citizens is differentiated according to their country of origin .
In the same context , the Commission 's initiative to improve the visibility and work methods under the EU Strategy on social integration and protection and to consolidate its interaction with other policies appears to be significant .
I gladly took note of the Commission 's proposal for a horizontal directive on combating discrimination in fields other than employment .
in writing . - ( HU ) One of the most important results of the European Commission 's renewed social policy agenda must be the restoration of the appropriate rights of European Roma as European citizens and the halting of their social exclusion .
I am pleased that the document supports this .
In the areas mentioned by the Agenda , the Roma are in a substantially worse situation than the majority of society in the areas of education , employment , living conditions , discrimination and health .
Lifelong learning programmes that give Roma suitable skills for employment and self-employment could be a useful tool in the fight against unemployment .
Anti-discrimination tools must be transplanted into national rights so that those who suffer from discrimination can turn to the courts , and the national authorities and equal opportunities bodies can recognise and impose sanctions for infringements .
The Structural Funds could be much more effective in reducing the social exclusion of Roma but , in order to achieve this , at least the right of discussion has to be given to Roma NGOs in selecting , planning , implementing and evaluating projects that are financed by the Funds , and programmes to equip Roma NGOs for preparing the successful bids that are necessary must be started up .
We hope that the Social Policy Agenda will be able to provide suitable answers to these questions .
I feel it is important that we are able to discuss these topics at the large-scale Roma conference being organised on 16 September , and I hope that the question of social inclusion of the Roma will be put on the agenda of the European Council both separately and as part of the social agenda .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's social package is a long-awaited reform to the building of the Union 's social dimension .
Like many of my colleagues , however , I would like to have seen the Commission adopt a slightly bolder and more ambitious approach to its proposals and reforms .
In my opinion , the package was especially wanting when it came to safeguarding basic public services .
The package does , however , contain many good proposals .
I would especially like to thank the Commission for deciding , after long deliberations , to draw up a horizontal anti-discriminatory directive that covers all grounds for discrimination .
Citizens who encounter discrimination in different forms and for different reasons should not be treated unequally .
The horizontal approach is the only real way of guaranteeing equal treatment for all .
Furthermore , the proposal to strengthen the role of the European Works Councils is very welcome .
The proposal for a directive on patients ' rights in cross-border health care , which received relatively less publicity , will have a tangible impact on the ordinary lives of many Europeans .
With European borders opening up and increased opportunities in the health care sector , it is especially important to clarify who is responsible for a patient 's health and how far that responsibility extends .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive is a welcome clarification of pan-European rules .
Despite its shortcomings , the package is definitely a step in the right direction , and I hope that the Commission will continue its efforts to improve the feelings that European citizens have about social security in the years to come .
In this connection , I would like to urge the Commission to get on with its plans to draft a directive on extending maternity leave from 14 to 18 weeks .
May the directive become future practice as quickly as possible .
I would like it , however , if the Commission 's proposal were to focus in particular on extending parental leave and thus improve the rights and opportunities of both parents to stay at home after their child is born .
in writing . - ( ET ) Martin Schultz is undoubtedly right to say that the social package could have been stronger .
The Commission should have produced the package sooner so that we could have dealt with this important matter , not as the elections approach but sooner , when there was time to weigh up all the nuances of this important package carefully , and it is undoubtedly important .
Among other things , I would like to pick out the Commission communication on the European Globalisation Fund .
Although it has provided assistance to several thousand people in , for example , Germany , France , Portugal and Finland , the survey for 2007 shows that a fairly large proportion of the Fund was not used .
Textile workers in Lithuania received compensation from the EGF in August .
This is a good sign that the new Member States too can successfully seek assistance to help with the changes globalisation requires .
The Commission will soon investigate the criteria on which decisions to grant assistance are based .
I would like to stress that in small countries like Estonia many businesses have had to lay off hundreds of people because of globalisation .
Simplifying the process of applying for EGF assistance would undoubtedly make it possible for assistance for those people to be simplified too .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Treaty of Lisbon acknowledges the fact that the Union should rely on a social market economy that provides its citizens with access to decent work and life conditions , education , health and social protection services .
The Union 's population is getting older .
If , in 2007 , citizens over 65 years of age represented 17 % of the Union 's population , in 2030 this percentage will reach 24.6 % .
The latest Eurostat statistics show that , as of 2015 , the number of deaths will exceed the number of births , thus leading to a decrease in the number of European citizens from 521 million in 2015 to 506 million in 2060 .
Under these circumstances , migration seems to remain the main population growth factor in the Union .
Yet , migratory flows affect Member States differently .
If , between 1985 and 2007 , Ireland recorded a 21.8 % population growth , in Bulgaria the population decreased by 14.4 % during the same period .
What are the solutions that the social package provides to these challenges ?
The Union citizens are waiting for firm actions for the creation of well-paid jobs , the guarantee of access to quality education , health and social protection services .
The social package represents the insurance policy for the future of the Union and it is essential for its long-term development .
in writing . - There is no doubt that the European social model needs to be reformed .
Especially , that the outdated welfare system still dominates in many of the larger Member States .
Any talk of a European social model seems like a step in the wrong direction .
No social agenda or social policy document published by the Commission is likely to promote real economic growth or job creation .
With the US economic crisis swiftly appearing on the shores of our continent , our governments should react to make sure that our citizens feel as little of the negative impact of a recession as possible .
EU bureaucracy will not stop an economic crisis or a recession .
Member States should focus on liberalising their economies , lowering taxes and interest rates , and cutting red tape especially for small-businesses .
Centralised intervention in the economy has always failed .
The top-down measures proposed by the Commission might not only not help our citizens fend off unemployment but may actually hinder employment and economic growth .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 pending voting time and resumed at noon )

( BG ) President , I would like to inform Parliament that in violation of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities , on July 30 I was arrested and beaten by the police , and I was also threatened that my throat would be slit .
It is a shame that Parliament still has not voiced any opinion on this crime , which was committed against me . And I want to ask the colleagues who have gathered in this hall : " What are you waiting for , colleagues , that my throat be slit open in actual fact ?
That the threats be fulfilled and they kill me ? ”
A cruel injustice was perpetrated against a Member of the European Parliament and you remain silent .
Thank you .
Thank you for informing us of that , Mr Stoyanov .
We will pass that on to the relevant body within the institution .
1 .
Youth in Action programme ( 2007-2013 ) (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , with regard to the four reports to be voted on , let me point out on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education that the multiannual programmes in the field of culture , education , youth and citizen participation in community activities are some of the most important activities of the EU and especially of the European Parliament .
Decisions on the choice and funding of the different activities covered by these programmes ought thus to rely on clear and objective criteria .
Simplified procedures should be adopted to avoid unnecessary delays for European citizens .
The four comitology reports , which the European Parliament is being asked to adopt today in plenary , aim to ensure transparent , fast and effective procedures .
This will simultaneously strengthen the European Parliament 's role in this field of procedures .
The fact that these parliamentary proposals have been accepted by both the Commission and the Council is particularly satisfying and gives hope for future interinstitutional agreement .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commission , the Council under the Slovenian Presidency , and the current French Presidency for the spirit of cooperation and agreement and for the way they have managed these four Community programmes .
2 .
Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) (
3 .
' Europe for Citizens ' programme ( 2007-2013 ) (
4 .
Action programme in the field of lifelong learning (
5 .
Protocol to the EC-Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (
6 .
Protocol to the EC-Kyrgyzstan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (
7 .
Protocol to the EC-Tajikistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (
8 .
Separate liability of Montenegro with regard to the long-term loans to Serbia and Montenegro ( formerly the Republic of Yugoslavia ) (
9 .
Organic production and labelling of organic products (
10 .
Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement (
11 .
Draft amending budget 5 / 2008 (
12 .
European Judicial Network (
13 .
Application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) This report was a good example of understanding and cooperation in Parliament and of cooperation between Parliament and the Council .
I therefore thank my fellow Members , the representatives of the Council , the technical staff and everyone involved in this complex and difficult report .
The framework decision will be very important for criminal justice in the EU .
It promotes the principle of mutual recognition , ensures that the rights of the defence and guarantees of the accused are strengthened , makes the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia quicker and more effective , and helps to combat crime in Europe .
The future framework decision will also help to strengthen the primacy of the law and the rule of law , and promote European integration .
The strong consensus obtained in the LIBE Committee was crucial and should be reiterated here and now . Thank you everyone .
14 .
Fisheries and aquaculture in the context of ICZM in Europe (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me briefly mention Integrated Coastal Zone Management , designed , above all , to protect fisheries and fish farming .
The debate on the report has been cancelled owing to the debate on the situation in Georgia , which is an urgent and important matter .
That is why I am speaking today .
My report is mainly about the protection of the environment , hence I ask for your votes in support of it .
I note that the Committee on Fisheries has voted unanimously .
My report contains different proposals , four of which are particularly important .
The first is the completion of the marine survey plan ; second , the long-term plan but also continuing discussions , at which representatives of all professions , especially fishermen , participate .
Thirdly , there is the possible formation of a central coordinating body , as there has been a lack of coordination between bodies in past years .
Fourthly , a schedule should be set up because , since 2002 , when there were similar talks , some actions have been taken without a defined timescale .
I suggest that what we decide upon should take place according to a timed schedule .
Because I believe that all of us desire the protection of the ocean , I ask you to vote in favour and I thank you in advance .
15 .
Use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) under the Schengen Borders Code (
16 .
Strengthening of Eurojust and amendment of Decision 2002 / 187 / JHA (
- Before the vote on Amendment 19 :
( DE ) Mr President , as I indicated before the vote , there is an oral compromise amendment that I discussed with Mrs Weber and Mr Demetriou - a compromise between amendments 37 and 39 .
The compromise amendment would read as follows :
' Other forms of offences where there are factual indications that a criminal organisation or serious crimes are involved . '
( DE ) That is how the compromise would be worded , and both amendments 37 and 19 would then be covered .
( The oral amendment was accepted . )
17 .
Evaluation of the Dublin system (
18 .
Certain issues relating to motor insurance (
19 .
Coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes . )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , I was unable to give my explanation because of the noise level , and I would like to do that now .
I voted for the Kaufmann report because of the need to make it clear that the European Judicial Network is a necessity , since it has functioned effectively over the last ten years in conjunction with the system of judicial assistance .
It is now a matter of making a clear distinction between the Network and Eurojust .
Both institutions have their justification .
The aim is that Eurojust and the European Judicial Network should complement each other or cooperate , as appropriate , and thus guarantee security for the Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , with regard to the enforcement of judgments delivered in absentia , it is of no use to us in the European Union if we have excellent police cooperation on the one hand while on the other hand the system of criminal prosecution does not work as well as it could .
In this respect , I believe our decision has closed a loophole .
The mutual recognition of judgments by criminal prosecutors will mean that judgments in criminal cases , including those delivered in absentia , can be enforced in other countries .
That is a vital step in enabling the judicial authorities to assist police forces in their work .
( DE ) Mr President , the aim of the Brejc report is to give us the means to ensure at long last that the Visa Information System is used and checked whenever nationals of non-EU countries enter the Schengen area .
We know that many persons are illegally resident in the EU because their visas have expired or have been invalidated .
Through this cooperation between the Schengen system and the Visa Information System , we are creating conditions in which we can eliminate visa abuses in the European Union and ensure that persons entering and leaving the European Union are legally entitled to do so .
( NL ) Mr President , of course I have no objection , like most people I assume , to improvements being made to the Schengen countries Visa Information System , but what we have here in this report is really too ridiculous for words .
The Visa System was actually to be made more flexible because of waiting times at the borders !
Anyone who has ever travelled knows that there just have to be waiting lists and that these are sometimes necessary .
I wonder what assessment could be made for border guards to decide when there is a danger and when there is not .
Who knows where terrorist and other risks come from ?
I also have no problem with us being all the more behind the times in this .
The Europeanisation of our border controls has been done thoughtlessly , without preparation and under pressure from ideological extremists who consider the security of citizens to be less important than the great ideal of the new European Soviet Union .
Mr President , I rise - as is becoming traditional on these occasions - to point out that the harmonisation of European policy in the fields of justice and home affairs has only the flimsiest of legal bases .
Much in the reports on which we have just voted - the Kaufmann , França , Brejc , Weber and Lambert reports - is there to give force to aspects of policy , to initiatives and , in the case of Eurojust , to an entire institution , that have no proper legal mandate .
It is true that such a mandate would have been provided by the European Constitution or Lisbon Treaty , but it is equally the case - as it seems periodically necessary to remind this Chamber - that the Constitution was rejected three times : by 55 % of French voters , by 62 % of Dutch voters and by 54 % of Irish voters .
The ability to have a monopoly on penal coercion via a criminal justice system is perhaps the supreme defining attribute of statehood .
We can define a state as a territory with agreed rules enforced by a common authority .
If the European Union wishes to give itself that supreme attribute of statehood , it should have the decency to ask its peoples ' permission first in referendums .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !
( DE ) Mr President , this report is about strengthening Eurojust .
This is another set of instruments whose ultimate purpose is to intensify police cooperation and make it effective .
It has become apparent that very many institutions are involved in judicial cooperation within a given country .
Our proposal for the establishment of a coordination system within and between Member States therefore makes very good sense , simply because it guarantees efficient cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and other forms of organised crime .
One particularly heartening measure I wish to highlight is that liaison magistrates are to be established in non-EU countries , similar to what we already have in the police framework , so that cooperation with those countries can then be improved accordingly .
In short , this system will enable us to build another cordon sanitaire to protect the European Union .
Mr President , may I begin by saying what a great pleasure it is to see you in the chair here in Brussels for a full plenary session .
One small step for Mr McMillan-Scott ; one giant leap , perhaps , for the European Parliament .
Who knows ?
Do not hold your breath .
I rise in relation to the Lambert report - and also in relation to the Bowles report , if you are calling me on that .
The Lambert report I find difficult to support .
There are references in it to the idea of distributing illegal immigrants among the vast majority of EU countries , which I think is completely impractical .
More important from the United Kingdom 's point of view is the fact that , uniquely or semi-uniquely ( because Cyprus is in the same position ) we are an island .
Therefore I think it is important for the United Kingdom to retain control of its own borders , controlled by the United Kingdom authorities not by the European Union which has large and leaky borders .
Therefore I think the Lambert report is unacceptable on that basis .
The Bowles report is unacceptable because , although it has some good intentions , it is effectively blaming tax havens for the high taxation many of us have to endure .
But the reason why we endure high taxation - certainly in the United Kingdom - is because we have a Labour Government bent and determined to increase the tax take and burden the British people and the British taxpayer with it .
The essence of high taxation is a national problem and should remain so , and governments nationally should take responsibility for it .
It should not be a responsibility of the European Union .
( NL ) Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs Lambert , is right when she says that the Dublin objectives for asylum shopping have never been achieved ; quite the reverse , in fact .
That is true .
She is also right to say that the system unavoidably places an unreasonably heavy burden on the Member States on the borders of the European Union . That is also true .
It is therefore a good thing that support for those States is being urged .
On the other hand , I do think a number of important points are missing from the report and I do not agree at all with most of the assumptions and aims of the rapporteur ; on the contrary .
One example : the assessment by the Commission already stated that tens of thousands of asylum seekers go into hiding because of the Dublin system , and yet the rapporteur argues against detention .
That cannot be more serious .
The close cooperation between the European Member States on asylum might pay off , but in that case it is necessary to do away with a whole bunch of politically correct ideas that fill this report .
( NL ) Mr President , it is impossible to summarise all the problems with the Lambert report within one minute , so I shall confine myself to a couple of points .
As regards the protection of children , the report states that , in the event of uncertainty as to age , children should be given the benefit of the doubt .
Something like that sounds good , but in fact it is a direct invitation to even more fraud with identity papers .
The report also states that the definition of a family member is too restrictive , which again is an open invitation to even more abuses .
In Africa , for instance , more or less everybody is family to everybody and if we have to take that into account we might as well throw all the gates open immediately .
The report also opposes access to the Eurodac database for police services and the law-enforcement agencies of the Member States because , I quote ' this would also increase the risk of asylum seekers being stigmatised ' .
That is a ridiculous idea , especially since Eurodac could contain a wealth of information in the fight against illegal immigration , international crime and terrorism .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Bowles report includes an examination of the problem of VAT fraud - and rightly so , for it runs to EUR 20 billion a year .
I support the proposals on this matter .
It is important to point out , however , that we need a change of system - structural reform - in this area .
What we have been hearing from the Commission in this context has never been more than a statement of intent to step up intergovernmental cooperation in this matter and to engage in evaluation , research and so on .
Given the volume of fraud that is taking place , it is high time the Commission abandoned its passive stance and supported the reformist Member States that actually intend to introduce this reverse-charge procedure .
This is also a call to Mr Kovács to have an overdue rethink on this issue .
I hope that we shall receive an appropriate proposal before this parliamentary term is over and that the proposals from the Austrian and German Governments will be endorsed .
Mr President , I voted against the Bowles report .
There are three points I would like to stress .
First , the report calls for better tax and fiscal coordination .
I suppose it to be harmful to tax competition , because tax competition is sound and fruitful .
Second , the way to eliminate tax fraud is not through a reduction in competition but by the strict elimination of tax exemptions .
Third , tax fraud in VAT should be eliminated by the unification of VAT rates , which will result in the fast reduction of exemptions and loopholes .
The Bowles report offers different remedies .
That is why I voted against .

( FR ) Mr President , as I said yesterday , I am against all types of fiscal fraud , and I asked the Commission and the Council to act expeditiously to remedy the disastrous effects of VAT evasion : losses have been estimated at EUR 20 billion per year , or nearly one fifth of the EU budget .
I referred to a model developed by RTvat and presented by that organisation to this House which would reduce VAT evasion by approximately EUR 275 million per day and would reduce the administrative burden , particularly for SMEs .
I think that the Commission should analyse these proposals , because models do exist .
Naturally , there has to be the political will to adopt them .
I was nonetheless unable to vote for the report because my Group 's amendments - including the amendment stating that healthy tax competition will help to maintain and increase Member States ' tax revenues and the amendment which opposes widening the scope of the Savings Tax Directive - were not adopted .
However , we are clearly opposed to the widening of the Directive 's scope to cover all legal entities and all sources of financial revenue .
In this context , I believe that we must not forget that ' too much tax kills tax ' , and that those Member States which are in favour of such measures should be very vigilant because people in Macao , Singapore and Hong Kong are already rubbing their hands with glee at the prospect that we are moving in this direction .
This is why I did not vote in favour of the report because I want this to be clear and precise .
Mr President , I just wanted a word on the Bowles report , which was on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
To read that , one would think it would be very difficult to be against the report or indeed any parts of it .
The reality is that while I fully support a coordinated approach in the fight against fiscal fraud - and we do need serious examination and coordination in this area - any suggestion of tax approximation and / or a decrease in tax competition throughout the EU of 27 Member States as part of the solution in the fight against fiscal fraud is wholly unacceptable .
I am not sure if Europe - as in the Commission - realises the damage that is being done in Member States by constant references to centralising , controlling or reducing Member State competence in the tax area in any way .
It was a huge issue - albeit a non-issue in terms of relevance to the Lisbon Treaty - during the debate on our referendum on 12 June .
Would that we could , but we could not dissuade those that feared Europe - as in the European institutions ' wish to control tax centrally in varying degrees for varying reasons - that the Lisbon Treaty lent any support to that concept .
Please be very wary of messing in this particular area .
( NL ) Mr President , I did not vote against the Kaufmann report , although I am not at all convinced that the Europeanisation of our judicial systems or the establishment of a European public prosecutor 's office are necessarily the right way to improve the working of the police and justice or the punishment of even cross-border crime .
Quite the opposite .
However , I am urging very wide-ranging and closer cooperation between all sovereign European security services and in that respect I can largely support a number of recommendations , improvements in the Kaufmann report , improvements to the European Judicial Network .
Nevertheless , all this must not result in an overpaid and arrogant European justice system that is cut off from the real world , such as we have seen in the past few months , meddling in a way that goes far beyond the necessary cooperation between sovereign Member States .
For that second reason , therefore , I abstained from the final vote on the Kaufmann report .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by Greek Member Katerina Batzeli , approving , at first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 1719 / 2006 / EC establishing the Youth in Action programme for the period 2007 to 2013 .
I welcome and support the amendments which have replaced the advisory comitology procedure with an obligation on the Commission to inform the European Parliament and the Member States without delay about any measures taken for the implementation of the decision without the assistance of a committee , in order to allow selection decisions to be implemented more quickly and efficiently .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Batzeli 's report and I greatly welcome the substantial increase in the relative funds .
The ' Youth in Action ' programme has been an important instrument in recent years for involving the rising generation of our Union in the great European project : a vital link , therefore , for bringing the new generation closer to Europe and enabling them to take part in several really interesting political and cultural initiatives .

The European Commission is doing the right thing in pursuing this route : as a young representative of this Parliament , and knowing the commitment and the aims of Mr Figel , I can safely be optimistic about the success of the new programme for 2007-2013 .
in writing . - I was very happy to vote in favour of this report , as I believe the Youth in Action programme is an excellent initiative .
Schemes such as these will be vital in encouraging engagement between young people and Europe .
This engagement is sorely needed .
Time and again I hear from my constituents that the European Union does nothing for them .
Without funding for civil society programmes , those who believe in the importance of the European project will have a hard time confronting criticism of democratic deficits and unresponsive institutions .
And this negativity is particularly strong among the young .
Whenever I visit schools in my constituency I am struck by their cynicism about the EU 's role .
A report such as this therefore represents a timely response to a pressing - and growing - problem .
But the report has faced opposition from scaremongers who claim it will strengthen the Commission .
What is clear is that all information provided will need to be objective if it is to be effective .
Yet I would ask Members to question how strengthening civil society and the role of the young citizen could possibly give the Commission more power .
in writing . - ( SV ) Culture is about fundamental long-term issues affecting nations and civilisations .
For this reason , the June List considers that cultural policy should be run by politicians who are close to their citizens and should therefore predominantly be addressed at national level .
We consider that cultural programmes have received far too generous appropriations in the EU 's budget for a matter which in all essentials should be down to the Member States .
We are generally in favour of more funds for culture , but we are against more funds being allocated by EU institutions which are far removed from the citizens .
In the vote on today 's four reports by Mrs Batzeli , we only had to reach an opinion on amendments of a more technical nature about the structure of the implementation of the programmes .
However , we chose to vote against these reports in order to make it clear that we are opposed to such major cultural investments being made at EU level .
in writing . - I welcome Katerina Batzeli 's report on the Youth in Action Programme .
Grants provided by the programme are a key element in allowing young Europeans to fully benefit from the opportunities the EU offers .
The report aims to reduce bureaucracy and simplify the decision making involved in the selection of grants .
I therefore support its recommendations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by Greek Member Katerina Batzeli , approving , at first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 1855 / 2006 / EC establishing the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) .
I welcome and support the amendments which have replaced the advisory comitology procedure with an obligation on the Commission to inform the European Parliament and the Member States without delay about any measures taken for the implementation of the decision without the assistance of a committee , in order to allow selection decisions to be implemented more quickly and efficiently .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this report because it aims at reducing the decision-making time for granting European financing though the Culture Programme 2007-2013 .
The experience of past years has shown that the procedure for granting financing through this mechanism is quite slow and the European cultural operators may have financial problems for this reason .
Taking into consideration that the cultural institutions and artists requesting these funds generally have a delicate financial state , I welcome any action designed to facilitate access to European funds is welcomed .
in writing . - Katerina Batzeli 's report on the Culture Programme for 2007-2013 streamlines the process by which financial support through the programme is decided .
Making that process more efficient will benefit programmes such as the European Capitals of Culture .
I therefore voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the reports by Katerina Batzeli put to the vote , which concern the Youth in Action programme ( 2007-2013 ) , the Culture Programme ( 2007-2013 ) , the Europe for Citizens ' programme ( 2007-2013 ) and the Action programme in the field of lifelong learning , show that the procedures followed in the adoption of multi-annual programmes in the field of culture , youth education and active citizenship clearly make the preparation and implementation of those programmes more difficult .
The question is : does that result from the European Commission 's bureaucratic style of operation or from a lack of understanding of the important subject of active citizenship ?
Culture and education cannot abide bureaucracy .
Hence the repeated calls from the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and Education for ' a swift , effective and transparent procedure which will , nevertheless , safeguard the right of scrutiny and information in regard to decision-making ' .
Without swift decisions the hoped-for effects will not be felt .
These facts fully justify voting in favour of the reports , especially as culture in the widest sense is the wealth of nations and the guarantee of their development and endurance .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by Greek Member Katerina Batzeli approving , at first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 1904 / 2006 / EC establishing for the period 2007 to 2013 the programme ' Europe for Citizens ' to promote active European citizenship .
I welcome and support the amendments which have replaced the advisory comitology procedure with an obligation on the Commission to inform the European Parliament and the Member States without delay about any measures taken for the implementation of the decision without the assistance of a committee , in order to allow selection decisions to be implemented more quickly and efficiently .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thank you , Mr President , as with the previous reports , I am convinced about this one and am voting in favour of the work done by my colleague Mrs Batzeli .
The ' Europe for Citizens ' programme has been an important step in recent years in the difficult task of bringing Europe closer to its citizens : all too frequently in the past , Europe has been regarded as distant , a bureaucratic entity cut off from the everyday reality of its citizens .
Today , since we are holding the plenary in Brussels , by way of exception , we have an opportunity to send a signal which will be greatly welcomed by European citizens : let us start talking about having a single headquarters of the European Parliament in Brussels .
Our citizens are increasingly perplexed at this monthly ' transfer ' which involves ever greater organisational efforts and financial burdens .
Let us start to discuss this matter without taboos .
in writing . - I welcome the proposals to cut bureaucracy in the decision-making process for the Europe for Citizens programme .
More efficient selection of grants for town-twinning and support for civil society will improve the EU 's capacity to encourage its citizens to engage with Europe .
With this in mind , I voted in support of Katerina Batzeli 's report on the programme ' Europe for Citizens ' 2007-2013 to promote active citizenship .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by my Greek fellow Member Katerina Batzeli approving , at first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Decision No 1720 / 2006 / EC establishing an action programme in the field of lifelong learning .
I welcome and support the amendments which have replaced the advisory comitology procedure with an obligation on the Commission to inform the European Parliament and the Member States without delay about any measures taken for the implementation of the decision without the assistance of a committee , in order to allow selection decisions to be implemented more quickly and efficiently .
in writing . - The lifelong learning programme helps finance education schemes like Erasmus .
It is through such schemes that people across Europe not only experience Europe 's cultural richness , but also the wealth of learning opportunities the EU offers .
I therefore voted in favour of Katerina Batzeli 's report on an ' Action programme in the field of lifelong learning ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is counterproductive to encourage our own people to learn on the one hand but come up with ' blue card ' plans on the other , as the increase in atypical employment and fiercer competitive pressure have already ensured that good basic and further training is no longer a defence against unemployment .
There are enough well-qualified people who are rejected by companies simply because they are out to employ the cheapest possible holders of PhD or Masters ' degrees in McJobs or no longer wish to offer anything other than atypical employment contracts .
There is a fundamental need to launch training offensives in order to eliminate the shortage of skilled labour which is used to justify the present state of affairs .
If that proves impossible , preference should be given to a seasonal-migrant model .
This will prevent the recurrence of waves of mass immigration .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Mrs. Katerina Batzeli 's report for several reasons .
It is well-known that education and training are essential priorities for the European Union , in order to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
The goal of the lifelong learning programme should be the maintaining of a flexible , autonomous society , based on knowledge , with a quantity and quality economic-cultural development , all following a line and in the spirit of a strong ( er ) social cohesion .
For this reason , lifelong training should involve all social factors .
Obviously , like any other programme of such size , it should be clear , coherent , regularly monitored and assessed after each implementation phase , in order to allow ( re ) adjustments , especially as regards the priorities of implementing the actions .
Nevertheless , the lifelong learning programmes should also focus on mature people .
The fact that , most of the time , emphasis is laid on education in the first part of life and , afterwards , the individual 's knowledge becomes limited , every citizen should be stimulated and motivated to participate in a form of lifelong learning , which would ensure potential employment on the labour market , no matter what the age .
This is even more important if we relate to the statistics regarding the ageing labour force and decrease in the active population .
in writing . - ( RO ) Today , all of Europe is dealing with a series of essential and dramatic changes for the citizens of all ages .
The importance of education and training in the Lisbon Strategy for growth and employment has been acknowledged and the European Council has repeatedly emphasized the role of education and training in the European Union 's long-term competitiveness .
Today , we can no longer forecast that people will remain for their entire life in the same business sector or in the same place .
Their professional evolution will follow unpredictable paths and they will need a broad range of general skills in order to adjust .
In order to prepare them for life and society , schools should guide them toward lifelong learning , a comprehensive European Union programme , which sees people able to learn at all ages , thus remaining lively and active members of society .
This is why I voted this report completely confident , because we need to develop the programmes designed for these purposes and here I refer in particular to the recent EU Member States .
in writing . - ( RO ) The partnership and cooperation agreement ( PCA ) between the European Communities and the Member States , on the one hand , and the Republic of Uzbekistan , on the other hand , became effective on 1 July 1999 , before the European Union 's enlargement with the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania .
The protocol to PCA had to be drawn up in order to allow the new Member States ( Romania and Bulgaria ) to join this agreement .
I consider that the Parliament should have more initiatives of this type , taking into consideration the partnerships signed with the other countries in the region as well .
In relation with the situation in the region , this year , the conclusion of a European Union - Azerbaijan partnership is required in order to provide Europe with the possibility to continue its energy projects .
Azerbaijan needs to receive special attention from the European Union , also starting from the reality of this country 's very balanced policy and availability to contribute to the achievement of the European Union 's energy projects .
in writing . - ( FR ) Following the referendum held in Montenegro on 21 May 2006 on the country 's independence , in which a majority ( 55.4 % ) voted in favour of an independent Montenegro , the Montenegrin parliament proclaimed Montenegro fully independent under international law on 3 June 2006 .
Serbia recognised Montenegro 's independence on 5 June 2006 , and the Serbian parliament adopted a decision defining Serbia as the successor to the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro , which was the new name for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia under the terms of the Constitutional Charter of 4 February 2003 .
It is against this background that I voted for the European Parliament legislative resolution approving , under the consultation procedure , the proposal for a Council decision establishing a separate liability of Montenegro and reducing proportionately the liability of Serbia with regard to the long-term loans granted by the Community to the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro ( formerly the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ) .
in writing . - I shall be voting in favour of Helmut Markov 's report .
I believe it is absolutely essential for stability and security in Europe that we do all we can to help both Serbia and Montenegro recover from the economic and social upheaval that took place with the break-up of Yugoslavia and the subsequent disastrous wars .
I would hope that , in particular , infrastructure and transportation would feature prominently .
If we are to be realistic in our aspirations for both countries , then this agreement is essential and should be strongly supported .
It is my hope that at some future date both Serbia and Montenegro can join the European Union .
This agreement is the first step on the road to that aspiration .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my excellent British fellow Member Neil Parish , I voted for the legislative resolution approving , under the consultation procedure , the proposal for a Council regulation amending the Council Regulation of June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products .
The Council Regulation of 28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products is supposed to come into force as a mandatory requirement from 1 January 2009 .
The purpose of this proposal is to postpone the compulsory use of the EU logo pending the design of a new logo in order to help to avoid confusing consumers by changing EU logos within a short time period , and creating an additional financial burden for operators , who would have to change their packaging and print-outs within a very short time frame .
It is therefore proposed to postpone the compulsory use of the EU logo until 30 June 2010 .
in writing . - I back this report from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on organic production and labelling on organic products .
I am not entirely convinced that it is always better to absolutely maximise organic production and consumption .
I believe science has improved food productivity and food safety in some important areas .
My own consumption reflects this belief .
Nevertheless , those who take a more fundamentalist view are entitled to be reassured that ' organic ' really is organic , and not just a label used to extract a price premium from gullible and ill-informed consumers .
in writing . - ( SV ) Demand for organically produced food and other goods is high and growing , and in order to meet this demand , consumers must naturally be able to identify these products on the market .
Therefore labelling is required if the market is to function in this respect .
However , we have previously voted against EU labelling of organic products , as it is our conviction that market forces , spearheaded by aware European consumers , are capable of performing this task alone .
If political regulation is required in the area of labelling of organic products , this should be carried out at national level .
In the vote on this report , however , we were only faced with the question of postponing the compulsory use of the EU logo on organic products .
We voted in favour of this proposal .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Parish report which accepts the Commission 's proposal to delay the introduction of the use of a compulsory EU organic label .
It should be noted , however , that voluntary use of such a label is not prohibited and any such moves which are of benefit to consumers should be encouraged .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted in favour of the report , as the amendments which Parliament proposes would mean requiring the consent of the European Parliament to conclude agreements .
We are in favour of a thorough review of the EU 's Fisheries Agreements and see this as a positive first step which gives us greater opportunities for influence .
We take the scientific reports which show that the seas are being exhausted very seriously .
Therefore we do not see the EU 's Fisheries Agreements as a means of combating poverty and encouraging development which is sustainable in the long term .
We would like to change the EU 's fisheries policy such that it leads to rebuilding fish stocks .
Through changes in the EU 's trade and aid policy and various forms of partnership , we also seek to support sustainable development in the countries in which Fisheries Agreements with the EU currently constitute a major source of income .
in writing . - I supported the Morillon report relating to the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement .
I consider that fishing nations should control their own fisheries whilst cooperating internationally through regional fisheries organisations .
The EU has a coastal interest in the Indian Ocean and accordingly must fulfil obligations under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
I look forward , however , to the day when France , and other EU nations , have direct control of their own fishing interests .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has just given its assent to the Southern Indian Ocean Fisheries Agreement signed by the European Community in 2006 .
Having fishing interests in the area because of La Réunion , the Community was obliged to cooperate with the other parties involved in the management and conservation of resources in the region under the terms of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
This new regional fisheries organisation establishes a specific institutional framework with , as its cornerstone , the permanent Scientific Committee , whose main task is to conduct a scientific assessment of the fishery resources and the impact of fishing on the marine environment , taking into account the environmental characteristics of the area .
The Agreement also encourages cooperation in the field of scientific research .
On the basis of these scientific recommendations , the parties will be in a strong position to draw up conservation and management measures that are best able to meet the challenges facing the area .
The Agreement marks a genuine step forward in promoting fishery resources and sustainable development .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the European Parliament resolution based on the report by my fellow Member Kyösti Virrankoski on Draft amending budget No 5 / 2008 ( PDAB 5 / 2008 ) , which covers the revision of the forecast of traditional own resources ( TOR , i.e. customs duties , agricultural duties and sugar levies ) , VAT and GNI bases , and the budgetisation and financing of the UK rebate , which have the effect of changing the distribution between Member States of their own resources contributions to the EU budget .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by German Member Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann , approving , under the consultation procedure , the initiative of a number of Member States to strengthen the European Judicial Network .
The resolution first of all calls on both the Council and the Commission to give priority to any future proposal to amend the text of the initiative by using the urgent procedure , in accordance with the Lisbon Treaty once it comes into force .
I support the strengthening of the ' data protection ' element and the fact that the Judicial Network contact points are to provide the national members of Eurojust with certain information .
I particularly welcome the reference to the future Framework Decision on the Protection of Personal Data Processed in the Framework of Police and Judicial Cooperation in Criminal Matters .
in writing . - ( FR ) Just for once , Brussels wants to take back through the window what the French , Dutch and Irish threw out the door in the 2005 and June 2008 referendums : the establishment of a single European Public Prosecutor 's Office .
The temptation proves too great for our pro-European sorcerer 's apprentices .
Whatever it takes , any objections , rejections and legitimate resistance by the peoples of Europe must be overcome and ignored in order to communitise by force all justice , security and immigration issues .
Europe is sorely mistaken .
The requisite cooperation between Member States in judicial , police and even criminal matters must not result in their subjection to a supranational legal order that has been established in spite of all the differences existing between the legal systems and traditions of the Member States .
We reject this supranational legal order that would go against the very principles and values that we hold dear .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of Mrs Kaufmann 's report on the European Judicial Network .
I concur with its content and its objective , which is to strengthen existing structures and to unify their action .
The significant changes in recent years in connection with judicial cooperation in criminal matters have made it necessary to introduce and strengthen structures which are able to provide assistance and coordination at European level .
Despite the fact that the principle of mutual recognition is beginning to be put into practice , there are still many practical difficulties and an increasing number of highly complicated transnational cases where the provision of assistance and support to the competent national authorities is becoming increasingly necessary .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am completely opposed to including religion , sexuality , political opinions , etc. as relevant information to be sent between authorities , but in this report this is only mentioned in conjunction with additional safeguards and as an attempt to tighten up existing legislation .
Therefore I am voting in favour .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the legislative resolution based on the report by Portuguese Member Armando França supporting the initiative by a number of Member States ( the Republic of Slovenia , the French Republic , the Czech Republic , the Kingdom of Sweden , the Slovak Republic , the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany ) to amend a series of framework decisions ( 2002 / 584 / JHA on the European arrest warrant , 2005 / 214 / JHA on the mutual recognition of financial penalties , 2006 / 783 / JHA on the principle of mutual recognition of confiscation orders , and 2008 . / ... / JHA on the principle of mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters ) in order to make provision for the enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia .
I support the proposal for a series of procedural guarantees to strengthen the rights of persons judged in absentia , and the efforts to eliminate different approaches towards ' grounds for non-recognition ' of such decisions .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for Mr França 's report on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters because I believe it is important to establish uniform rules for the mutual recognition of decisions rendered in absentia .
I congratulate the rapporteur on the proposals presented in the report , which I consider to be crucial for harmonising procedural guarantees in all Member States and for reinforcing the protection of fundamental rights , such as the right to a defence and the right to a trial .
in writing . - I will be supporting this report on mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters .
I take the view that those convicted of crimes should not be able to hide within the interstices of the European Union .
Anyone convicted within one Member State should be considered guilty across the Union .
If we doubt the independence and integrity of courts in any State of the Union , that State should have its membership suspended .
Otherwise , just as we make no distinction between criminals in Manchester or London , neither should we if it is Madrid or Lisbon .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against the França report on application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters , because the report is aimed at harmonising criminal justice at European level .
I believe that criminal justice is a responsibility of Member States and not the EU .
It should not therefore be harmonised .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against Mr França 's report on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters because the aim of the report is to harmonise criminal law at European level .
I think that criminal law is the responsibility of the Member States , not the EU .
I am , of course , in favour of the right for defendants to have proper representation , but there is no need for harmonisation .
in writing . - ? ( RO ) Mutual recognition is the cornerstone of judicial cooperation at European level and any clarification of the instruments for enforcing this principle is welcome .
The decision approved today is opportune .
Nevertheless , I would like to draw attention to another problem , namely the way in which some Member States implement important instruments , such as the European arrest warrant .
In January 2007 , the Romanian authorities issued a European arrest warrant in the name of the Czech citizen František Příplata , sentenced to eight years in prison for incitement to serious crime , in the case of the 2000 assassination of a Romanian trade union leader .
Yet , the Czech Republic , on whose territory the killer is , enforces the procedure of hand over only for crimes committed as of 1 November 2004 .
Consequently , eight years after the crime was committed , the sentenced person has not yet been extradited and the execution of the sentence has not yet started .
I believe the Members States that understand enforcing the judicial cooperation instruments in this manner should seriously consider the opportunity of keeping such reserves .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Armando França 's report on the enforcement of the principle of mutual recognition to confiscation orders and of the Framework Decision 2008 . / ... / JHA on the recognition and enforcement of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters imposing punishments or measures involving deprivation of liberty for their enforcement in the European Union .
There are ever-increasing cases in which dangerous criminals use the freedom of movement and the elimination of borders within the European Union to avoid judgment .
I support this report unconditionally because it ensures a unitary regulation in the field of decisions rendered " in absentia " , an extremely necessary regulation in order to avoid the possible blocking of the judicial system by those who run from justice to another European Union country .
in writing . - ( SV ) Parliament 's amendments focus on increased protection of individuals and thus seek to improve the existing regulatory framework .
Therefore I am voting in favour .
in writing . - ( PL ) I fully support the initiative to amend the legal provisions governing application of the principle of mutual recognition of judgments .
Every effort must be made to render judicial cooperation between Member States as effective as possible .
At the same time , we must seek to ensure that all citizen 's rights , including the fundamental right to defence in criminal proceedings , are fully preserved .
In my view the proposed amendments will not only considerably facilitate cooperation between courts but will above all help to reinforce the rights of the citizen with respect to the administration of justice throughout the European Union , especially the right of defence and the right to a retrial .
in writing . - ( SV ) This own-initiative report highlights fisheries and aquaculture within the context of Integrated Coastal Zone Management in Europe .
Ecologically sustainable management of aquatic and fisheries resources is naturally important for protecting the environment in which we live .
Unfortunately , the report ignores the problems which the fisheries sector in the EU brings with it .
Therefore we have chosen to abstain .
Overcapacity in the fishing fleets in the EU is leading to far too large catches .
This threatens the marine ecosystem and edible fish stocks .
We would like to see a major reduction in fishing vessels , and fishing quotas which are set on the basis of biologically safe and scientific grounds .
Of course , the employees affected by the restructuring must be offered labour market training and reasonable financial support in order to be able to take work in other parts of the economy which need labour .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for the report by my fellow Member Mr Gklavakis on Fisheries and Aquaculture in the context of Integrated Coastal Zone Management ( ICZM ) in Europe , and congratulate him on its quality .
I do so because it stresses the economic and social importance of these activities for coastal regions , and calls for them to receive assistance within the framework of ICZM .
For this reason too it is essential for the national and regional governments of the outermost regions to prepare integrated ICZM strategies to guarantee the balanced development of their coastal regions .
I also strongly support the rapporteur 's suggestion of using the European Fisheries Fund for the long-term funding of measures within the framework of ICZM , since it supports actions which contribute to the sustainable development of fishing regions in a transversal approach to all maritime activities taking place in those regions .
Finally , it is important to stress that regional planning has so far been largely land-based and has failed to take into account the impact of coastal development on certain maritime activities .
This has led to the degradation of marine habitats , which is why a new approach is crucial .
in writing . - The Gklavakis report rightly recognises the importance of fishing to coastal communities and the retention of cultural traditions .
All too often , this very human aspect of the fishing industry seems to have been overlooked in the implementation of the CFP .
The report correctly notes the need for bodies at EU , national and regional levels to cooperate in matters of coastal management , and I consider that , within this context , coastal areas and nations must take the lead role , with the EU acting as a facilitator .
in writing . - ( IT ) Fisheries and aquaculture are two of the principal activities underlying the economic and social development of the coastal zones of the European Union .
It is therefore necessary to manage them in such a way as to ensure sustainable exploitation of fisheries whilst also satisfy the increasing demand for fisheries products .
To that end , the EU states need to implement a series of measures aimed at protecting coastal zones and promoting a clean marine environment .
In view of the cross-border nature of many coastal processes , there is a need for cooperation between Member States and between them and neighbouring third countries .
One such measure concerns the planning of housing developments for tourism purposes .
For many regions , the tourism industry is an important contributor to local GDP .
However , I think that we should support ' eco-friendly ' tourism , in other words a form of tourism which dovetails with countryside and environment protection policies .
There is also a need for coordination in terms of industrial activities : just think of the importance of an effective common policy on waste water management for ensuring the compatibility of an important economic activity with the need and duty to preserve the marine environment .
Inshore , small-scale fishing is a very important source of income for thousands of families and keeps alive a centuries-old tradition which , in my view , Europe should support and preserve .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour of the Gklavakis report which underlines the need for a European coastal zone strategy with a view to sustainable development .
An integrated coastal zone management strategy can in fact provide a suitable framework for the sustainable exploitation of these zones and the activities carried out in them .
I fully endorse the position of the rapporteur when he says that there is a need for long-term planning involving all the sectors concerned .
I applaud that view and would also like to emphasise that this should just be the start of a greater focus on the sector , and I invite the Commission to implement a meaningful policy in this field .
in writing . - I abstained on this vote because I am in favour of sustainable fisheries everywhere and I support the coastal communities and fishermen of Ireland .
The Common Fisheries Policy , while focusing on both of these ends , has led to the opposite : destruction of the marine environment , decrease of fish and impoverishment of the marine environment .
in writing .
( FR ) - On the basis of the report by my excellent Slovene fellow Member Mihael Brejc , I voted for the legislative resolution approving , at first reading under the codecision procedure , the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 562 / 2006 as regards the use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) under the Schengen Borders Code .
In view of the expectations that Europe 's citizens have when it comes to internal security , I wholeheartedly support the amendments to be made to the Schengen Borders Code in order to guarantee the effective use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) at our external borders .
The aim of this proposal for a regulation is to establish common rules for the compulsory use of the VIS ( i.e. a systematic search using the number of the visa sticker , combined with finger print checks ) at the external borders and thereby to continue to develop an integrated border management system in the European Union .
Although it would like to be able to boast the opposite , Europe has made no progress in the area of freedom , security and justice .
Quite the contrary , since the deplorable Schengen Agreement was first implemented , the lifting of internal border controls has led to an explosion in organised crime and all forms of trafficking .
The European Union , a real sorcerer 's apprentice in terms of security , with methods that all too often pose a threat to the security of states and their peoples , has imposed on us this area of insecurity lacking in freedoms and justice .
The Schengen Borders Code will not help because it is the very foundations of the Schengen Agreement that are inadequate and unacceptable .
Common security will prevail only if each state regains full sovereignty in the management of its borders and its migration policy .
The pinnacle of the absurd is reached when this involves transferring even more responsibilities to a Union that is already paralysed .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted for Mihael Brejc 's report on the use of the Visa Information System under the Schengen Borders Code .
The common rules for the external borders of the Schengen area must be amended , and the use of the Visa Information System must be made more efficient and uniform .
These things must be done very judiciously and carefully , since data privacy and human rights are always paramount and must be respected .
Blanket checking of fingerprints at the borders with the aid of the Visa Information System will lead to unnecessarily long queues and to lengthy delays at border crossing points , even for people who do not require visas .
The report now proposes only random searches of the information system .
Officers on duty at the border will continue to check whether incoming travellers meet all the requirements for entry to the EU , but they can also decide themselves whether to do a VIS search as well .
This approach will still guarantee a very high level of security but will ensure that people are not kept waiting at border crossings any longer than is strictly necessary .
in writing . - ( DE ) Strengthening the Visa Information System ( VIS ) is undoubtedly a good way to make combating fraud easier in future and - provided that data protection is ensured - is therefore to be welcomed .
Nonetheless , if the collection of fingerprints and face scans is necessary for the granting of Schengen visas in future , this will lead to quite considerable upheavals in the embassies concerned .
In the debate in Germany , it has been suggested that some embassies have neither the personnel nor the facilities to cope with this change .
The possible outsourcing of data storage to external companies , which is also under discussion , gives grave cause for concern , however , and could potentially open the way for future visa scandals .
The VIS has positive aspects , but overall , it has not been properly thought through , which is why I was unable to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) I am voting in favour of the Brejc report .
I support the proposal and its aims .
In certain periods , our borders are crowded with people wanting to enter the Schengen area .
The proposal does introduce a relaxation of the normal system of controls but it also aims to protect travellers and to spare them long hours of waiting at frontiers to comply with those controls .
However , the derogation should remain just that and not become the general rule , and I agree that the duration and frequency of the derogation should be limited as far as possible .
All in all , I welcome the introduction , in that connection , of specific conditions governing the applicability of the derogation .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am in favour of amending Regulation No 562 / 2006 as regards the use of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) under the Schengen Borders Code .
I consider it unnecessary and too time-consuming to carry out checks on third-country nationals holding a visa every time they cross the border .
It causes excessively long waits at border crossings .
A reduction in the intensity of border checks will not in my opinion affect the level of security in the EU .
I therefore consider that limiting the checks carried out by the border guard in command to random VIS checks is the right solution .
in writing . - ( RO ) Today , I voted in favour of the Brejc report because , for the effciency of external border controls , the use of the VIS ( Visa Information System ) is of fundamental importance .
The Visa Information System should be consulted systematically by the border police agents for any person holding a visa in order to ensure border security .
The expansion of the Schengen zone has eliminated barriers in the European Union .
Third country citizens are still checked only once at the entry .
50 % of the illegal immigrants enter the EU legally , but exceed the period of stay because there is no visa control system .
We want Europe to be safer and , at the same time , welcoming for those who come for tourist or business purpose .
The amendment voted today in the European Parliament is to the advantage of the EU citizens and third-country nationals , who do not need a visa because , in this way , the jams at the land border-crossing points would significantly decrease .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by Romanian Member Renate Weber , I voted for the European Parliament legislative resolution supporting the initiative of a number of Member States ( Belgium , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Spain , France , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Austria , Poland , Portugal , Slovenia , Slovakia and Sweden ) to strengthen Eurojust .
I support the strengthening of the ' data protection ' element of the proposal and the fact that the European Parliament is to receive more information so that it is better able to monitor the tasks and duties of Eurojust , which was set up in 2002 as a European Union body with legal personality whose role is to promote and improve coordination and cooperation between the competent judicial authorities in the Member States .
It has become clear from Eurojust 's experience that its operational efficiency needs to be improved by ensuring that its National Members have equivalent status .
I also support the emergency cell for coordination , the national coordination systems , the partnerships with the other Community security and protection instruments ( Europol , Frontex , OLAF ) , and the possibility for Eurojust to second liaison magistrates to third countries .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption of Mrs Lambert 's report on the evaluation of the Dublin system .
The report rightly recalls that , overall , the objectives of the Dublin system have , to a large extent , been achieved , but that , owing to the lack of precise data , it has not been possible to evaluate the cost of the system .
Some concerns remain in terms of both the practical application and the effectiveness of the system .
The report opens the debate on the future of the common European asylum policy which was launched in June 2007 with the publication of a Green Paper .
The report points out that the following aspects of the system should be clarified or modified : observance of the basic principle of non-refoulement ; applicants must receive all relevant information concerning the Dublin system in a language which they understand and they must have access to legal aid throughout the procedure , they must also have the right to a suspensory appeal against any transfer decision ; the criteria for determining the age of minors should be harmonised ; mechanisms should be devised for blocking transfers to countries which plainly do not uphold applicants ' rights .



in writing . - ( FR ) Under the pretext of reinforcing the operational capacities of Eurojust in the fight against various forms of crime , this proposal 's main objective is to pander to the obsession with political correctness of proponents of the thought police .
The thinly disguised aim is the monitoring of all remarks under threat of penalty , whether they are made in writing or spoken at meetings .
Various speakers in this House have already called for the adoption of a framework directive to condemn as criminal offences alleged acts of racism and xenophobia and , with a view to ensuring the speedy transposition of such a directive into national law , to establish a single European Public Prosecutor - the EU 's new Torquemada of ' political correctness ' .
Regrettably , the more the European Parliament , an institution which proclaims itself to be the temple of democracy , gains decision-making powers , the more fundamental freedoms - particularly the freedom of research , opinion and expression - are flouted .
In fact , this totalitarian Europe is far more dangerous than the ' monsters ' which it claims to be fighting .
The primary objective of the proponents of Euro-globalist and immigrationist ideology is to rid themselves of troublesome opponents by adopting repressive European criminal legislation .
We do not accept this .
in writing . - The Council 's proposal and the related report on the amendment to the Eurojust Regulation give even greater power to this repressive EU mechanism .
Eurojust 's jurisdiction is extended to almost all areas of penal matters and its powers of intervention with national judicial authorities have been strengthened .
Transmitting information and personal data ( including DNA data ) from a Member State to Eurojust becomes obligatory and a network of national Eurojust associations is created .
Eurojust 's ties are closer with other repressive mechanisms of the EU ( European Judicial Network , Frontex ) and of third countries .
Reinforcing Eurojust bolsters Europol and generally increases files kept on EU employees and foreigners .
This is helped by updating the Schengen and VIS surveillance systems and by incorporating the Prüm Treaty into Community law .
Behind the excuses of terrorism and organised crime lies an attempt to arm capital against the intensified popular reaction engendered by EU policy and Member State governments .
The rampant growth of mechanisms of repression at national and EU level further exposes the reactionary nature of the EU , and more than ever goads the people to resist and overthrow this imperialist structure .
in writing . - The Maltese Islands are the Southern frontier of the EU .
Situated in the middle of the Mediterranean , they are receiving a disproportionate number of irregular immigrants .
The majority file for asylum status .
Frontex - which was hailed by Government representatives as a solution to curtailing the number of irregular immigrants - has been a complete failure .
We have been requesting the sharing of the burden , with little or no response .
Now that this legislature has entered its final year , we are proposing mechanisms for burden-sharing .
Finally we are acknowledging the need ' to help alleviate the disproportionate load which could fall on certain Member States , in particular the border Member states ' .
The fact that we have acknowledged the need ' for the provision of mechanisms other than financial to correct the adverse effects of the implementation of this system for the smaller Member States at the Union 's external borders ' is most welcome , as it refers to Malta in everything but name .
The EU has not lived up to its spirit of solidarity where this issue is concerned .
It is about time that we cut the rhetoric and get down to the substance .
The EU must realise that its smallest state cannot continue to absorb the vast number of immigrants seeking refuge and asylum .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by British Member Jean Lambert on the Dublin system , and I applaud the work done by my friend Patrick Gaubert , who was the rapporteur for our PPE Group .
The purpose of the Dublin system is to determine the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application made in the territory of one of the EU Member States , Norway or Iceland .
Although , generally speaking , the aims of the Dublin system , in particular the establishment of a clear and viable mechanism for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application , have largely been achieved , problems remain with the efficiency of the system and its application in practice , as well as with the cost , which has not been evaluated .
All of this shows the urgent need for a European immigration and asylum policy , and I welcome the work done by the current President of the Council with responsibility for this field , my friend Brice Hortefeux , the French Minister for Immigration , Integration , National Identity and Mutually-Supportive Development , who has just chaired the European ministerial conference on the right of asylum on 8 and 9 September 2008 in Paris .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted against the report on the evaluation of the Dublin system because I believe that it would not improve the system but , on the contrary , would create an obstacle to its effective operation .
In particular , I consider it essential to warn against the introduction of an automatic suspensory right of appeal against a decision to transfer an asylum seeker to another Member State .
In addition , the very qualified stance on the use of detention centres for the transfer of asylum seekers to the State competent to assess the asylum application will definitely not contribute to an improvement in the effectiveness of the system but , on the contrary , will call it into question and make it unclear .
The report thus actually tends to remove or at least weaken the tools with which Member States can ensure that their decisions are enforceable within the framework of the Dublin system and this should not be approved .
It is wrong because the undefined humanitarian aspect in assessing asylum applications must not result in Member States ' decisions remaining simply paper decisions in the event of non-cooperation on the part of applicants .
I also cannot identify with the call to introduce European burden-sharing mechanisms , since I am of the view that the existing mechanisms for the financial compensation of the States most affected by asylum applications are quite sufficient and there is no reason to interfere with the sovereignty of Member States in the field of asylum by means of further regulation .
It is with some irony that we note that , for the first time , a European Parliament report describes the massive influx of immigrants into an EU Member State as a ' burden ' .
Should immigration not be more of an opportunity that is beneficial to all the peoples of Europe ?
Let there be no doubt about this : the absurdity of the obligation to take in asylum seekers and strict compliance with the principle of non-refoulement are not being called into question .
The report highlights only the deficiencies of the Dublin system with regard to the determination of which Member State is responsible for processing asylum applications .
This is self-evident given the ever-increasing migration flows to countries that , for the most part , are located on the southern periphery of the EU .
Once again , the report offers a fallacious solution to the technical and human problems associated with migration waves .
The establishment of a common asylum system , which is bound to be ineffective in a constantly enlarging EU with porous borders , is not what is needed .
Quite the reverse , Member States should be given the right to take their own decisions on migration and the management of their borders .
The Dublin system has proved in practice to be a mechanism promoting the EU 's overall anti-refugee policy .
The various injustices in its application set out in this report confirm its reactionary nature .
The EU , which bears a significant share of responsibility for the creation of hundreds of thousands of refugees through its support for unpopular regimes and by stirring up internal strife , wars and imperialist interventions , instead of providing for asylum victims and respecting their rights , has in recent years continually hardened its position towards them .
One aspect of this is the unacceptable bouncing back and forth of asylum seekers from one EU country to the next .
This is sanctioned by the Dublin Regulation , and was made a reality by the creation of Frontex for the expulsion of refugees from the EU 's borders , by the recent directive on their detention for up to 18 months , by approving the extension of the use of Eurodac for other purposes as well , such as to keep files on them , and by the generally inhumane treatment .
It is therefore clear that we need to fight hard to repeal this regulation and the EU 's anti-refugee policy in general .
We must respect the right of asylum seekers to flee to whatever country they deem most suitable and ensure that the Member States comply with the 1951 Geneva Convention .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted in favour of Jean Lambert 's own-initiative report on the Dublin system , although it contains opinions which I do not share .
The reason why I voted yes is that I concur with the strong criticism found in the report of the way in which the current EU rules undermine the rights of asylum seekers , for example , by transferring asylum seekers to Member States which are unable to guarantee complete and fair treatment .
However , I am against total harmonisation of the EU 's asylum policy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of my colleague , Ms Lambert 's , report on the evaluation of the Dublin system .
In particular , I would like to highlight the sections which emphasise that in decisions relating to children , the best interests of the child must be paramount at all times .
In my own country , Scotland , we have the disgraceful situation at the Dungavel detention centre , where children of asylum seekers are effectively imprisoned .
Such practices can never be described as being in the best interests of the child , and I support the Scottish Government 's efforts to close that institution and return responsibility for immigration to Scottish control .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is important that some rules governing asylum procedure are being clarified , including those that determine where responsibility lies for curbing multiple applications .
Whilst the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs calls for greater protection of children in asylum procedures , more and more unaccompanied children are turning up at the external borders of the EU , seeking to exploit the special protection they enjoy from deportation and refoulement .
Time and again they risk their lives in search of cunning new escape routes .
If the rules we have created as safeguards are now developing into incentives for more and more new forms of risk-taking , we shall have to think about new strategies .
The present report contains some building blocks , but on the whole I believe it does not go far enough , which is why I was unable to endorse it .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of the Lambert report on the evaluation of the Dublin system .
The report raises concerns over the system 's shortcomings , calling on the Commission to take measures against states that do not ensure full and fair treatment of the asylum applications they receive .
After the unacceptable draft Directive on non-refoulement , adopted in June , the European Parliament is stressing today that asylum seekers have rights under European legislation and that the Member States have obligations .
Greece is a systematic offender of asylum seekers ' fundamental rights .
It has unacceptable conditions at reception centres and one of the lowest rates of acceptance of applications .
Certain Member States have already refused to implement the Dublin Regulation when Greece is the country responsible ; more still are talking about following suit .
We invite the Commission to propose substantial and effective measures to ensure that asylum applications are treated correctly by the Greek authorities .
, in writing . - ( RO ) Asylum legislation and practices still differ between Member States and the asylum applicants are treated differently from one country to another .
Unless a satisfactory and uniform level of protection is reached across the entire European Union , the Dublin system will always produce unsatisfactory results , both from the technical and human point of view and the asylum applicants will continue to have solid reasons to address their application to a certain Member State in order to benefit from the most favourable decisions at national level .
The large number of multiple applications and the small number of transfers performed indicate deficiencies in the Dublin system and the need to create a common European asylum system .
The implementation of the Dublin Regulation may result in the unequal distribution of responsibility , in case of the people requesting protection , to the detriment of some Member States that are particularly exposed to migratory flows only due to their geographical position .
According to the Commission 's evaluation , in 2005 , the 13 Member States situated at the Union 's external borders , had to deal with increasing challenges raised by the implementation of the Dublin system and , therefore , the first-country-of-entry criterion , provided under the Dublin system , placed the Member States situated at the external borders in a very difficult situation .
in writing . - ( SV ) This own-initiative report focuses on potentially improving and increasing the protection provided for asylum seekers , but I distance myself from the statement in the report that a common asylum system would resolve this problem .
Despite this , I am voting in favour as the majority of the report is positive for asylum seekers and it is they who are the focus of the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today the European Parliament adopted a report which clearly and critically points out the weaknesses of the current Dublin system .
There is no doubt that we need a common migration and asylum policy at EU level in an increasingly borderless Europe .
The question is merely how this is to be achieved .
Folkpartiet agrees with the majority of the criticism and consider that it is right to send a sharp signal that a change in a more humanitarian direction should be initiated .
Therefore I voted in favour , with certain reservations .
Amendment 5 criticises some countries for systematically depriving asylum seekers of their liberty by placing them in detention .
I considered that this criticism should remain , particularly since Sweden is one of the countries which has historically been guilty of precisely this .
However , I do not agree with the proposal of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left to completely prohibit the use of detention , although I do think that it is something that should be applied only as a last resort .
I abstained on Amendment 6 , on introducing a proactive duty to trace family members for organisations such as the Red Cross and Red Crescent .
Such a duty can only be imposed upon an agency and should not be placed on a civil organisation .
As neither the original text nor the amendment expressed any other option , I chose to abstain .
Although Mrs Lambert 's report on the evaluation of the Dublin system contains viewpoints and proposals that I do not support , I decided to vote in favour of the report in the final vote .
I did this first and foremost in order to express my approval of the report 's clear criticism of the way in which existing EU regulations undermine the rights of asylum seekers , for example by contributing to the transfer of asylum seekers to Member States that cannot guarantee full and fair processing of their applications .
in writing . - ( NL ) The agreements on Dublin II are based on the political fiction that the 27 Member States trust each other when it comes to dealing with asylum applications and that all Member States assume their responsibilities in the same principled way .
I myself investigated the reception of Chechen refugees in Poland , because a number of Chechen refugees were sent back to Poland from Belgium on the basis of Dublin .
There were strong protests .
That was why I made my own investigation .
In fact you can see the pictures on my website .
Whilst there is not an adequate and consistent level of protection in all 27 Member States , in my view Dublin II is not much more than a political fiction and it creates gross injustice .
I saw for myself in Poland that the basic principles of the Dublin rules are not being put into practice .
The quality of the reception , the reception of children and the failure to provide schooling , the unhygienic conditions refugees have to live in , the lack of health care : all these vary a great deal from one Member State to another .
The Lambert report identifies the problems , starts from an accurate assessment and offers solutions in a number of areas .
It deserves our full support .
in writing . - ( PL ) One of the consequences of the free movement of persons in the European Union is the growth in cross-border car traffic .
It raises the need to establish provisions at European level in the field of motor insurance so as to protect accident victims effectively .
The efficiency of the claims representative system established by the insurance company in the victim 's country of permanent residence is exceptionally important for the achievement of this aim .
It is the claims representative 's duty to inform the victim how to pursue his claim against a foreign national , and it would increase consumer confidence if the information package accessible before conclusion of the insurance contract included full information on the rules governing the functioning and application of the claims representative system and its benefits for the victim .
Another important issue raised by the rapporteur is whether legal expenses insurance should be compulsory in all Member States .
I support his view that maintenance of the existing voluntary system is the right solution .
The increase in consumer confidence brought about by a compulsory system would be outweighed by the increase in the cost of the insurance itself and the delays resulting from settlement of cases by the courts .
It is nevertheless essential that measures be taken immediately with regard to the availability of legal protection insurance , especially in the new Member States .
in writing . - The Mladenov report gives an appropriate degree of prominence to consumer organisations in the evaluation of motor insurance .
Consumer bodies do indeed have an important role to play in this area , alongside the EU 's institutions , Member States and the insurance industry itself .
in writing . - I would like to thank Mr Mladenov , our Committee rapporteur .
This report on aspects of motor vehicle insurance is a good example of how Europe is delivering practical and pragmatic benefits of EU membership for its citizens .
With 1.2 million road accidents in Europe every year , regrettably some citizens will be victims of a car accident , as a driver , passenger or pedestrian .
Yet many people are not aware that EU law exists to help resolve insurance claims without having to deal with a foreign insurance company in a foreign language .
This EU law exists to enable citizens to go home and get the claim settled quickly and easily in their own language .
The 4th Motor Insurance Directive also ensures assistance for accident victims by setting up information centres in each Member State .
As the law does not currently provide for compulsory cover for legal costs , citizens should consider the option of taking out legal protection insurance .
Of course , as the Parliament 's rapporteur on mediation , I hope parties will use alternative dispute resolution to find a settlement to conflicts while avoiding the costs and delays of court proceedings .
It is with concrete , practical measures like this law that we can demonstrate Europe 's value to our citizens .
in writing . - ( PL ) In 2003-2005 some 17 000 citizens of third countries were sent to another EU Member State to have their application for asylum examined there .
Of these , 12 % were applications from people who had already sought asylum .
At the present time , the chances of being granted asylum vary considerably from one EU Member State to another .
This is shown most clearly by the example of the Iraqis .
In Germany they have a 75 % chance of asylum , in Greece barely 2 % .
It would be advantageous for the EU to liquidate the phenomena of ' refugees in orbit ' , twofold migration and the simultaneous submission of asylum applications in different countries by introducing a system under which one Member State would be responsible for examining asylum applications .
in writing . - ( SV ) Fiscal fraud causes major financial losses for Member States and reduces opportunities to maintain and improve the quality of the services that we finance through our taxes .
However , we abstained from voting in the final vote due to several amendments in which tax competition between Member States was seen as something positive and in which the attitude towards the damaging effects of tax havens on the economies of Member States was toned down .
We also chose to vote against the wording in the second part of paragraph 3 , which gives too positive a picture of tax approximation between Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the European Parliament resolution on the own-initiative report on a coordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud , drafted by British Member Sharon Bowles in response to a Commission communication on the subject .
Fiscal revenue , in other words the total amount of taxes and compulsory social contributions , accounted for 39.3 % of the European Union 's GDP in 2004 , at EUR 4 100 billion .
There are very few estimates of the amount of taxes that go uncollected because of fiscal fraud , which is estimated at around 2-2.5 % of GDP .
Although taxation is a national responsibility , fiscal fraud is an obstacle to the successful operation of the internal market in that it distorts competition between taxpayers .
There is no disputing that the fight against tax fraud has a European dimension because of the globalisation of the economy internationally .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this final resolution , since the majority in the European Parliament overlooks the true causes of the principal fiscal fraud - the existence of tax havens - although there are some positive proposals that we voted in favour .
Although the Parliamentary Committee 's report does contain some positive proposals , notably explicit references to tax havens and their greater responsibility for fiscal fraud and the erosion of the fiscal base , which decreases public revenue and reduces the State 's capacity to put social support policies into practice , several of these positions were rejected or watered down in the plenary vote .
The political majority in the European Parliament does not genuinely wish to close down the tax havens that shelter large fortunes and huge stock market profits from various more or less unauthorised deals .
They wish to fuel one of the centres of the scandalous profits of capitalism , even if it means lower revenue for states and fewer possibilities for a response from public policies serving workers and the people .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Bowles ' report is typical of this Parliament : it offers solutions to problems that would not exist without the Europe of Brussels , solutions which , moreover , would merely exacerbate these problems or create new ones .
In this instance , the solutions proposed to improve the fight against fiscal fraud involve the levying of tax in the country of origin and the setting up of a clearing house that would make individual Member States ' tax receipts dependent on transfers made by other Member States .
Others involve charging VAT at the rate of the importing Member State ( instead of the current exemption system ) or the application of a reverse-charge mechanism , both proposals which , if adopted , would end up imposing insurmountable administrative and fiscal burdens on companies .
In addition , all tax administrations would be allowed direct access to electronically stored data on tax payers in other Member States .
The taxation of savings and criminal law in the area of fraud would be standardised .
A number of reduced VAT rates would be abolished .
All this clearly shows that the real goal is not so much to fight against fraud , which is a very real and serious problem , but rather to put an end to the fiscal sovereignty of the Member States .
in writing . - ( SV ) The fight against fiscal fraud is of course worthy of full support .
We have therefore voted in favour of the motion for a resolution in its entirety , despite the fact that it contains numerous elements which have not been thought through and are unwarranted .
Paragraph 3 states that ' in order to be operational , a VAT system based on the " origin principle ” requires tax approximation between countries to avoid tax competition ' .
We will not support such a wording .
Approximation of the VAT and tax systems of Member States is a very dangerous step away from national self-determination in one of the most fundamental policy areas .
The European Parliament must not make such sweeping statements on such an important issue .
Tax competition also has advantages in that countries are able to forge ahead and develop more effective taxes or other solutions to finance public spending , provided that they are free from poorly thought-out EU legislation .
in writing . - I fully support the fight against fiscal fraud and recognise that there needs to be close cooperation between administrative authorities in each Member State and the Commission in order to achieve this .
However , I do not support the inference in the explanatory memo that the introduction of the CCCTB is in any way necessary to counter fiscal fraud .
At this stage the CCCTB is only a technical proposition , there is no communication proposed and as such it is premature to suggest that it could help in the fight against fiscal fraud .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of the report on a co-ordinated strategy to improve the fight against fiscal fraud .
Sharon Bowles rightly points out that tax fraud has serious consequences for national budgets .
It leads to violations of the principle of fair taxation and is liable to distort competition .
Distortions caused by VAT fraud affect the overall balance of the resource system .
According to various sources , VAT losses range from EUR 60 to 100 billion per annum across the European Union , which results in an increased need to call on Member States ' own resources based on gross national income ( GNI ) .
I agree with Sharon Bowles ' initiative .
The problems caused by VAT fraud must be eliminated .
To guarantee the proper functioning of the Community we must ensure that the resource system operates fairly and transparently .
in writing . - ( DE ) After ten years of beating about the bush , we still cannot agree on effective methods with which we can put a stop to VAT fraud - which , after all , involves the evasion of taxes equivalent to between 2 and 2.5 % of Europe 's economic output .
The reverse-charge system looks quite nice on paper but still seems too embryonic , which is why most of the calls we have been hearing are still for better cooperation between Member States .
Particularly in the area of fraud , we have some Member States with a conspicuously high degree of susceptibility to fraud and with lax controls , compounded by the prevalence of an unacceptable laissez-faire attitude to recovery .
It strikes me that the parliamentary report does not deliver an emphatic message or offer any new solutions , which is why I have abstained .
in writing . - The UK Conservative delegation regrets that it is unable to support the report by Mrs Bowles .
We recognise that tax fraud is a serious problem and that it needs to be tackled with great urgency , and in particular that a solution needs to be found to the so called " carousel " fraud in respect of VAT .
Nevertheless , the failure of the report to positively support tax competition and sovereignty ; its unrealistic approach towards tax havens ; and its lack of recognition of the direct link between high taxation and high levels of tax avoidance and evasion lead us to request that the European Union think very seriously before proposing tax measures that may only serve to create capital flight , discourage inward investment or indeed encourage even more fiscal fraud .
I am happy to support this report which recognizes that developing a strategy to deal with tax fraud is a matter of necessity .
Although the implementation of effective policies is , for the greater part , the concern of Member States , cooperation is needed on a European level .
A disproportionate administrative burden should not be placed on businesses , especially , small and medium sized enterprises and given the context of the Commission 's policy , red tape and bureaucracy should be reduced .
I supported the author 's amendment which emphasizes the importance of fair competition in terms of taxation for the European Union 's economy .
I am disappointed that the same author referred to the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) in the explanatory memorandum .
There has as yet not been sufficient examination of CCCTB to guarantee that such a taxation system would have a positive impact and it is likely that more evidence exists to the contrary .
This statement is based on poor conjecture and as it is only in the explanatory memorandum we cannot vote on the subject .
As a result , I would like to take this opportunity to express my disappointment and to make my objections known .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 and resumed at 15.00 . )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Presentation by the Council of the draft general budget - Budget 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the presentation by the Council of the draft general budget for 2009 .
I therefore welcome Éric Woerth , Minister for the Budget , Public Accounts and the Civil Service , as the representative of the Council Presidency .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is both an honour and a pleasure for me to speak in your House today for two reasons : firstly , because your Parliament represents the heart of European democracy .
The French Presidency has a tremendous amount of respect and admiration for the work that you have done in support of European integration , and the best possible proof of our willingness to help Europe move forward together was provided by the French President in his speech in Strasbourg in July .
It is this same spirit that guides me and is shared by my colleagues in the French Government .
Secondly , because the draft budget for 2009 , which I am presenting to you today , was adopted unanimously by the Council on 17 July .
This unanimity shows that this draft budget is balanced and that it allows all EU governments to identify with it .
Our initial contacts have provided a sound basis for the continuation of the budgetary procedure .
The trialogue and conciliation meetings have taken place in a constructive atmosphere .
We have already reached agreement on six statements , and I am sure that we shall be able to agree on many other matters of common interest .
I can assure you that the Council is prepared to continue this high-quality dialogue with a view to securing an agreement on the 2009 budget that is satisfactory to all .
This agreement should comply with three principles : the first is to ensure the financing of the European Union 's policy priorities - and we have established a financial framework for the period from 2007 to 2013 that we must implement in order to achieve our objectives in terms of competitiveness , cohesion and growth .
The second is to observe the rules of budgetary discipline and sound financial management laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Expenditure must remain within the limits fixed by this Agreement and sufficient margins must be maintained under the ceilings for the various headings .
The third principle requires that appropriations be adjusted to take into account actual requirements .
In particular , we should draw lessons from previous budget outturns so as to be able to determine our real ability to implement sectoral policies .
Moreover , since the establishment of the financial perspective in 1988 , the Community budget has always been subject to an under-utilisation of payment appropriations .
Budget implementation is improving thanks to the efforts made by Commissioner Dalia Grybauskaité , but uncertainties related to the financial year 2009 clearly remain considerable and there is no evidence , at this point , to suggest that 2009 will be any different from previous years .
It is also important to protect the interests of European taxpayers - this is all the more true in the current economic climate - and so we must avoid , as far as possible , entering in the budget any appropriations that cannot be utilised .
The objective of a realistic and balanced budget has consequently been the guiding principle of the Council 's work .
Before presenting the fruits of its labours to you , I should like to say a word on the facility for rapid response to soaring food prices in developing countries .
Our discussions over the next few weeks will focus on this issue .
The European Council of 19 and 20 June provided a strong political impetus by welcoming the Commission 's intention to come forward with a proposal for a new fund to support agriculture in developing countries .
However , the European Council mandate is quite explicit in this respect : it is in strict compliance with the current financial perspective that a solution has to be found .
I am aware that the European Parliament does not currently share this view .
Nevertheless , the Council will evaluate the proposal adopted by the Commission on 18 July from this perspective .
Finally , I would remind you that the European Council reaffirmed only yesterday its readiness to support reconstruction efforts in Georgia , including in areas of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , in addition to the EUR 6 million in emergency aid that have already been disbursed .
The EU will therefore take the initiative of convening an international conference shortly to assist reconstruction in Georgia .
Yesterday 's European Council requested the Council and the Commission to start preparations for this conference .
I should now like to present to you the main thrust of the 2009 draft budget established by the Council .
We are proposing a budget of EUR 134 billion in commitment appropriations , which amounts to EUR 469 million less than in the preliminary draft budget .
The increase in commitment appropriations therefore amounts to 2.8 % compared to 2008 and , as a result , the EU 's overall commitment capabilities are maintained .
As for payment appropriations , the Council has made an adjustment limited to EUR 1.7 billion compared to the preliminary draft budget .
As you requested in previous years , the Council has not been making random across-the-board cuts to all headings .
This reduction is based instead on a detailed analysis of budget implementation in 2007 and 2008 and on a realistic approach to the potential of Community programmes to be implemented and completed .
The draft budget therefore amounts to EUR 115 billion in payment appropriations .
The reduction in the level of payment appropriations in 2009 does not - and I should like to emphasise this point - come as a surprise .
It had been taken as read when the financial framework for 2007-2013 was adopted .
If the ceiling on payment appropriations in 2009 is far lower than that in 2008 and 2010 , this can be explained , in particular , by movements in appropriations for the cohesion policy , which will be affected in 2009 by the end of the 2000-2006 programming period and by a gradual increase during the 2007-2013 programming period .
We also have seen no indication that new programmes have been able to get off the ground more quickly .
On the contrary , the mechanism for the monitoring of the adoption of management and control systems and of major projects shows that they are getting off to a slow start .
Therefore , out of 433 programmes , there are only two , in Hungary , for which interim payments have been made .
The level of payment appropriations in our draft budget is therefore realistic and adapted to the needs of the Union .
A few points should be emphasised heading by heading .
With regard to the heading ' Competitiveness for growth and employment ' , the Council attaches great importance to the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
It has therefore ensured that adequate financing is provided , particularly for research and technological development programmes , trans-European networks and improving the quality of education and lifelong learning .
The Council has limited the increase in commitment appropriations on the basis of the analysis of the potential of programmes to be implemented , as I have already said .
Nevertheless , I should like to emphasise that , in this context , the increase in commitment appropriations is quite considerable for priority programmes .
For instance , compared to 2008 , the Research Framework Programme will receive a 10 % increase , the innovation and competitiveness programme a 16 % increase and the ' Lifelong Learning Programme ' , essential for European citizens , will receive a 6 % increase .
These examples clearly illustrate the targeted strategy adopted by the Council .
Moreover , the Council has reduced payment appropriations ( by EUR 471 million ) by making cuts on several targeted lines so as to take into account how the appropriations were utilised .
With regard to heading 1b , ' Cohesion for growth and employment ' , the Council has accepted the amount of commitment appropriations proposed by the Commission in the preliminary draft budget .
For payment appropriations , we adopted a balanced approach by introducing , on the one hand , an increase of EUR 50 million for convergence countries and regions and , on the other , a reduction of EUR 300 million in the area of regional competitiveness .
This means a reasonable overall reduction of EUR 250 million in payment appropriations , and I am delighted that we were able to agree on a joint statement on the Structural and Cohesion Funds as well as on the rural development programmes .
With regard to the heading ' Conservation and management of natural resources ' , the Council has adopted a limited reduction of EUR 382 million in commitment appropriations and of EUR 497 million in payment appropriations .
These concern mainly budget lines related to market intervention and clearance of accounts and , to a reasonable degree , rural development .
I would also point out that the budget lines related to food programmes , free distribution of fruit and vegetables , school milk and promotion measures have been maintained .
We have also maintained the amounts proposed by the Commission for environmental policies .
With regard to heading 3 , ' Citizenship , freedom , security and justice ' , the Council has made a slight increase in the margins available under the ceilings to reach a total of EUR 76 million by making targeted reductions of EUR 20 million in commitment appropriations .
In this context , I should like to emphasise the importance attached by the French Presidency to immigration policy .
The amount proposed in the preliminary draft budget for the Frontex Agency has therefore been included .
With regard to heading 4 , ' The EU as a global partner ' , we have sought to anticipate the needs related to Palestine and Kosovo without waiting for the Commission 's letter of amendment , which it should be adopting next week .
We have therefore set aside additional resources , compared to the preliminary draft budget , of EUR 100 million for Palestine and EUR 60 million for Kosovo .
Regarding the CFSP , the Council has accepted , as a precautionary measure , the commitment and payment appropriations which were entered in the preliminary draft budget and which are in line with the amounts provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 .
As for payment appropriations , the reduction made amounts to EUR 393 million , but half of this reduction relates to the reserve for emergency aid and , as you know , the Council considers that it may be possible to finance this reserve by redeploying payment appropriations , as has been seen in recent years .
Finally , with regard to heading 5 , ' Administration ' , the Council has adopted a controlled increase of 3.8 % in administrative appropriations which it deems necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the institutions .
The margin available under heading 5 therefore amounts to EUR 224 million .
The Council has , of course , accepted the 250 posts linked to the 2007 enlargement .
We have also made targeted reductions based on past implementation , rather than making across-the-board cuts , which have become almost a tradition .
Finally , with regard to decentralised agencies , we have taken account of the life cycle of these agencies .
We cannot deal with agencies that have already reached cruising speed in the same way as agencies that are still developing their expertise - agencies that are at the development stage - and we have taken into account the surplus generated by some agencies in previous financial years .
This is the case for Frontex and Eurojust , two agencies that fall within our priorities .
In conclusion , I therefore feel that the 2009 draft budget represents a balance between the ambitions that we naturally all have for our European Union and sound budgeting for which we are answerable to the citizens .
This is clearly essential if citizens are to share this confidence in the European idea .
The view of this House will probably be different , but we are only at the beginning of the budgetary procedure and we still have plenty of time to harmonise our views on the structure of the 2009 budget and to respond to the challenges facing us as a result of the Commission 's new proposals .
I am sure that the three institutions will therefore make every effort so that , between now and conciliation in November - in two months ' time - we can reach a comprehensive agreement on all these issues , and I hope that this agreement will be the best possible compromise for both the institutions and European citizens .
You can obviously count on my total commitment with that in view .
Thank you very much , Minister .
You deserved a rather better turnout , but the quality of our Members counts for a great deal .
Today , of course , we are engaging in an initial discussion , and a former minister who once held your office is also in attendance .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , you just said that we are at the start of the budgetary process .
As far as Parliament is concerned , that is not the case .
We had begun the budgetary procedure and discussions on the procedure and on our budget for 2009 at the start of the year .
We have therefore come a long way already .
In particular , moreover , we in Parliament are agreed that neither the Commission 's preliminary draft budget nor the Council 's draft - which , as we know , has pruned back the appropriations for both commitments and payments contained in the Commission 's estimates , is particularly inspiring .
We certainly do not regard it as an ambitious budget that satisfies the demands made of us in the European Union in every possible area of political activity .
In particular , Parliament has recurring difficulties with the fact that , for all the constant and ubiquitous talk of wanting to tackle climate change , this intention is insufficiently reflected in the budget .
We in Parliament - as you can see from the overwhelming support the chamber gave the negotiating team from the Committee on Budgets in the July vote - will ensure that the fight against climate change can be stepped up in many parts of the budget and that this can be done with European funds .
We do not believe that such a wide gap can remain between the appropriations for commitments and those for payments as the 15 % proposed by the Commission , which has subsequently been further widened by the Council .
Instead , we shall ensure that we obtain a budget which is more in tune with the principles of budgetary accuracy and clarity .
No doubt we shall have the occasional heated discussion this autumn .
I am very hopeful , however , that we shall arrive at a satisfactory outcome once we have come to an arrangement with each other on certain matters .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , in autumn we embark , as usual , on the decisive phase of the budget procedure , this time for the year 2009 .
Our task is to note and take account of all the changes that have occurred since submission of the preliminary budget proposals .
The greatest problem and difficulty for me , as rapporteur on the budget of the European Parliament and the other European institutions , is the uncertainty as to the fate of the Lisbon Treaty .
The budget forecasts for 2009 were based on the most likely outcome , namely entry into force of a treaty that fundamentally enlarges the European Parliament 's powers of co-decision .
Since at the present time there is a question mark over the Treaty , the normal reaction with regard to the budget is to separate the expenditure directly linked with the Lisbon Treaty from the preliminary expenditure for the coming year , and that was the request we put to all the European institutions .
We have a response from the European Parliament , which is currently being examined .
It is not yet an official document of Parliament 's Bureau , but it meets the requirement to separate expenditure linked to the Lisbon Treaty , which can be taken into account later if the situation changes .
Obviously the uncertainty as to the fate of the Lisbon Treaty affecting the budget for 2009 does not excuse us from applying the other principles governing establishment of the expenditure plan for 2009 .
We have to take account of the new rules on MEPs ' remuneration and the remuneration and employment of assistants .
We have to cover the costs of the European election campaign and take account of the movements in prices of the various energy sources that occurred in 2008 .
Above all , 2009 is an election year , in which we must strive for rigour and financial discipline .
An expansion of European bureaucracy - European administration , in other words - is not the best message to send to people whom we are asking to renew the mandates of members of the European Parliament .
I would like to draw attention to one more matter that concerns me not as the European Parliament 's rapporteur but as a member of a community of democratic nations concerned with human rights and the sovereignty of all the nations of Europe .
We should react , on a budgetary level too , to what has happened in Georgia .
I believe the European Parliament should take a position on this question at the first reading , since it will be difficult to persuade European taxpayers to continue providing unconditional aid to Russia when it is spending money on wars beyond its borders .
Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FI ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , first of all I would like to say how thankful I am that next year 's draft budget is now before Parliament .
At the same time I wish to say how sorry I am that our Committee 's chairman , Reimer Böge , cannot be present at the debate , as he has important obligations in his country at the same time .
For that reason , I will make the speech for the Committee on Budgets for him .
I want to thank the Council and its Presidency for their constructive cooperation , as at the budgetary conciliation meeting in July we made important , joint declarations which relate to the implementation of the Structural and Cohesion Funds , the European Solidarity Fund , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , and staff expenditure , besides other matters .
This also bodes well for a positive atmosphere at the conciliation meeting in November .
Unfortunately , the Council has not been quite as cooperative as regards the financing of the numerous new posts which were discussed and included in the resolutions at the European Council in June , for example .
The Commission 's preliminary draft budget was already very meagre .
Commitment appropriations stood at EUR 134.4 billion , which is 2.6 billion below the financial perspective , and payment appropriations were even more meagre at EUR 116.7 billion .
This is the equivalent in payments of just 0.9 % of the EU 's GDP , which is substantially below the already extremely compromised financial framework , at an average of 1 % .
The Council has cut the budget further by a total of EUR 500 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 1.8 billion in payment appropriations .
In my opinion , this much reduced budget does not reflect either the EU 's or Parliament 's priorities .
It is very dangerous to have made cuts to heading 1 , which is vital for sustainable growth and employment .
The paucity of payment appropriations is a particular threat to structural policy , which is one of Parliament 's major priorities .
Its implementation has already been greatly delayed in any case .
It is quite clear that heading 1 in the budget needs to be looked at in particular , but so does heading 4 , which seems to be chronically underfunded from one year to the next .
At this very moment there are difficulties with Kosovo and Palestine .
Finally , I would like to raise two issues .
The first is the Food Facility Instrument .
The Commission is proposing approximately EUR 1 billion for the development of food aid and production in developing countries .
Parliament supports this , but regrets that the Commission has not proposed any suitable instruments .
The interinstitutional agreement is a good opportunity for this , and the Committee on Budgets is ready and willing to back it on this issue too .
The European Parliament is also ready to support reconstruction in Georgia .
The budgetary procedure also provides opportunities for this .
We hope that when the Commission makes promises on behalf of the European Union at the next Conference of Donors they will be discussed with the budgetary authorities beforehand .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to recall the very good atmosphere of our negotiations which we began in the spring , finalising them before the summer vacation .
I hope that we will be able to proceed in this manner throughout the whole procedure .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we will have four main blocks of problems in our negotiations .
The first one concerns the level of the payment appropriations , which have been cut by the Council by EUR 1.8 billion .
In the evaluation of the Commission 's proposal , Parliament thinks it is too modest and the Council thinks it is too ambitious ; so I hope that we will be able to find a compromise and a proper budget for Europe by the final stage of our negotiations .
The second block of problems is concentrated in Heading 4 , and here I would like to mention three elements : additional resources for Kosovo and Palestine ; the emergency aid reserve , especially as there will be needs requiring a fast response this year and next year ; and of course the upcoming donors ' conference to help Georgia , and here - at least today - we do not yet have a decision on the table .
The third block which the Commission sees as a problem concerns administrative expenditure , where as usual the Council approves posts but cuts the financial funding .
This means that for the Commission , at this stage and with these proposals , it will not be possible to recruit additional staff , although 250 enlargement-related posts have been approved .
The fourth block concerns the food facility .
At the Council 's prompting , we made a proposal which has not yet at this stage been approved as an instrument by the Parliament .
So this is the fourth block of our negotiations which I see as problematic .
So , in general , there are only these four points which may cause difficulties .
For the rest it is very well prepared and very well calculated , and I think that for the most part we can very rapidly reach agreement .
If we maintain the spirit of cooperation which we have today , I hope that we will solve all our problems .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , firstly , thank you for this discussion .
I should like to say to Mrs Haug that this budget clearly is ambitious , even if the levels are not quite the same when you refer to the various headings .
However , we naturally share the same objective and we obviously need to reconcile our differences of opinion .
We now have two months in which to do so .
Secondly , Mr Lewandowski , regarding your comments on the consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon , we share your desire which is actually to consider that the ratification process has not yet been concluded and that it is therefore wise not to enter these costs in the budget .
I think that we clearly share the same opinion on this issue .
You mentioned Georgia .
The European Commissioner has actually referred to this as one of the major issues that we need to resolve , and the Council has expressed its views on the subject .
We must now endeavour to flesh out the policy areas identified yesterday afternoon .
Mr Virrankoski , with regard to the preliminary draft budget , you say that it is already extremely tight and that what we are actually doing is tightening it even more .
That is true .
However , first we must draw a distinction between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations .
In the case of commitment appropriations , there is an increase of just under 3 % compared to 2008 .
I think that this shows how ambitious we are .
Regarding payment appropriations , it is true that a reduction of a similar magnitude is planned .
I tried to explain that we carried out a very detailed analysis and that this is not the result of a random and undiscerning method of reducing payment appropriations .
It is purely and simply the result of an analysis of the rate of utilisation of appropriations of the various policies .
I tried to explain this , heading by heading .
To go back to heading 1 briefly , it is true that there is a reduction , but , at the same time , within that reduction , there is a planned increase of EUR 50 million for convergence countries and regions ; I wanted to mention this .
Under heading 4 - the Commissioner mentioned this as well - there is an increase in appropriations for Palestine and Kosovo , and half of the reduction in appropriations entered in the draft budget relates to the emergency reserve that can be financed , as has been the case so far , through the redeployment of resources .
Obviously , we have until November to discuss in more detail issues that are specific , clearly defined and subject to certain parameters , and we shall endeavour to find the best possible compromise , a compromise that would , of course , help us forge ahead .
That was an important interim debate on the budget .
You were all very quick to refer to the crisis and the war in Georgia .
As you know , I made a statement to the European Council on that issue yesterday , and I sense that the opinion I expressed yesterday is shared by all sides in the European institutions . Thank you .
Electronic communications networks and services - European Electronic Communications Market Authority - Common approach to the use of the spectrum released by the digital switchover - Electronic communications networks and services , protection of privacy and consumer protection ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Catherine Trautmann , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services , Directive 2002 / 19 / EC on access to , and interconnection of , electronic communications networks and associated facilities , and Directive 2002 / 20 / EC on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services - C6-0427 / 2007 - ,
the report by Pilar del Castillo Vera , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Electronic Communications Market Authority - C6-0428 / 2007 - ,
the report by Patrizia Toia , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on reaping the full benefits of the digital dividend in Europe : a common approach to the use of the spectrum released by the digital switchover , and
the report by Malcolm Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2002 / 22 / EC on universal service and users ' rights relating to electronic communications networks , Directive 2002 / 58 / EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector and Regulation ( EC ) No 2006 / 2004 on consumer-protection cooperation - C6-0420 / 2007 - .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you only have to look at some figures to see the strategic importance of telecommunications and new information technologies in Europe : telecom technologies alone account for one quarter of European growth and 40 % of our productivity gains .
If you look at a number of studies that have been conducted , you can see that , over the past 12 years , 50 % of the growth gap between the US and Europe is linked to disparities in the development of our information and communication technologies .
Europe therefore needs to invest in this sector on a long-term basis . A speedy revision of the EU 's electronic communications regulatory framework is consequently essential to promote competitiveness and growth in the European economy .
As I said at my hearing before the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , the objective of the French Presidency is to reach a political agreement at the Council of Telecoms Ministers on 27 November , the substance of which will , of course , be based as closely as possible on the positions adopted by the European Parliament .
To achieve this , the Council has planned to hold some 15 working meetings throughout the second half of 2008 .
I should therefore like to take a few moments to inform you of the position prevailing in the Council on the main issues which are addressed by the three rapporteurs , Mrs Trautmann , Mrs del Castillo and Mr Harbour .
My colleague , Éric Besson , will deal with Mrs Toia 's report on the issue of the digital dividend .
I should like to commend the quite considerable amount of work that has been done by the three rapporteurs on issues which I shall discuss in a moment .
In my opinion , the work that they have done helps clarify the situation and provides a new basis for entering into discussions with the Council , and I should like to emphasise that there is a broad consensus between our two institutions , Parliament and the Council .
Firstly , I should like to congratulate Catherine Trautmann for the work that she has done so far as rapporteur on the Directive amending the Framework Directives on ' access ' and ' authorisation ' .
I should like to commend her willingness to take into account the challenge raised by the deployment of next-generation networks , a concern which is shared by all stakeholders in this sector and by the Member States .
Mrs Trautmann , your report emphasises the need to continue to promote competition , especially infrastructure-based competition ; that is the view of the Council .
Your report suggests greater use of the geographical segmentation of the market in order to remove ex ante regulatory obligations where competition is effective .
This second issue is being debated in the Council .
I should now like to turn to the regulation of the markets , in particular the proposed extension of the Commission 's right to veto remedies proposed by regulators .
Mrs Trautmann emphasises in her report that the Commission should play the role of an arbitrator rather than of a judge ; she is therefore proposing a coregulation mechanism whereby a matter may be referred to the reformed regulator group , for example , when a remedy proposed by a regulator is disputed by the Commission .
Parliament 's rapporteur is therefore seeking a compromise between the status quo and the right of veto which was originally proposed by the Commission and which , as you know , has met some opposition from the Member States .
This constitutes real progress compared to the original text on what is a highly sensitive issue for the Council , which does not seem quite willing , at this moment in time , to give so much power to the Commission .
Another issue that has been the subject of heated debate is functional separation .
Mrs Trautmann 's report proposes the retention of the imposition of functional separation as an exceptional remedy for national regulatory authorities ( NRAs ) .
This exceptional remedy would be more restricted in terms of its implementation , since it would require both the prior agreement of the Commission and a favourable opinion from the Body of European Regulators in Telecommunications ( BERT ) .
The approach adopted by the rapporteur generally seems to be consistent with the compromise emerging in the Council in this respect , namely the retention of the imposition of this remedy , without its use , however , being allowed to become widespread .
Another major issue in these negotiations is the management of radio frequencies .
Your rapporteur is , like the Council , in favour of a gradual approach to changes in spectrum management that strikes a balance between the principles of neutrality put forward by the Commission and the complexity of the management of this scarce resource .
The report finally adopted by the Industry Committee also introduces a new element by advocating the creation of a Radio Spectrum Policy Committee ( RSPC ) responsible for advising the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on radio spectrum policy issues .
This Committee would be assigned the task of establishing a strategic legislative programme on the use of radio spectrum .
On this issue , I believe that the Council has taken into account the legitimate request from the European Parliament for it to be more involved in the formulation of broad guidelines for the management of radio frequencies , but , as you know , the Council also wants to avoid a situation where there are too many bodies responsible for this resource and to preserve the responsiveness required by these markets and by radio frequencies as a strategic resource for innovation .
I wish to commend the quality of the report by Pilar del Castillo on the establishment of the European Electronic Communications Market Authority ; I would point out that it touches on a highly sensitive issue , one that is also the subject of a broad consensus between Parliament and the Council .
The report , Mrs del Castillo , concludes that the European Authority , in the form originally proposed , is not the right solution to strengthen cooperation between regulators and promote the harmonisation of practices ; this is also the Council 's position .
You are opposed to the creation of a European super-regulator and you are proposing the establishment of a body - BERT - which would be closer to the regulators , which would enjoy greater independence from the European Commission and which would have a much simpler structure and governance than those originally proposed .
The Council is aware of all of these arguments but , as you know , a majority of Member States do still have some reservations about the idea of establishing a Community body .
Over the next few weeks , the Council must therefore try to strike a balance between two options : the institutionalisation of a private-law body comprising European regulators or the establishment of a Community body whose independence must be guaranteed .
My final comments relate to the report by Malcolm Harbour , whom I wish to thank for the quality of his work ; I especially welcome the fact that it takes into account fundamental consumer rights .
Parliament , like the Council , supports the measures proposed by the Commission aimed at strengthening consumer protection , an issue that has come to the fore recently given the increased impact of communications services on the daily lives of our citizens .
In particular , Mr Harbour 's report proposes that the information to be included in contracts should be specified , that the measures to be taken by Member States for disabled users should be strengthened and that lead times should be reduced for number portability in order to improve competition .
The Council broadly endorses all these measures .
I think that the issue of the protection of privacy , which was dealt with under the enhanced cooperation procedure with Mr Alvaro in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , is also an important matter that needs to be addressed and I am delighted , for example , that unsolicited communications by SMS have been taken into account .

As regards the specific issue of copyright , Mr Harbour 's report proposes the retention of the obligation on network providers of electronic communications services to provide subscribers with all useful information on the unlawful uses of networks and services .
It also proposes to encourage cooperation between all stakeholders in order to promote the dissemination of legal offers .
These appear to be balanced measures , but we shall need to take into account that this is a highly sensitive issue , both for your House and for the Council .
To conclude what I have to say on those areas for which I am responsible , Mr President , before handing over to my colleague , Éric Besson , on the issue of the digital dividend , we feel that Parliament and the Council are very much in agreement on these issues , although it is true that there are slight differences of opinion regarding the level of detail to be included in this Directive .
We shall naturally do our utmost to continue working closely with Parliament and the Commission so that compromises may be reached between the three institutions as quickly as possible .
Thank you , Mr Chatel .
Luc Chatel is the Minister of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs .
We break new ground today by hearing a second representative of the Council , namely Mr Éric Besson , Minister of State to the Prime Minister .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as my colleague , Luc Chatel , has just said , it falls to me to speak to you about the very important issue of the digital dividend .
On 12 June 2008 , the Council adopted conclusions on the Commission Communication entitled ' Reaping the full benefits of the digital dividend in Europe : a common approach to the use of the spectrum released by the digital switchover . '
The switch-off of analogue radio broadcasting will free up spectrum in the UHF band , which is particularly appealing due to the propagation properties of UHF radio waves .
The switchover to digital broadcasting therefore offers an unprecedented opportunity of which we must reap the full benefits .
That is the purpose of Mrs Toia 's report on which you will be expressing an opinion , and , at this point , I should like to commend the quality of the work that she has done .
As Mrs Toia has shown in her report , the combined value of the electronic communications services markets that depend on the use of the radio-wave spectrum in the EU amounts to more than EUR 250 billion , or about 2.2 % of the EU 's annual gross domestic product .
Good spectrum management can significantly contribute to the Lisbon goals of competitiveness and economic growth and satisfy a wide range of the social , cultural and economic needs of European citizens .
In practical terms , wise and judicious use of the digital dividend will help reduce the digital divide , especially in underprivileged , remote or rural areas .
As your rapporteur rightly points out , radio spectrum released by the digital switchover needs to be reallocated as soon as possible .
I can tell you now that the Council essentially agrees with the rapporteur 's view that a coordinated approach to the use of spectrum at European level will ensure the optimal use of the digital dividend .
The identification of a harmonised sub-band for new electronic communications services will enable operators and equipment manufacturers to benefit from a market of sufficient size .
This is a strategic issue for the industrial and political development of Europe .
If Europe succeeds in coordinating action on the digital dividend , as it did for GSM , it will be presented with a historic opportunity of relaunching , over the next 20 years , a major policy for the benefit of its industry and consumers .
However , as emphasised by Ministers last June , the Council considers that we should respect the principle to ensure flexibility of usage of the digital dividend notwithstanding constraints necessary to avoid harmful interference or to promote general interest objectives such as large availability of the service or media pluralism and cultural and linguistic diversity .
National discussions on spectrum allocation must proceed with all speed , but , if the Community approach is to be successful , it must remain consistent with the national decisions currently being taken on the reuse of frequencies .
I should like to conclude by saying that the Council therefore calls on the Commission - and I know that it has already done so - to initiate the studies and consultations necessary to define a coherent basis for the coordinated usage of spectrum .
The Commission is also called on to support and assist the Member States in achieving this goal .
The Council is therefore looking forward with great interest to the Commission 's report to be submitted by December 2008 on the results of this process and on any further steps required .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteurs , Catherine Trautmann , Pilar del Castillo Vera , Patrizia Toia and Malcolm Harbour , for very difficult work and very constructive proposals .
I would like to thank Parliament generally , because the work has been very hard , and I know it has involved a very thorough and extensive preparation - hearings with the stakeholders and the consideration of literally of hundreds of amendments - and I know that you have also been working against the clock , but it is often in such circumstances that the best results are achieved , and that certainly applies here .
No matter how adequate the existing regulatory framework is in many respects , everybody agrees that there is a real need to improve it .
Why ?
We have to reinforce the protection of consumers by ensuring that they can exercise a properly informed choice between a variety of competing products and services .
We have to ensure that when Member States manage their national spectrum - which is a very precious resource , as has already been said - they realise social and economic benefits because their management is efficient , transparent and flexible and because there is better coordination at EU level .
We have to make sure that our regulatory system will facilitate and not hinder investments in next-generation networks so that Europe remains competitive in the 21st century .
Finally - and this underlies all our endeavours - we must reinforce the internal market .
This is not about paying lip service but about equipping the EU with an efficient competitive single market that brings economy of scale not only to the electronic communications sector but also to the citizens and to the wider economy .
It is this economy at large which benefits and which has to be reinforced .
Let us take advantage of our European continent : let us get rid of the barriers that lead to the fragmentation and to less economic and social efficiency .
All of these four fundamental subjects - consumer protection , spectrum , investment and the internal market - are very important , and Parliament has understood that .
I must congratulate Parliament for identifying the underlying problems and having made the right diagnosis for putting forward real solutions .
Let me now pass to the internal-market mechanisms .
That is where the stakes are highest and where the discussion ahead with the Council still promises to be very difficult .
I say this in spite of the recognition by the ministers themselves at the end of the Slovenian presidency that we need to improve the consistency of the internal market for electronic communications .
Recognition is all very well , but what are the solutions ?
Parliament has rightly seen that there is just one debate - not two - when it comes to the body and to the mechanisms for improving the functioning of the internal market , in particular the Article 7 mechanisms for notification of national market reviews .
Those are the two sides of the same internal market coin - they belong together .
We all know that the existing arrangements for cooperation between national regulators within the Community framework - i.e. the European Regulators Group ( ERG ) - have to be improved if they are to be useful .
That is why the Commission welcomes the amendments that build on the Commission 's proposal for a more transparent , accountable and effective form of cooperation .
Above all , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's proposals for a Community body .
Such a Community body , with all it entails , has to be fit for purpose : it has to operate in such a way that it is efficient , fair and reliable , and also above the suspicion that it is perhaps closer to some regulators than to others .
That is why , if we are to be coherent , we must also be coherent with the financing .
National financing , in whatever proportion , will call a body 's credibility into question and will open the door to administrative and legal uncertainty .
We know from experience that hybrid financing creates problems , so we have to avoid creating such problems .
In this respect , I would like to warn Parliament to be on its guard against what I call the Belgian football club approach , which I must explain to you .
You know that the ERG was created by the Commission as an adviser to the Commission .
Recently , the national regulators established a private body law under Belgian law to act as a secretariat to the International Regulators Group - the IRG .
The IRG operates outside the Community framework - it has a membership beyond the 27 Member States - and in practice nobody understands where the IRG begins and where the ERG ends .
The Commission wanted to end this confusion by establishing a clearly defined and accountable authority .
We certainly do not want a Belgian private body , alien to the Community approach and the guarantees it provides , to become involved in European decision-making .
That is why there is still a need for further consideration on a number of legal and institutional issues concerning the establishment of the body , in particular its governance structure .
We have to find the right means to safeguard the independence of the national regulators in a way that guarantees a Community-based approach .
But , above all , I must stress the fact that the body is a means to an end and not the end in itself .
The body is nothing more than an instrument in order to improve regulatory consistency .
That is why the other side of the internal market coin is so important and that is why the European Parliament is absolutely right to reinforce the Article 7 consistency procedure for notifying national market reviews in which , by the way , the body will play its part .
Parliament 's new arbitration mechanism in Article 7a shows that the Commission and Parliament stand together in seeing the need for operational consistency mechanisms that will make a real difference .
Parliament 's solution is to enable the Commission to step in to require a national regulator to change its regulatory approach if , after a peer review by the body , a problem has been identified .
We have to discuss further details of Parliament 's approach so as to respect the institutional balance laid down in the Treaty , but what I find absolutely right is the logic of the approach taken , which is to find a balance between the interests of subsidiarity and those of the internal market , and then to draw clear operational conclusions .
Thanks to a peer review carried out through the body , there is a means to benefit from the pooled experience of the national regulators , alongside their sensitivity to what are legitimate local differences .
It surely makes sense that when the body advises that there is an internal market problem , in conjunction with the concerns raised by the Commission as the guardian of the Treaty , then there should be consequences .
In the interests of the internal market and of legal ( and ' legal ' also means business ) certainty , there must be a power for the Commission to require the notifying national regulator to change its approach in such a case , because we cannot accept that , having been through the very lengthy Article 7 review process the notifying national regulator can say ' thank you very much for your point of view , but I prefer my approach ' , and to simply act as if nothing had happened .
That is why I congratulate Parliament , which is right to say that the whole process cannot simply end in a whimper .
Industry , consumers and taxpayers will not appreciate it if we build sophisticated and time-consuming regulatory systems which are not capable of making a difference .
That is why the system needs to have a backstop , namely that ultimately there can be a binding decision of the Commission .
I mentioned earlier the importance of creating a regulatory framework friendly to new investments .
That is why the Commission , in its proposal , not only maintained but reinforced the competition-based approach to regulation as competitive markets drive new investment .
That is also why the Commission is grateful to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for trying to make the telecom rules more investment-friendly , especially as regards the large investments that are needed to modernise the old copper wires by putting fast optical fibre network into place .
These outdated local loops - and that is the vast majority of European households and small businesses which depend on being connected to the internet - represent the choke point of the high-speed internet , the point where the information superhighway slows down to a crawl , and that is why I applaud Parliament 's move to encourage infrastructure competition on these next-generation access networks by proactively promoting the sharing of the ducts that house the new fibres , and the risk-sharing of new facilities .
These efforts are welcome and are in line with the recommendation that I am currently preparing to give guidance for national regulators on these issues .
But the upgrading of the choke points in the high-speed internet must not become a new and enduring bottleneck for competition in the future , and we have plenty of evidence that the transition to fibre will make the business case for alternative investors much more difficult , because unbundling of fibre is currently neither technically nor economically possible , which means that alternative operators must invest in their own fibre or use a bitstream service of the incumbent .
We have to face the facts : in many geographical zones , where infrastructure competition proves not to be feasible , appropriate regulation will continue to be the only way to keep competition alive .
Competition brings lower prices , better quality of services and more choice , so that consumers are the real winners .
But I do not kid myself . I can see that Parliament shares these concerns .
Choice needs to be real ; consumers need to be empowered to make the best out of competition , and to be empowered means they need to be informed .
That is why the enhanced ability to switch your supplier is so important .
I welcome Parliament 's support on the need to ensure that number portability is completed within one day .
If it can happen in Australia within two hours , then one day should be entirely feasible in Europe .
I also welcome the clarity that Parliament has added with the changes on enhanced consumer information , so that consumers really know what service they are getting from their providers and can make useful comparisons .
This enhanced transparency also serves to support the open architecture of the internet , which we underline ; which we want ; which we defend .
If there are any restrictions on accessing the internet , it is imperative that the consumers are clearly informed of what those restrictions are , and I am glad to see that both the Commission and Parliament stand in agreement on these points .
However , what I find more difficult is to understand why Parliament has changed the text in such a way that subscribers are not similarly empowered and informed when it comes to the privacy of their personal data .
I know that Parliament takes the protection of consumers and of citizens ' fundamental rights very seriously , and that is why I am so surprised that the breach notification requirements in the Commission 's proposals are diluted by the changes now on the table .
The default position should be that subscribers know of a breach of security concerning their personal data so that they can take precautions , and it cannot be left to the service provider to determine whether such a breach is likely to cause a subscriber harm - it is the subscriber and his own data which have to be protected .
How , for example , can a provider know how sensitive that information is in an individual case ?
I would , therefore , urge Parliament to reconsider its position on this issue .
Finally , concerning spectrum : I had no need to persuade Parliament of the importance of this subject .
That is why the Commission welcomes the politicisation of the debate surrounding the spectrum issue .
This debate goes far beyond the technical level .
Even if it will continue to owe a great deal to the hard work and solutions produced by the Radio Spectrum Committee , much has been achieved by the radio spectrum decision .
We should preserve this .
But Parliament is right : more progress depends on integrating a political layer to this process , so that the stakes can be properly debated .
A more efficient - and that means a more coordinated - approach among Member States brings about the prospect of a win-win scenario , whereby the achievement of social and cultural goals is enhanced alongside the great benefit for Europe 's economy .
Important progress in maximising the digital dividend and other questions related to this can only be assured with the strategy and important political decisions agreed both by Parliament and the Council .
So the Commission supports Parliament 's legitimate goal of greater involvement in setting spectrum policy and accepts in principle the changes Parliament is proposing .
Of course , the Council will have its say .
I wish to signal that the Commission will stand by Parliament in this debate and will help the Council to arrive at an agreement with Parliament .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , for the reform of the regulatory framework that we are discussing to be justifiable , it has to bring about tangible improvements , both for consumers in terms of prices , access and connection speed and for companies in terms of the prospect of fair competition , new investment and competitiveness .
The large number of stakeholders involved means that there are divergent , even contradictory , interests at play .
For my part , from a very early stage , I made a point of listening to views on all sides and also of sending a timely and reliable message to companies and consumers in order to build or rebuild their trust .
Electronic communications are a real opportunity for European growth .
The sector accounts for 3 % of European GDP .
We still need to be able to reap the full benefits of this potential in the EU in terms of investment and the development of services .
This requires competition , but not competition alone .
Steps need to be taken to create conditions for responsible and sustainable development ; in other words , to build an ecosystem for the sort of knowledge economy that we all want to see .
We must now consider ICT as a resource .
It is therefore a matter of both public and private concern that requires us to support flexible rules and the responsibility of all stakeholders through cooperation between regulators and the Commission , in the same way that operators and customers cooperate on the basis of a contractual agreement .



There are four key areas that I want to see strengthened : firstly , customer service , whether in terms of access - through the more widespread territorial deployment of networks - fair prices or quality ; secondly , sustained industrial activity with a view to stimulating job creation and innovation , since technological progress is also effective in bringing down prices ; thirdly , the competitiveness of small and large companies in order to guarantee sustainable competition in the EU Member States and the necessary investment , especially in fibre optics , that will enable us to compete more effectively in a global market ; and , finally , legal certainty - the need to ensure the reliability of the system by giving responsibility to those involved and encouraging mutual cooperation , especially among regulators but also between regulators and the Commission .
I was pleased to note that , on this basis , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy accepted my compromise proposals - often by a large majority - and I should like to thank my colleagues for making themselves so readily available , despite deadlines that were , at times , rather tight but which meant that we have been able to keep to the timetable with a view to achieving the objective of amending this Regulation before the end of the current parliamentary term .
This is the result of a collective effort .
I personally feel that the sector has generally responded positively to these guidelines , and I hope that our partners in the Council will do likewise .
I have listened carefully to Mr Chatel and Mr Besson and their views , as well as to Commissioner Reding , and I should like to thank them for their informed and generally positive opinions .
To come back to the points that are still under discussion , I should like to talk about the issue of remedies .
Without any encroachment on the powers of national regulators , a consensus has emerged on the need for a more consistent application of remedies at EU level .
However , there has been unanimous - or almost unanimous - rejection of the Commission proposal that it should have the right to veto remedies .
Under the mechanism provided for in my report , each body has its rightful place : the Commission may raise doubts about a remedy but cannot completely reject it unless BERT also delivers a negative opinion .
Conversely , for functional separation to be imposed as a remedy , this would require the agreement of both the Commission and BERT .
With a restriction of this nature , such separation remains a tangible threat but one which cannot be imposed lightly .
As regards radio spectrum , our proposals are directed towards more flexible management of this scarce resource but in a moderate and proportionate manner , whilst , at the same time , introducing measures aimed at optimising spectrum management .
For us , the first building block is a genuine European spectrum policy that could be presented , once the package has been adopted , at a major conference to be held early in the next parliamentary term .
As regards new networks , these were absent from the Commission proposal , or poorly addressed , at a time when Europe is already involved in this technological revolution .
We felt that it was essential immediately to provide the Member States and regulators with the guidelines and tools that they need to encourage investment and manage , where necessary , the deployment of these networks . For this reason , our proposals were validated by a panel of recognised experts just before the summer holidays .
A final issue has arisen rather late in the day : the protection of intellectual property rights .
It is unfortunate that this debate has come to the fore at this stage in the review of the telecom package ; I think that it would be out of place to discuss mechanisms for ensuring full respect for intellectual property rights here .
I just want to say that I hope that we shall be able to complete the review of this Package without undue pressure and without being disrupted by this issue , albeit an important one , given that creative content is the subject of a Commission communication .
I shall deal with the remaining points in the two minutes that I have to conclude .

rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by emphasising what Mr Chatel said : the electronic communications sector is responsible for 25 % of European growth and 40 % of productivity .
In short , these numbers confirm the Lisbon Agenda statements on the need to develop a European economy based on knowledge , where the great driver of development is , in fact , electronic communications .
The Commission has demonstrated this knowledge and awareness by proposing a set of measures which redefine the regulatory framework which was adopted in 2002 .
Several markets have been deregulated and there are still some important regulations pending whose aim is to give full forward thrust to the competitiveness of the internal market .
I shall , however , focus of course on Parliament 's position .
A position , Mr Chatel , representative of the Council , Mrs Viviane Reding , representative of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , which has a common denominator , a factor which makes Parliament 's position , in my opinion , an extraordinarily consistent , coherent and powerful one .
And the common denominator in the reports drawn up by Parliament and approved by the appropriate committees , is simply the concept of shared responsibility .
The report by Mrs Trautmann is based on shared responsibility .
The proposal to establish a body of national regulators is based on shared responsibility .
We have heard in both cases that shared responsibility is the tool still needed today in the electronic telecommunications market in Europe , and everything that has been proposed stems from that concept of shared responsibility , whether it relates to interplay in shared regulation between the Commission and the board of national regulators , known as BERT , or to the organisation and funding of BERT .
As time is pressing and the debates have already been lengthy and will continue to be in the future , I must now refer solely to BERT .
This is a proposal which fits in which the concept of shared responsibility and developing an essentially successful market which still requires a few props up front in order to adjust fully to the rules of competition , a board based on cooperation between the Commission and the Member States in the form of the regulatory bodies .
Against that background , and in view of the current situation , the board 's duties are better defined , as are its structure , responsibility , accountability and funding .
And to that end I should like to say , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Chatel , that it is essential to maintain cohesiveness and consistency .
The co-funding that I have proposed and advocate for the board is compatible with the concept of shared responsibility which forms the backbone of any proposal made by Parliament , both in Mrs Trautmann 's report and in my own .
What would not , by contrast , be consistent and cohesive would be for a funding mechanism strictly based on Community funding to slip in through the back door ; it would not be consistent with the remainder of the proposal and would therefore bring about an enormous dysfunction with the concept and rationale behind the reform which Parliament is proposing .
I am convinced that both Parliament and the Commission , as well as the Council , are seeking to achieve the same objectives , we have proved as much , and I call for the equilibrium and good understanding we have so far had to continue so that we can pursue that course .
The sector we are debating is worth it .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the telecommunications world any medium which allows the transmission of voice , data and images is a precious resource .
This is why the idea that in a few years ' time there will be a significant , not to say massive , quantity of radio spectrum available , in other words new frequencies available for new uses , is a huge social and cultural opportunity as well as an economic and commercial one : in fact , someone has even quantified the commercial value of the digital dividend already .
We therefore need a suitable European policy , capable of exploiting this resource to the maximum , and turning Europe into a driver and not just an assembler of national policies .
As we all know , in other parts of the world , such as Japan and the USA , this resource is already being used to great effect , thereby giving businesses in those regions a competitive edge .
We have therefore got some time to make up - or at any rate use rapidly - and even if the digital switchover is completed in 2012 - a date which should be absolutely and comprehensively respected - we need to focus now , without delay , on reforming the radio spectrum and on the digital dividend .
The radio spectrum is a natural and hence a public resource .
Its value must therefore be exploited , for economic purposes certainly , but it also has a social value which must be exploited for the benefit of the general public , for example by guaranteeing wide accessibility for all citizens , including the disadvantaged , by bringing broadband services to the most remote areas of our country and thus eliminating the digital divide which is still a feature of so many parts of Europe , and I am not just thinking of rural areas but also of urban and industrial areas .
I was saying that time presses for the digital dividend and I think that we need to use this last part of the parliamentary term to make some progress together , Member States and Europe alike .
To the Commission and the Council I would say : move forward together in the direction of a more positive response to the need for harmonisation , a response which , as we have all been saying , will enable us to make optimal and more effective use of the digital dividend .
We are hoping for strong coordination at European level and an ability to speak with one voice in the international negotiations , which have opened , I believe , in Geneva .
Our report makes various points and I will just single out one or two : the need for a win-win strategy , as the Commissioner was saying , in other words an allocation of resources which satisfies audiovisual and media operators - who are already present in the field to ensure cultural pluralism and to defend cultural identities - and also answers the needs of and provides adequate space for telecommunications sectors , which need to develop new services and a broad range of technologies to respond to new requirements from modern consumers .
This means that media and telecommunications can operate together , in the spirit of colleagues , and on a level playing field .
However , there is a third party who I would like to see being a winner as well as the others : namely those users , even unlicensed users , who are represented by charitable bodies , local entities , small community networks and general interest associations .
Another point , with which I will conclude , Mr President , is one on which , as the Council representatives also said , there are differing views , in Parliament and between the various Member States , and that concerns the level of collaboration between the various authorities in this field .
I believe that on the one hand - and here Parliament is in agreement - we must respect the responsibility of Member States in terms of allocating frequencies , but we must also assess together the vital need for harmonisation , because we should all be aware that if we fail to harmonise , if we fail to coordinate and fail to take common decisions , the economic and social value of the spectrum will be diminished .
In my mind , I think of the successful and happy outcome of the GSM .
Therefore , on the basis of cost / benefit analyses carried out in various countries , as part of national projects , regarding the dividend sought by our report , on the basis of the broadest possible debate to be held in the Member States , involving both operators and the general public , I believe that in the end , with a big dose of political will at European level , we must all come to recognise the added value of a Europe-wide management of this resource which will , I believe , offer a challenge to Europe both socially and economically .
rapporteur . - Madam President , it is a privilege for me to be back here as rapporteur for the second time , because I was rapporteur for this directive in 2001 .
It has also been a privilege to work with my colleagues , Mrs Trautmann and Mrs del Castillo , because this has been a team effort .
This is a package .
As the Commissioner said , it has been a major achievement .
That is why we want to reform and improve consumers ' rights , so that they are well informed and able to take advantage of the offers that are available and able to encourage innovation .
We need a structure that will work , of course , and I would remind the Commissioner that it was this Parliament that argued for the Commission 's role under Article 7 .
We supported that role , against the Council at the time .
Nobody is more aware than this Parliament of the importance of getting the balance right , but , in looking at the team position , I would almost say that it is time for the regulators not just to accept responsibility , at a national level , for implementing the regulation consistently , but also to take on a share of that Community policymaking work .
In my view , whatever we end up with will only work if they have a stake in that body - I will leave you to decide what I mean by that !
I want to pay tribute to all members of the team that worked with me on improving this directive .
I thank both the Minister and the Commissioner for the kind remarks they have made about the improvements we have put forward .
It is a combination of work on users ' rights and on the E-Privacy Directive .
In this Parliament , responsibility for data protection and the residual expertise lies with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
In my view , it was a mistake to package the two together , but I think we have managed it successfully .
My colleague Alexander Alvaro will respond on those aspects , and the Commissioner should thank him for actually putting in the details of how data-breach notification works , because it was entirely unacceptable for the Commission to send us a proposal in which all the implementing details were delegated to a committee .
Those are big political decisions .
I agree with you that we still have a bit of work to do , but you should certainly thank him in the first place for doing that job for you .
As far as my side is concerned , I am disappointed that the whole of the universal service aspect is coming later .
We are doing this in two bites .
We are awaiting your report , which will come shortly .
I have made the most of the users ' rights aspects , but we still have work to do .
By that I mean that we want those empowered , well-informed consumers to make their choices on the basis of maximum clear information on price , on what is in the service , on whether there are any restrictions , and on whether the cost of a handset is included if they take a longer contract .
We want them to be able to shop easily and to be able to transfer their number quickly , and I am glad you support us on that point .
We also want them to be able to study the length of the contract and for the length of contract not to be used as a restriction when they try to move .
We also want to look at consumers ' entitlements .
They are entitled to data security .
They are entitled to secure and available networks .
They are entitled to networks where operators are not blocking anti-competitively a particular content or service .
We agree with your idea of having a new quality of service obligation , and think we have improved on that .
This is a very important entitlement .
Consumers are entitled to good quality universal emergency services and to caller location services .
Disabled users in particular are entitled to those services as well , and to better services .
However , I feel that consumers are also entitled to be informed about some of the problems they might encounter , be this potential for infringing copyright , potential for unauthorised use or potential , for example , for buying things that could damage their health , like counterfeit medicines .
Why should we not demand that electronic service providers carry public service messages in the same way that television channels do at the moment ?
That is what we are talking about , colleagues .
We are not talking about this as a mechanism for enforcing copyright , which is the responsibility of national governments , but we are talking about making life easier and better for consumers .
We have a bit of work to do , Commissioner , but I am pleased to say that I have agreement on a large packet of compromises and I am confident that they will be adopted .
I look forward to working with the French presidency to meet the ambitious timetable , because Europe needs us to meet that timetable .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DE ) Madam President , the interest of the Committee on Budgets in the legislation on electronic communication , the so-called telecom package , is naturally focused on the part involving expenditure from the European budget .
In other words , we are interested in the agency - the European Electronic Communications Market Authority proposed by the Commission and renamed the Body of European Regulators in Telecommunications ( BERT ) by our colleagues in the specialised committee .
To put it plainly , as things stand , we do not have enough money under subheading 1a for this agency in either form .
For this reason , we very much welcome the fact that the lead committee has taken our amendments on board in its report and is proposing a structure that puts less strain on our budget .
We must all work together , however , to ensure that we make BERT a European body and that we in the European Parliament retain control of it .
I must also remind the House that , under Article 47 of the Interinstitutional Agreement , Parliament and the Council must reach agreement on the funding of BERT .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion on the first part - better lawmaking - in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I refer the House to my written opinion , but there are three points to which I attach particular importance .
The first is the promotion and development of fibre-optic networks , known as next-generation networks .
In order to promote these networks , consideration must be given to risk-sharing for the funding of new facilities and to sharing of ducts .
Besides the telecommunications companies , other public enterprises must also be involved in duct-sharing .
My second point - and this has already been touched upon - is that the Commission 's centralisation drive , pursued by means of the authority , the right of veto and comitology procedure , must be firmly resisted .
Thirdly , the precise distribution of frequencies should not be laid down until numerous preliminary questions have been answered .
Does responsibility lie with the EU ?
For which aspects is it competent ?
What is the real extent of the digital dividend ?
And what is the impact of specific distribution models ?
Secondary services such as wireless microphone systems must not be endangered , for such systems are responsible for major transmissions of events such as the Olympic Games .
For that reason the results of the current studies by specialised bodies must be taken into account in the political decision-making process on the distribution of the frequency spectrum .
I hope that we shall then jointly achieve European added value for all stakeholders .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , Europe 's ability to be the leader in the field of telecoms and mobile internet is dependent on our ability to open up to new innovations and new services .
From that perspective , it would be dangerous to try and defend old structures and old players .
We need to open up , and that is why it is so important to use the digital dividend in a way that frees up the whole of the spectrum for new services and new opportunities , while at the same time defending old broadcasters and their services of today .
The possibility of developing different services in all parts of the spectrum must be freed up .
Where infrastructure competition is not there already , we must ensure that there is real competition via a functional separation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , allow me , in the space of sixty seconds , to make a few brief remarks on behalf of my honourable colleague Bernard Rapkay .
Particularly for us Socialists , the creation of a smooth-functioning internal market in telecommunication services is a very high priority .
We welcome the active role of the Commission in this domain .
In particular , consumers must be protected against the obvious abuses of power on the part of the large operators .
There is clearly still plenty of room for fee reductions .
The Commission 's initiatives on roaming show that interventions in price-setting are necessary in a market economy too .
We prefer to see the visible hand of the Commission than feel the invisible hand of the market , which is often the hand of a pickpocket in consumers ' purses and wallets .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) I shall conclude , Madam President , by thanking all the rapporteurs and especially Catherine Trautmann , who has done a tremendous job , as a result of which we can expect a very large majority tomorrow .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( NL ) Madam President , the package in itself contains sound proposals for protecting consumer rights and privacy , but unfortunately it lacks coherence and so creates legal uncertainty both for businesses and for consumers , because the scope is completely unclear .
I have the feeling that the Commission has let itself be led more by the internal institutional structures and the legal basis than by the real facts , because what are we actually talking about exactly ?
Is it about telephone systems ?
Surely that is completely out of date !
Or is it about mobile phones ?
What is Skype then ?
What are telephone payment services ?
Are they telecoms too ?
What about RFID networks ?
It is not clear .
Why are there rules for reporting breaches for telecom and Internet providers but not , for instance , for banks , insurance companies and social services , which often use the same data ?
What if the personal data collected by a firm are used by someone else , such as government departments , the police , the judicial authorities , as laid down in the data protection directive ?
Who is responsible for those data then ?
What use is that to a citizen ?
Where can I turn to as a citizen ?
Finally , I think we have to start looking urgently with the United States at transatlantic and international standards in this area .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( FI ) Madam President , Ministers , Commissioners , and Mrs Trautmann in particular , now is the time to think in actual terms of human rights in the information society , which we are improving , with democracy and good business practice as the main objectives .
Improvement is therefore necessary , and we are also improving the protection of privacy and security , as in the case of junk mail .
We insist on the principle of right of access playing a role and we are legislating on access to services , which is no insignificant matter : charges need to be low and broadband for everyone , for example , is a civil right .
We have now strengthened the status of the elderly and disabled in particular , and I think that is a humane and proper goal .
Secondly , the networks need to be competitive and we have to stop operators from preventing competition .
Instead , competition needs to be given a boost , and data terminal equipment on which you can only listen to one operator should not be allowed to be made .
That would be as crazy as having a radio which only played one station .
Broadcasters should now and always be guaranteed their own frequencies , because they never have the money to take part in auctions .
That is actually a firm basis for the information society , and we must always preserve it .
We nevertheless need room for 3G , and that is being organised .
We also need to ensure there is room for new technologies and innovation .
I have one more thing to say .
The fairer and more technically advanced Europe is , the better we will do both as a democratic force in the information society and as a community which fulfils the Lisbon objectives , which at present feel a long way off .
It is up to us : this is a legislative package which is a step in the right direction .
Rapporteur for opinion of the IMCO Committee . - ( RO ) Mrs. President , dear colleagues , Mrs. Commissioner , dear Ministers , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs involved in the work with the Telecom package .
I think Mrs. Trautmann 's report represents a balanced position and I support the compromise amendments proposed .
I am also glad that certain amendments were accepted , in particular those regarding the harmonization of the spectrum , as well as certain measures related to the global telecommunication services .
The European economic growth , as well as the consumer welfare , depends on a dynamic and competitive telecommunication sector .
Competitive markets have broadband available , the new comers on the market have brought increased speed and innovating services .
The framework directive in the telecommunication package should focus on increasing investments ; we also have to take into account next-generation networks and consumer options have to be more diversified , leading to lower costs and better services to their advantage .
In conclusion , I would like to express my confidence in the changes we intend to bring to the Telecom package , which shall be to the benefit of consumers , providing them with a broad range , lower costs and more diversified services .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
We can safely say that the Union can be credited with successes in the electronic communications sector over the last decade . Together with this , there are still some cross-border problems and inequalities with regard to access to broadband , the spread of the digital society and services .
If we really want a ' common ' market , the conditions for it must be created .
As a result of the debates held over the last few months , we voted in favour of creating BERT , which would simplify cooperation by the national regulatory authorities and would guarantee actual participation .
We still think that BERT should be accountable to and transparent to the European institutions .
However , a condition for this is Community funding ; cofinancing by the Member States would apparently ensure greater independence and efficiency , but this is not the case : we would pull this organisation out from under the control of the European Union and the European Parliament .
We cannot contribute to this .
We must continue to fight , with the Commission , to protect the interests of consumers , so that they should only have to bear the costs of the ever-expanding , new technologies where this is necessary , and so that , similarly to roaming , consumers cannot be swindled through invoicing either . Thank you .
Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education , let me point out that it is extremely important to treat the intellectual rights of originators as equal fundamental rights .
All of us , especially legislators , should bear in mind that if intellectual creativity is not protected and if , in the name of protecting personal data , the legal rights of originators are infringed , then the artistic content made available to users will also be restricted .
Piracy and the illegal distribution of music and films on the Internet are an indisputable reality .
The downside of technology , however , is that the injured party is the originators .
Whether we like it or not , they are the source of the material on offer .
On behalf of the Committee on Culture , I thus call on all Members in all committees and political groups to protect European creativity , thus safeguarding artistic content provided via new media .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner Reding has once again shown her decisiveness with the telecom package .
As regards the Commission proposal on the digital dividend , for the Committee on Culture and Education I worked with Mrs Toia very constructively .
On behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , I should also like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Mrs Niebler , for her excellent cooperation .
The Committee on Culture and Education sees radio and television as vital media for disseminating culture and language .
With the switchover from analogue to digital television , there is room available on the spectrum at the moment .
Mobile phone and broadband Internet providers are very interested in those frequencies .
The Committee on Culture and Education is not opposed to technological innovation , but it wants the rights of the present users , public and commercial , to be protected .
The cultural and linguistic diversity of broadcasts must continue to be fully guaranteed and the interests of consumers and their investment in television equipment must be safeguarded .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - Mr President , it is important to underline that the telecom evolution is not only a technological and economic process , but also a social and cultural event .
We should maintain and sanction the leading role of Europe in this process .
Two aspects should be taken into consideration : general and democratic access to electronic communications services , which means that everyone should have the right to access such services , and also the principle that culture and educational heritage should be transmitted and respected .
The Committee on Culture has tried to strike a balance between these interests .
As the draftsperson in the Committee on Culture on the Body of European Regulators in Telecom ( BERT ) , I only focused on the aspects which come under the responsibility of the Committee on Culture .
The BERT should be open to contacts not only with industry and the consumer groups , but with culture interest groups as well , as they can provide useful and reliable information on cultural aspects .
I think if we use the telecom evolution properly , the whole process can contribute to making Europe the world 's leading knowledge society - which is our main goal .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( FR ) Madam President , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work .
The Committee on Culture and Education has , from the outset , taken this whole issue very seriously because we can no longer legislate on the electronic network or on radio spectrum whilst ignoring the real nature of the content being distributed .
This cannot be done on the basis of purely technical or even economic criteria which do not take into account the objectives of cultural policy or the safeguarding of diversity .
The reality of a digital world requires us to work together with television broadcasters and electronic service providers and to legislate for an internal market in telecommunications which has become inseparable from the audiovisual market .
We also need a balanced response to the problem of illegal content on the Internet which will compel each of us to face up to our own responsibilities in a struggle that must concern us all if our children and our culture as we know it are to be protected .
I therefore support all these texts in their current form and I hope that our debate and the final vote will not be contaminated by ill-informed external pressure .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( PL ) Madam President , European framework legislation on telecommunications was adopted in the 1990s , effectively freeing national markets from state monopolies .
It resulted in a significant fall in the prices of calls offered by competing operators .
Recent years have seen revolutionary changes in communication technology : cell phones and the development of the Internet and wireless networks have diametrically changed the face of telecommunication .
EU law must reflect these changes , including the social implications .
Some 15 % of Europeans are disabled , and by 2020 the elderly will constitute 25 % of society .
It is precisely these people with special needs who should be provided with easier access to telecommunication services .
It is necessary to ensure cost-free access to a common alarm number , 112 , for people throughout the Union , including users of Internet telephony , and to other electronic voice communication services .
Furthermore , customers must have the right to be fully informed both of the legal obligations arising from the use of a given service , for example with respect to author 's rights , and of the legally imposed restrictions .
Above all , the key to better consumer protection is precise definition of the responsibilities of national regulatory bodies with respect to the day-to-day exercise of consumers ' rights .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( ES ) Madam President , the rapporteur , Mrs Trautmann , has said that intellectual property issues should not be part of this debate .
I agree with her because I believe that protection of intellectual property , like the protection of privacy and other legal concepts , have already been defined in other legal frameworks .
However , it should be pointed out now that the protection of intellectual property is still important as regards content updates .
Telecommunications have been described as super-highways where one can move freely ; but if someone commits a crime on the motorway , the police step in .
You cannot steal a car , drive it on the motorway and , when the police step in , say there is free movement on the motorway .
I believe that it is important from Parliament 's point of view for us to restate the importance of protecting intellectual property , to restate protection for private life , to restate even the right people have to privacy , a right which at the moment is being violated by major telecommunications companies .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , if you granted me the same speaking time as the three previous speakers , that would suit me fine .
I should observe in passing , however , that I was under the impression that I would have two and a half minutes .
So as not to waste any of that time , let me thank Malcolm Harbour , Catherine Trautmann and Pilar del Castillo Vera for our truly outstanding cooperation , to which Malcolm has already referred .
We tackled this issue without friction in a spirit of mutual trust and in particularly close cooperation .
It is , unfortunately , too late now to correct the structural defect of having the two directives lumped together .
Nevertheless , let me say in the brief time at my disposal that I am very pleased that the Commission addressed the general issue of data privacy , albeit rather superficially .
The fact is , Commissioner , that you would probably not give me your credit-card details , your telephone number and your address , even if I asked nicely .
The problem , when you are on the Net , is that much of this information may well be there already , in places you cannot imagine and where you would not like it to be .
To that extent I am pleased that I was able , in cooperation with other groups and Members , to help ensure that the right of consumers to have their personal details treated confidentially and their personal systems protected will be incorporated into this package .
I see that time is running out , but I do hope we shall have more opportunities to discuss this or that issue more thoroughly .
May I therefore say thank you again for our constructive cooperation , and perhaps we shall manage to advance the development of data privacy in Europe for the benefit of consumers .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , let me also begin with a word of thanks to our rapporteurs Mrs Trautmann , Mr Harbour , Mrs del Castillo and Mrs Toia and to all the shadow rapporteurs both for the good work performed by everyone and for their fruitful cooperation with those who were less closely involved with this dossier .
The last legal framework for market liberalisation dates from 2002 .
The importance of the market has already been emphasised today .
After all , if I may remind you of a statistic , a turnover of more than EUR 300 billion has been achieved by the telecommunications sector in Europe alone .
Thousands of jobs depend on this market , and so it is important that we continue to develop the legal framework which has stood the test since 2002 in such a way that new chapters can be added to this European success story .
To this end , of course , we must first and foremost adapt our legal framework to take account of new technological developments .
In the brief time that I , too , have been allocated , let me highlight two points that are of particular importance to me personally .
The first is investment in high-tech infrastructure in Europe .
We in Europe face the formidable challenge of investing as much as possible as quickly as possible in these new high-speed broadband networks .
That is one of the keys to a competitive Europe .
We must create the legal conditions in which these investments will bear fruit .
On the other hand , we must not create new monopolies and closed markets .
In committee , we ensured that the risk involved in creating the new networks would be fairly distributed and that regulators would have to take this risk-sharing into consideration in future .
In addition , we devoted a great deal of attention to the subject of frequency policy .
We favour a more flexible frequency policy in Europe .
I believe a good way can be found to share out the digital dividend so as to take account of broadcasters ' legitimate interests while providing as much flexibility as possible for new services too .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I only wish to deal with two points .
I should like to begin with an area in which we still have one or two matters to clear up with Pilar del Castillo Vera .
I refer to the question of how the independence and autonomy of the future small agency can be guaranteed and which is the most appropriate way to fund it .
There are highly diverse views on this point .
I would very much like to learn from the Council how its debates on this subject are shaping up , and how the Council would like to see the creation of the secretariat or BERT - or whatever name is adopted - being guaranteed and how it envisages the funding method .
In this respect , I believe the Commissioner was perfectly correct in stating that we want a European structure and have no wish to create structures that do not dovetail with the European legal system .
There are , as you know , two funding methods under discussion .
The first is the mixed financing suggested by the rapporteur and the second is the proposal I made , which my group supports , that we take the funding from the Community budget .
Be that as it may , it would be interesting to hear how the Council - which has , of course , had heated discussions on this point - and indeed the national regulators now stand on the funding issue .
My second question , which is also addressed to the Council , concerns the funding of the new networks .
Here too , we have adopted various amendments , including one I tabled in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which went into a little more detail on the possible form of a risk-sharing system if companies make the requisite investments and competitors are to have access to the networks right from the start .
As far as I have heard , the Council thinks differently and does not wish to go into such detail or give companies a guarantee that any kind of risk-sharing can take place .
I should be grateful for your comments on these points .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the slowdown of production and economic growth in Europe is also being felt by the telecommunications sector which is currently undergoing various crises .
It is a sector which demands investment , which is driven by research and innovation , and which also needs a fair amount of time in which to make its own choices .
I therefore think that we need to provide all possible support and that our review package regarding the regulatory framework can boost the revitalisation of this sector by providing a stable , solid and effective legal framework .
This I believe is the purpose of our work in Parliament and in the ITRE Committee .
We have worked with this aim in mind : to provide a framework , as Mrs Trautmann was saying , which is less complex , clearer and more effective than the previous one , in the conviction that sometimes we do not need more rules or more laws , but instead reliable and effective instruments to apply the existing rules and sometimes even dismantle the current framework .
We have worked hard to create an open , competitive market , trying to resolve the eternal dichotomy between old , not to say historic and formerly monopolistic , operators , and new operators , by saying that there can be room for everyone in a balanced framework as long as there is business acumen and design expertise , and if the resources are available .
Finally , I think we stressed - and I in particular feel that this is a crucial point - that in a more flexible and deregulated framework the role of regulation , of the various responsibilities , of the chain of responsibility , is vital ; and I concur with the Commissioner 's point just now that it is important for the various bodies in charge of the essential task of regulation to have clearly defined roles and areas of responsibility .
One last point , which has been mentioned by several colleagues in addition to the rapporteur , whose work we have all praised , and that is the role of the consumer : the consumer is often relegated to the background , but we want to bring him to the fore and put him in the spotlight because he , I would say , together with business , is the real driving force in the marketplace .
Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to start by thanking all the rapporteurs on the electronic communications package for their work , starting with the organisation of hearings and ending with the preparation of the reports .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Reding for her reliable and active work in the sphere of electronic communications , both on roaming and also on this package .
At the same time , I am not convinced that the amendments made by the various committees to the drafts submitted by the Commission will result in the better use of resources , competition within the single EU market and efficiency for consumers .
I will give you just a few reasons why .
Firstly , it is possible that the joint structure formed of the national regulators , BERT , will be a more democratic regulatory structure than the authority proposed by the Commission , but it may be that BERT will function in accordance with worse cooperative principles and will weaken the Commission 's capacity to take regulatory decisions .
To take a second example , the functional distribution of the telecommunications businesses , separating access to the networks from other retail products , was a courageous proposal by the Commission .
It seems , though , that this separation requirement as an exceptional measure , to be imposed by the national regulator , will in fact never be used in many markets .
It is no secret that in the smaller EU states the power of regulators to adopt such exceptional measures against large companies will be very limited , and so I am not convinced that in this case Parliament is making progress in terms of strengthening the single European market compared with the European Commission 's proposal .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , to the many thank-yous we have heard I should like to add a very special one of my own .
I was responsible for the framework directive in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and it is thanks to the political instincts of Catherine Trautmann in media matters and her ability to work in a very structured and systematic manner that we in Parliament have perhaps been able to prevent the pursuit of a misguided media policy through the report on the framework directive .
We shall see .
Commissioner , in my view , Parliament has made crucial changes to the draft framework directive as regards competition law but also , and more especially , on frequency-trading .
I found that your initial proposals for the framework directive were purely market-focused and vastly overestimated the digital dividend .
Thankfully , these proposals did not appeal to the members of the Committee on Culture and Education or , subsequently , to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
On the contrary , my fellow Members put public cultural and political interests and the general public good at the heart of their deliberations , and I believe this is reflected most clearly in the following elements of the Trautmann report :
Radio frequencies are defined as a public good and will also remain the responsibility of the Member States .
Priority will be given to broadcasting in particular but also to opinion-forming services .
Your attempt to force broadcasting onto the defensive has failed , Commissioner .
It will be easier to introduce pan-European services - that is a good thing , as I am sure you will agree .
The Member States will also have primary responsibility for further harmonisation of frequencies .
If there are difficulties , decisions will not be taken by the Commission alone - Parliament will also be involved .
BERT will play a major role .
It goes without saying , as far as I am concerned , that its funding must be European .
I hope we shall manage to ensure that it is .
Besides the framework directive and the point about frequencies , I would also like to say something about two other reports , beginning with the Harbour report .
In your report , Mr Harbour , there really are some very good provisions for consumers and consumer interests .
Greater consideration will be given in future to the interests of people with disabilities , for example .
I also believe that you even contribute to media pluralism through your proposed rules on mandatory services .
My group does not agree , however , with the attempt that is made in the report to regulate copyright too .
We do not like that at all .
Neither the French model - and this is addressed to the Council Presidency too - nor the ' three strikes ' model has our support - on the contrary .
This attempt does not allay any of our concerns about copyright or about the protection of privacy on the Internet .
Let me conclude with a few words on the Alvaro report .
You have spoken with great conviction once again , Mr Alvaro , about data privacy .
I find , as you have suggested in your speeches , that there is no consistent line yet on matters such as the protection of IP addresses .
Our experience of the telecoms scandal and the trade in addresses through call centres has shown that IP addresses must be given maximum protection , and I hope that we shall reach agreement to that effect within the next fortnight .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , I hope that many of our citizens are following this debate and becoming involved before the vote as it involves such major changes , especially regarding internet services .
The European United Left has three main areas that we would like particularly to highlight :
Firstly , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left is against the proposal to establish a new European authority in this area .
It will be more expensive and more complicated .
It is unnecessary to set up yet another European authority .
Secondly , greater emphasis must be placed on geographical differences and different infrastructure when it comes to electronic services .
We must emphasise that access for consumers must be equal so that no more gulfs are built into our societies .
There must not be any differences in access to electronic services between those who live in cities and regions with a strong economy and those who live in regions with a weak economy and sparsely populated areas .
When it is not society or the state but private players who are to take over such important investments in infrastructure , there is a clear risk that not all citizens will have the same access at the same cost .
Thirdly , the GUE / NGL Group reacts against the major influence exerted by different industrial lobby groups .
The telecom package should not affect copyright , but the lobbyists have nevertheless gained a hearing especially for this in the proposal .
The proposals of the lobby groups which have been accepted by all groups apart from the European United Left - which was the only group to vote against in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection - open up opportunities for controlling downloads and free access , for example to websites such as MySpace and YouTube .
The amendments came in late through the back door and without there having been any great debate among the citizens over these major changes .
In Sweden , for example , we have had a wide-ranging debate about file sharing .
I am working against the decision to prohibit file sharing at national level and am doing so at EU level too .
The risk of now taking a decision at EU level is greater than that of national decisions as the lobby groups have had a major influence and effect in the EU system and because many citizens lack sufficient information when we are debating these issues at EU level .
I hope that there will be a powerful surge of opinion from citizens to guarantee freedom of speech and access to internet services .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , Sisyphus is my middle name .
I have been elected by 15 % of the Swedish people to oppose here in the European Parliament the EU becoming involved in ever more new areas and thus continuing to centralise and bureaucratise European society .
This is a sisyphean task .
Telecoms is one of the areas where the EU has an important function to perform , and I view with satisfaction the proposed telecom package , which is about greater competition and greater protection of privacy , but it seems unavoidable that we will also get centralisation and bureaucratisation .
In this respect , there are two elements to which I am opposed .
Firstly , it is proposed that spectrum which is freed up by digitalisation should be allocated according to EU rules .
Secondly , a new European Electronic Communications Market Authority is proposed .
I urge the chamber to reject both these proposals .
Freed spectrum must be allocated by the Member States , and the natural solution is to develop the bodies of the European telecommunications supervisory authorities which already exist .
( BG ) Mr. President , colleagues , I wonder at the things that were said today , in this hall , and no one underscored the point of preserving the confidence of information .
I call upon you that when so important a matter is discussed we in no way follow the example of the United States .
You know that under the pretext called " fight against terrorism and piracy ” the supra-national oligraphy is trying to put as many citizens as possible under a total , unconditional and unaccoutable before civic society control .
The confidentiality of our personal information has to be preserved at any cost .
I repeat - at any cost !
Currently , all telephone calls in Bulgaria are controlled .
As of next year , those in power in my country want there to be full and unconditional access to all log-files and exchanged electronic messages from every single computer .
This is not done out of helplessness . In Bulgaria , as in Europe , there are quite enough well-trained and capable specialists who can fight any kind of computer crime .
This is being done , I repeat again , with the objective of total control over the citizens .
The right to freedom also guarantees our right to human dignity .
Anyone who tries to deprive us of our dignity should be reproached and exposed , not provided with media comfort to get away with such intentions in this manner .
Some time ago , an apathetic discussion on the matter of citizens ' rights in the electronic world was held in Bulgaria .
The only conclusion that was made at the time was that no matter what the citizens want , they live with what is imposed on them .
I am absolutely firm in guaranteeing all citizens of Bulgaria that Attack party , even at the begining of its government next year , will repeal any encroachment on correspondence and monitoring in Internet .
In conclusion I would like to say that if our right of private correspondence is restricted once this will remain so forever .
Even if terrorists begin to use pigeons for correspondence .
Anyone who substitutes freedom for security does not deserve either freeom or security . Thank you .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner Reding , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by congratulating the Commission .
We have now reached the second stage in the process of reducing roaming fees for voice telephony .
I believe that this regulation has proved to be very effective in practice .
Nevertheless , at the end of the holiday period our consumers will again be hit by alarmingly high bills , because too little progress has been made , if truth be told , in the SMS market and in particular with regard to data roaming .
For this reason I call on the Commission to act in this matter and create a single European market for European consumers .
We cannot but observe that this part of the European internal market is not yet in working order and that there is an urgent need to establish a single market in this sphere , especially through the gradual introduction of a common flexible frequency-allocation plan .
Efficient management of this scarce resource is especially important .
The digital dividend is a historic opportunity , and it will also be important for the television corporations to be able to transmit their programmes to third-generation mobiles so that we can obtain a common European media area .
The digital dividend also creates new opportunities in the realm of European communications .
I would also like to emphasise the importance of implementing the decisions of the World Radio Conference on the basis of this approach , and I call on the Commission - since there is no provision for BERT to deal with these issues - to set up its own authority or group to examine these matters and enact authoritative guidelines for cooperation .
I also believe that BERT should be fully financed from Community funds , because we quite simply need an authority or institution that is committed to the European internal market and because national regulators should be granted more rights in the other Member States .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , the development of the information society relies upon the electronic communication networks and services .
The transition from analog to digital television by 2012 will release a significant range of frequencies at European level , thus enabling the development of new technologies and innovating solutions to stimulate the European competitiveness in this sector .
In order to fully benefit from the digital dividend in Europe , the European Parliament supports its common , flexible and balanced approach , which enables , on the one hand , the broadcasters to continue to provide and expand their services and , on the other hand , the electronic communication operators to use this resource for providing new services related to important social and economic usages and emphasizes the fact that the digital dividend should be allocated in compliance with the principle of technological neutrality .
The use of the digital dividend may help the achievement of the Lisbon Strategy objectives by supplying improved interoperable social services , such as e-governing , e-health , e-learning , in particular for the people living in disfavoured , isolated or even rural areas .
Acknowledging the Member States ' right to decide on the use of the digital dividend , we consider that a coordinated Community approach shall significantly improve the digital dividend value and is the most efficient way to avoid harmful interferences between Member States and between Member States and third countries , and to guarantee that the spectrum users benefit from all the internal market advantages .
Consumer confidence in the information society services depends on the quality of the electronic communication services , their security and the personal data protection .
It is essential that the national regulatory authorities consult all suppliers of electronic communication services before they adopt specific measures in the field of electronic communication network security and integrity .
I also consider that Member States should establish measures to promote the creation of a market for products and services accessible on a large scale , which shall integrate facilities meant for disabled users .
( DE ) Madam President , this gives me an unexpected opportunity to respond to Mrs Harms ' contribution , which I shall do with the greatest of pleasure , for the distinction between suggestions and facts , I believe , is certainly discernible in the report .
We have essentially incorporated a judgment of the Federal Constitutional Court that created a new fundamental right .
The right to the confidentiality and integrity of IT systems was the first thing to be enshrined in this legislative act .
We have thus acted faster than any Member State , particularly my own .
Publicly accessible private networks have also been included , services like Facebook , Bebo , etc . , that have hitherto lain completely outside the scope of directive .
What about cookies , similar software or other applications that transmit user data back to home base , as it were , without the consumer 's prior consent - will they become a thing of the past ?
Consumers have given their prior consent , in principle , in respect of everything in their computers , mobiles and other applications belonging to , or even accessible to , third parties .
In future , location information can only be captured anonymously or with the prior consent of the consumer .
Unsolicited marketing , irritating text messages , stupid e-mails and the like - the directive will rule out all of these things .
Notification of the data-protection authorities will be mandatory in future whenever any authority searches for anyone 's personal data .
Last but not least , we have created a clearer framework for the notification requirement in the event of security breaches and the loss of data than has existed to date .
Since we were talking about suggestions before , I do not wish to omit that we are considering how to deal with IP addresses , because IP addresses - and we must not confuse these things - are not the data that are being traded , which are personal data , credit-card details , etc . , and even if they were traded - just to explain this briefly - an IP address is not necessarily a personal characteristic , at least not when your fridge transmits a message to your computer .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( GA ) Mr President , it is absolutely necessary that wherever people live , be it in parishes , big or small , in the countryside or in towns or cities , they have access to broadband and to modern technology .
Companies which base themselves in certain areas rely on a fast internet service .
Unless broadband service is available in certain areas investment and companies cannot be enticed to set up there .
It is absolutely necessary that governments concern themselves with the inequality that exists between rural and urban areas in terms of digital services and broadband in order to ensure competitiveness and investments for those areas .
This is especially obvious in Ireland where there is inequality because of the existence of a private company , Eircom , which controls the internet service and as a result there is a terrible disparity between rural and urban areas .
I would like the Commissioner to investigate the situation , because to all appearances , neither the national regulator nor the government seems able to do so .
( ES ) Clearly there is only a faint shadow left of the ambitious project which the European Commission presented a year ago .
This is a shame for many reasons , as consumers need independent European management , not a club of national regulators strongly influenced by national champions .
The Greens are against making the European Electronic Communications Market Authority just a club for regulators funded by them , lacking transparency and without sufficient controls or the right of veto on the part of the European Commission .
The independence of the new body is questionable .
It is also a shame that because of pressure from the large telecommunications companies , access to major telecommunications infrastructures is not provided to new , innovative undertakings and there has to be a duplication of infrastructure .
The Greens advocate neutrality in technology and the unbundling of operations to do away with the dominant positions of the state telecoms giants .
However , the European Parliament has been too timid and influenced by lobbies and has overlooked the interests of new , more innovative undertakings which are providing most wireless services in Europe and offer advantages to consumers .
I regret to say that overall we have allowed an opportunity to give much greater European added value to the telecommunications market to slip through our grasp .
Of particular concern to us are some dangerous proposals in the Harbour report which clearly infringe the principle of neutrality of the Net as a means of communication , infringe users ' privacy , threaten freedom on the Internet and , above all , clearly exceed the legal scope of the telecommunications package in terms of content , in terms of what is lawful or unlawful , legal or illegal in intellectual property , and in terms of information filters .
This package is about the infrastructure of the market , about consumers , and not how to turn Internet service providers into digital policemen .
( DA ) Mr President , in its current form , the telecommunications package contains many good measures .
Ordinary consumers will gain easier access , and it will be cheaper in line with increases in transparency within the market .
However , the package also contains some very unfortunate aspects that the previous speaker considered .
The question of defining what constitutes lawful and unlawful content on websites opens the door to surveillance , registration and control with regard to all our communication and transactions over the Internet , to an extent that there are countries we would not normally consider to be democratically worthy !
We cannot allow registration , just as we cannot allow service providers to arbitrarily close traffic that someone considers to be harmful .
This would be much the same as us employing an army of inspectors at Europe 's post offices to remove letters that they consider to make harmful reading for the recipient .
Who will have the authority to read my love letters ?
We must ensure that future legislation does not become an electronic straitjacket , but a framework within which the culture , societal debate and interactive life of the future can unfold .
( PL ) Madam President , may I begin by congratulating Commissioner Reding .
A year after the regulations on roaming we have the next package , which is very important for consumers in particular .
I would also congratulate the rapporteurs .
No fewer than four reports had to be coordinated , and the coordination seems to have been very successful .
The protection of consumers referred to in the regulations discussed in Malcolm Harbour 's report is very closely connected with proper allocation of the digital dividend , which consumers are awaiting .
It will be important - as Commissioner Reding proposed - to optimise use of the spectrum through coordination on a European scale .
Television and mobile telephony are proposed as the main beneficiaries of the digital dividend , but I want to stress the importance of wireless Internet .
In many parts of Europe that is the only possible means of access to the Internet for millions of citizens , especially in rural and remote areas .
So if the economic growth of the sector we are discussing is particularly strong , then a significant portion of the resulting dividend should be allocated to broadband wireless Internet .
Research into optimisation and allocation of dividend is another important issue .
It could be carried out by the Joint Research Centre , and I would ask the Commissioner whether this is really being considered .
These , then , are the three most important requirements : consumers must be able to choose , the regulations must promote investment and competitiveness , and the internal market must be strengthened .
In my view , this calls for lobbying not only in Parliament 's domain but also with respect to the Council , i.e. in every member State .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , thank you for allowing me to speak at this point ; I must apologise for having to leave shortly to return to Paris .
My colleague , Luc Chatel , will answer many of the questions that have been raised during this debate .
Allow me just to say a few words in response to Mr Harbour 's comments on the lack of debate on the scope of the universal service .
I should first like to express my agreement with the rapporteur on the fact that broadband access is a major challenge facing our societies , whether in terms of access to knowledge or essential services .
As Mr Harbour said , broadband access is not covered by the current scope of the universal service .
The French Presidency simply wishes to open the debate on how to ensure broadband access across the whole of Europe .
After listening to the views of the various Member States , it becomes apparent that several potential scenarios are conceivable .
The first option would be to extend the scope of the Universal Service Directive to include broadband services ; the second would involve freedom of choice and would enable only those Member States to include broadband access in their universal service which wished to do so ; and , finally , an intermediate option would make the inclusion of broadband within the scope of universal service compulsory in those Member States where broadband has reached a sufficient level of maturity .
We have therefore all been given the opportunity , under the French Presidency , to open this debate and to try to reconcile our positions ; this is what the Commission likewise hopes to achieve .
I should just like to say a few words to Mrs Harms : it is not our intention to pit the development of the Internet against copyright protection .
In an era of convergence , we need to develop both the channel and the content by improving the networks at the same time as encouraging the creation of content and providing support to authors .
As you pointed out , France sets great store by copyright ; however , the French Presidency is not seeking to impose the model that we shall be developing in France based on preventive action and graduated response , known in our country as the Creation and Internet Law .
We are acutely aware , as you said , of the need to protect both privacy and personal data .
We feel that this is in no way incompatible with any other concerns that we might have .
( FR ) Madam President , Ministers , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after months of discussions , which have not yet been concluded , I think I can say that , as a result of the work done by Mr Harbour and the shadow rapporteur , we have reached compromises that have consumers ' best interests at heart .
Accordingly , it is essential to encourage better competition by implementing a number of measures to require telecom companies to offer contracts of acceptable duration and to give effect to number portability within one day for subscribers wishing to change to a different service provider .
In terms of protection , the general rules on consumer protection must apply to the telecom sector ; cost-control mechanisms have been envisaged as well as improvements to out-of-court settlement procedures in the event of a dispute .
Another very important issue is access to emergency services and the provision of caller location information , which must be made available in a reliable manner , regardless of the technology used .
Protection of privacy has also been a priority , as has child protection : access providers must provide customers with free parental control software .
All these developments had to be secured for the benefit of as many people as possible .
Many measures therefore apply to equal access for users with disabilities and people on low incomes ; the needs of SMEs have also been taken into account .
The report also emphasises the need to extend the scope of universal service , particularly to include broadband ; it is very positive that the French Presidency has made this issue one of its priorities .
I should now like to turn to the question of content and copyright which has tended to overshadow the rest of the improvements in the text .
Our aim has always been to provide consumers with general information on infringements of copyright , in line with the Commission 's original proposal .
We shall be working right up to the final vote to improve the wording of the compromises by ensuring that the principle of neutrality in providing access to content is upheld .
Some amendments adopted in the Privacy Directive , however , are really causing problems and we shall make sure that they are deleted .
I should like , once again , to thank my colleagues , and I am looking forward to more specific proposals from the Presidency in order to make further improvements to this text before the next part-session .
Mr President , the telecom package is an important step forward in modernising and harmonising telecommunications in Europe .
I worked on the citizens ' rights directive and , together with the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , we did a lot of work and we reached consensus on many issues .
This directive will ensure better protection of consumer rights in electronic communications .
Number portability , and privacy protection and security in telecommunications are other examples of improvements brought by this directive .
We had a very delicate discussion on network neutrality .
My opinion is that extreme network neutrality , as we experienced in some amendments , will make networks more congested , slower , less efficient and more expensive .
Network management is necessary to run efficient and intelligent networks and to maximise the overall user experience and value .
I am very satisfied that we agreed on amendments regarding the emergency number 112 and , after the directive has been adopted , Member States will make further efforts to inform and educate the public on the use of 112 .
The 112 number will be made accessible from the entire EU territory and Member States will have to ensure the implementation of caller location .
In addition , access to emergency services through 112 may be blocked in case of repeated misuse by the user and 112 will be more accessible to people with disabilities .
I also hope that the amendment regarding the establishment of an EU-wide early warning system will be adopted .
This amendment does not require an agency in Brussels to be set up but the definition of common standards about the warning system to be done jointly by the relevant authorities of the Member States .
Of course , the warning would be launched at the local level , but on the basis of common standards that would ensure that all potentially affected citizens of the EU could get and understand this message and act in a way that will save their lives .
I am very sure that the telecom package will support the efforts of companies in improving their performance and investment in new technologies and at the same time will consolidate the consumer rights of European citizens .
( PL ) Madam President , European society and the world at large are increasingly dependent on electronic communications .
They are the economy 's nervous system .
They are used in education , administration , health care , the media , and in lifelong learning .
Alongside the tremendous benefits , electronic communications also involve a number of direct threats to citizens , institutions and businesses .
The expectations of citizens , who are less intensive users of the system , include wide access to services at the lowest possible prices , e.g. for roaming calls between EU Member States , and elimination of the threats to users of electronic communications referred to in Malcolm Harbour 's report and elsewhere .
We must meet these expectations on the basis of modern technology and competitiveness , and with the financial support of the European Union , especially in rural and mountainous areas .
With a view to the interaction and interconnection of these requirements and regulatory mechanisms , as well as to visibility , we should consider whether it might be advisable to combine the provisions we are discussing in a single directive .
May I thank all the rapporteurs for the work they have put in .
Madam President , channels of communications are vitally important to our lives today .
The availability of broadband needs to be ensured , particularly for those in remote areas and those who are challenged , such as the visually impaired .
While we enjoy the freedom which the internet affords , we must recognise that with freedom come responsibilities .
I am a committed proponent of net neutrality .
As the world becomes more globalised it is crucial that people have the ability to communicate freely .
However , this freedom , which is of great value , must be used with respect .
It must be recognised that without this respect the internet harbours the potential for abuse .
We have taken action on some of the worst abuses on the internet , such as paedophilia .
However , other abuses also need to be tackled .
Internet service providers must play their part in preventing their platform being used for destructive forces like libel , hate and exploitation .
I would say to the Commissioner that we need to do everything in our power to protect freedom and , at the same time , to promote responsibility on the internet .
( FR ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this work has been outstanding .
The result that has been achieved by our committees is a balanced one , and , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you were quite right to want to take it fully into account .
I should just like to congratulate my colleagues , Catherine Trautmann , Pilar del Castillo and Malcolm Harbour , on their work .
That being the case , I have no problem telling Mrs Trautmann that I do not agree with her view that we should exclude completely any reference to intellectual property rights .
Over and above the platforms and channels that we are discussing , especially in her report , what is of importance to us all is what these platforms and channels allow us to access , in other words , content .
Mr Guardans , Mr Medina and Mr Mavrommatis have made that point very well indeed , and I agree with them .
In the Commission text , two references had been made to this issue ; it would have been better to have retained them .
The debate is now focused on a reference made to the 2001 and 2004 Directives on copyright and on cooperation among the various stakeholders .
To what end ?
To promote legal offers - in other words , content that will enable our industry and our cultural diversity to prosper .
The criticisms that have been levelled at these texts - some of which I have heard repeated even here in this Chamber - have , for example , raised the spectre of the Olivennes Agreement .
However , the model that we should follow is the Memorandum of Understanding that was adopted on 24 July by the UK Government , OFCOM and the various stakeholders .
As far as I am aware , they do not support bureaucracy or Internet dictatorship .
The point is not to prevent laws from being enforced in the Member States , to ensure reconciliation with fundamental rights , and not to prevent new technologies and the new economy from acting for the benefit of our cultural diversity , our cutting-edge industries and the intelligence and talents of European citizens , for these are our most important weapons and our greatest assets in global competition .

( DE ) Madam President , like Mrs Vergnaud , I welcome that one part of Mr Harbour 's report which relates to consumer protection and which contains numerous very good decisions .
Universal access to these services is a very important principle , and that cannot be emphasised enough .
I can assure you once again , Mr Harbour , that this part of the report also has the full backing of my group .
There are , however , parts that require revision .
You are quite right , Mrs Reding .
In your introductory remarks , you expressed surprise that the European Parliament should seek to dilute the protection of personal data .
May I say to you that this is not the opinion of Parliament , for Parliament is not due to vote for another two weeks , and only then shall we see what position it takes on these matters .
Until then , we shall be sorting out all the things that are still in a bit of a mess .
I promise you that there will be no dilution of data privacy from our group .
If no satisfactory agreements materialise in Parliament on data protection , network access and network neutrality , my group will be unable to vote in favour of the package , and then we shall have to see how we move on from there .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to congratulate you on your dedication , and , of course , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs and especially Mrs Trautmann , who has worked extremely hard to reach this consensus , which she wanted to be neutral and to have no sectoral distinction .
However , as regards rights to use spectrum , it should be noted that investment and depreciation cycles differ from one sector to the next .
However , the provisions of the text on the allocation and harmonisation of frequencies and licences place satellite operators in a situation of legal uncertainty given the specific nature of their sector .
The new Article 8a , proposed by the rapporteur , does provide certain guarantees , but the wording of this clause must be tightened up in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity and ITU rules .
A number of questions also remain open regarding the substance and scope of the Commission 's negotiating mandate .
Regarding Mr Harbour 's report , I should like to raise the issue of the definition of ' publicly available telephone service ' , as laid down in Article 1 , point 2b .
This definition should apply only to two-way services , in accordance with the definition given in the Privacy Directive .
Voice over Internet Protocol ( VoIP ) and games consoles are in no way comparable to traditional telephony services .
Their assimilation as such would create a regulatory framework that inhibits innovation and provides uninformed users with tools that they do not see as being intended for certain uses , for example , the possibility of making an emergency call from a games console which can establish one-way communication .
It is therefore important to limit the definition to two-way services .
Regarding copyright , I should like to endorse the comments made by all my colleagues who have raised this issue .
( ES ) First I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on the good work they have done .
This reform achieves the objectives set and adjusts to new times and new challenges , both for businesses and for consumers .
Allow me to dwell , however , on one particular point in the Harbour report .
It is true that the rapporteur has done a magnificent job but I believe that we should not tackle the group of final amendments on the content of the Net here , in this directive , because in short what those amendments do is allow intermediate service providers to filter and block content on the Net and therefore , ultimately , consumers will lose their anonymity .
Ladies and gentlemen , this stance runs counter to Article 12 of the Electronic Commerce Directive , which already states that intermediate service providers must act as neutral intermediaries when they transmit electronic information .
In a State governed by the rule of law , we cannot do things to the Net which we would not do to other forms of communication .
Therefore I ask Mr Harbour to withdraw those amendments so as to restore the balance between copyright and the rights of Internet users .
( SK ) I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Work on legislative packages is never easy and I welcome its cogency .
I too should like to emphasise that the main objective of this package is to produce better communications services in the use of mobile telephones and broadband internet or cable television connections for consumers .
I think that , thanks to our rapporteur , Malcolm Harbour , consumers will be better and more quickly informed .
If consumers decide to change providers , comparable offerings are often unavailable and the process of number transfer still takes far too long .
I therefore welcome Malcolm Harbour 's report , on the basis of which providers must supply consumers with transparent and above all comparable prices and changing providers while retaining existing numbers will be possible in just one day .
Despite the fact that I would never wish anyone to have to dial 112 for an emergency , it should be emphasised that , on the basis of this directive , the emergency services will have access to information on the caller 's location , allowing them to provide assistance more quickly and effectively .
The switch to digital transmission will release spectrum , which should be able in future to provide for broadband internet connections in even the most remote corners of the EU .
Commissioner , I believe that the Commission will ensure the most effective use of this ' digital dividend ' in the interests of every consumer .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we live in a world where everyone , governments , private companies and criminals alike , seek the greatest possible access to our electronic data , in the most unrestricted way possible .
For this reason , any changes to the e-Privacy Directive must do exactly what its title implies : ensure the greatest possible protection of our personal data and private lives .
I am therefore opposed to any attempt at weakening the definition of a piece of personal data relating to European citizens , because since it is personal , it is protected by law .
The exceptions sought , especially for IP addresses , covertly contravene existing European legislation .
Furthermore , I do not think that Internet service providers should be allowed to judge for themselves which breaches of their network security harm their users and which do not .
They should not decide for themselves when to inform users and the authorities about even blatant acts of neglect .
I respect the role and contribution of private companies , but the economic interests of the Internet giants must not be allowed to dictate the laws adopted by Europe to protect the fundamental rights of its citizens .
( DE ) Madam President , many thanks to all the rapporteurs for their work , which was truly excellent .
Let me , however , deal with two specific points .
The European Union is not only an economic community but is also pledged to uphold common values , and that is why the protection of private data is a vital concern .
At the same time , however , technical progress and the protection of cultural and creative works must not be regarded as conflicting aims .
Both will be key factors in our future competitiveness .
That is why I , along with many other Members who have addressed the House today , am appealing earnestly for a strengthening of the position of holders of rights , in other words those who want to have their copyrights protected .
No one else needs this protection , hence the introduction of models for cooperation with Internet service providers .
A step in this direction reflects technological convergence as well as convergence in the reinforcement of copyright .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , when managing and allocating the radio spectrum we must ensure full and effective access for all citizens to this public asset .
The proposals in the reports by Mrs Trautmann and Mrs Toia on the radio spectrum and digital dividend place the issue on a firm footing from the outset .
They point first and foremost to the social , cultural and democratic significance , and to the new opportunities offered by the digital dividend we ought to be offering European citizens .
The debate on the digital dividend should not boil down to a black-and-white choice between commercialisation and social benefit .
Mapping out a significant strategy at national level , allowing each Member State to set public interest objectives and fulfil and coordinate them - these are the entirely achievable actions we can take at Community level .
However , the new approach taken by the Commission for greater harmonisation at EU level with regard to how to allocate the radio spectrum on the basis of common administration criteria , such as the principle of neutrality of services and the extension of the principle of a general licence , seems to ignore the public nature of the radio spectrum and to favour the commercial aspect .
For this reason , I consider that we must disagree and that we must continue with the proposals put forward by our rapporteurs .
( RO ) Thanks to the report under consideration , there is an opportunity to stimulate , by making the best of the digital dividend , the larger scale use of broadband technologies in rural , isolated or disfavoured regions , taking into account that there are still many places where digital technology is entirely absent or access to digital services is not possible due to the absence of infrastructure .
I support the acceleration of the drafting , by the Member States remaining behind , including Romania , of national strategies regarding the digital dividend , which shall implement measures designed to enable a faster and easier access of citizens to interoperable social services , in particular to those enabling access to educational , professional training and health systems .
We draw attention to the carefulness necessary to ensure the best possible transparency as regards the reassignment of frequencies released and the investments in next-generation infrastructures , so that all the European Union countries could have access to them .

Madam President , I want to take the opportunity as Chair of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) to thank Mr Harbour and the shadows for producing what I hope this Parliament will consider a balanced and workable proposal on universal services .
I want to draw the attention of this House to one provision - an amendment I made and backed by the committee - to make the introduction of the 116000 missing child hotline a legal obligation on all Member States .
The Commissioner will be aware that a recent report has shown that , a full 18 months after its introduction in 2007 , only seven Member States have assigned the missing child hotline .
The voluntary approach is clearly not working .
Across Europe every year approximately 130 000 children go missing .
These statistics show that this is an area where Europe can help , must act and must identify , track down and recover missing children .
Therefore I urge the European Commission and the Member States to support this provision , to speed up the implementation of the missing child hotline and give a major boost to Europe 's efforts for an EU-wide missing children amber alert system .

( FR ) Madam Speaker , I should like to commend Mrs Trautmann , Mrs del Castillo , Mrs Toia and Mr Harbour for a job well done .
How do we reap the full benefits of the digital dividend ?
That is the question .
It is certainly the case that digital broadcasting is releasing and will be releasing frequencies .
I deliberately use both the present and future tenses of the verb ' to release ' in order to emphasise the fact that this change is not going to come in a flash , with a snap of the fingers ; this is something that many players seem to have forgotten when arguing their case .
In addition , the amount of investment is likely to frighten off many investors before they can even think about recouping this EUR 250 billion providential windfall .
The distribution of these constraints must therefore be factored into our policies .
I should like to use this rather short speaking time to emphasise the compelling need to establish a European frequency policy in which Parliament will be involved as a major player : as such , it will need to be aware of the limitations imposed by the physics of electromagnetic waves , be mindful of the need for frequency spectrum management and show due regard for the role to be played by standardisation bodies in making optimal use of this scarce resource , whilst always bearing in mind the general interest of our fellow Europeans .
I should also like to remind the Commissioner that the roll-out of fibre-optic networks , to paraphrase Jean Cocteau , certainly needs grand declarations of love but it also needs tangible acts of love , accompanied by European funding included in the budget in order to carry them out , to build these broadband networks and to prevent the digital divide in Europe .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , at the end of this debate , I should like to start by thanking you , ladies and gentlemen - I found that both the quality of your deliberations and your commitment to this subject highlight the importance of telecommunications in current European debates .
In Europe today , we are seeking economically strategic issues that are of relevance to our fellow citizens .
Telecommunications clearly illustrate a major strategic challenge - you have noted their potential impact on European growth - but , at the same time , they concern issues that affect the daily lives of our citizens ; this is precisely the kind of issue that Europe needs .
After all , it is telecommunications that to a certain extent give Europe a human face .
I should like to commend the very broad consensus that I observed during this debate between Parliament and the Council , particularly on improving spectrum management , enhancing consumer protection and restricting the use of functional separation in order to prevent it from becoming widespread , which is an issue that has been raised several times .
I note , however , that our institutions will need to continue working on a number of issues in order to reach a compromise .
I am referring , of course , to the introduction of the Commission 's right to veto remedies and also to the legal form and the financing of the alternative to the European Regulatory Authority , since its role and remit appear to be shared by Parliament and the Council .
I should like briefly to come back to three issues : the first concerns precisely this question as to how this new body , which has been mentioned by several speakers , is to be financed .
As you are aware , ladies and gentlemen , the Member States have not yet adopted a clear stance on this issue and , needless to say , the method of financing will depend primarily on the legal form and remit of that body .
As you know - I mentioned this earlier - a majority of Member States still have some reservations about the idea of establishing an additional body .
The Council will therefore have to strike a balance between the various options that have been mentioned this afternoon .
With regard to next-generation networks , another issue that was raised , I believe that , as Mrs Trautmann quite rightly pointed out , in order to promote new networks - next-generation networks - the primary concern is to continue to promote competition , particularly competition in infrastructure , which provides an incentive for investors and encourages risk-sharing between the various operators .
As you are aware , discussions are currently taking place in the Council .
There is , however , an urgent need to address these issues which require further action and more short-term measures .
As you know , the Commission has published a draft Recommendation on this issue ; perhaps the Commissioner would be good enough to elaborate on this .
The third issue that I wanted to address , which was likewise mentioned by several speakers , is , of course , the issue of the protection of personal data and , more generally , issues related to content , rather than the channel used to convey content .
Éric Besson already said a few words on this subject ; I believe that the objective of the French Presidency is not to pit one issue against another or to impose a specific model , but I did appreciate the comments made by a number of speakers this afternoon who said that , whereas we are clearly building this future economy , this future source of growth , for the benefit of the European economy , we must also do so to enable our culture and our cultural players to increase their presence in the global arena .
Therefore , I do not think that we can separate the two issues , although I know that other interested parties are also holding important debates on the subject .
We have to bear in mind that any efforts to modernise this infrastructure must also be aimed at promoting the dissemination of our content and the protection of copyright with a view to preserving the creative process in the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that concludes the comments I wished to make in order to wind up this debate .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , what do we want to achieve ?
We want to ensure that all citizens , wherever they live and wherever they travel , enjoy fast access to multiple , safe and affordable services .
We want all citizens to have access to a wealth of content that reflects European cultural diversity .
We want strategically important companies to contribute to economic growth and job creation by developing new infrastructure and a wide variety of content .
We want the establishment of an unfettered single market , enabling the continent of Europe to lead the way in terms of connectivity , communications and new technologies , but we also hope that Europe will play a leading role in the protection of consumer rights and citizens ' privacy .
That is what we all here want to achieve , and I think that the many and varied views that have been expressed by this Parliament are directed along these lines and are calling for the adoption of balanced decisions in order to make it possible to reach a consensus .
Of course , none of this would have been possible without the work of the rapporteurs .
I should like to pay tribute to them because they have often managed to square the circle .
This is a remarkable feat that has been achieved by our rapporteurs but also by Parliament 's committees and by the coordinators .
In the coming weeks , we must all - whether it be the Commission , the Council or Parliament - try to bring this project to life , a project that is capable of moving our continent forward and generating a consensus between the Council and the European Parliament .
As for myself and my colleagues at the Commission , we shall play the role of honest brokers in order to make this possible .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , at the end of this debate , I should like to thank the Council and the Commissioner for listening so carefully to what we had to say ; this has enabled them to see that there is quite considerable consensus , a great deal of agreement , in our Parliament on the telecom package .
Nothing could be more common in our everyday lives than a mobile phone , a television set or the ability to communicate .
The Single Act established the mobility of persons and goods as a fundamental right , a fundamental freedom .
As Mr Paasilinna said earlier , communications are also a fundamental right and a means of giving Europe a soul , sustaining its existence and connecting its citizens .
We must therefore have the necessary ambition to make a success of this telecom package .
I therefore urge the Council not to proceed with a compromise or with a willingness to compromise that might unbalance the various points on which we have managed to reach agreement .
Between us , and with the help of my colleagues , Malcolm Harbour , Pilar del Castillo , Alexander Alvaro and others - it would be impossible to mention them all - we feel that we have already achieved a great deal on the basis of common sense and shared determination .
In response to the remarks directed towards me earlier by Mr Toubon , I should also like to say that I cannot be criticised for not wishing to take into account the need to support the creative process in Europe .
I believe that it is a powerful driving force for innovation , both in terms of the diversity and the intellectual value that it brings , which is absolutely critical in this day and age .
However , we must also take into account the freedom that must be guaranteed in our texts - we have adopted extremely important texts on the protection of personal data , and we are the only ones to have done so in the world today .
We must reconcile these two aspects .
There is no conflict between the two : the objective is the same , namely to protect both creative freedom and the freedom of each individual .
It is in this spirit that we shall continue to work to improve our proposals .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Madam President , in this final speech I wish to thank the Council for its understanding approach , which has again been in evidence today .
I would also like to thank the Commission very much , especially the Commissioner , for the awareness she has always shown in what I would term her fireproof advocacy of a more competitive electronic communications market and consumer protection .
I also wish to express my thanks above all to my colleagues who , here today as on so many days in the past , have shown the extent to which they are aware of the importance of this sector to European economic growth and , therefore , to the employment and welfare of all European citizens .
I would now just like to ask the Council , in this final stage and until the end of the current Presidency , to give this telecoms package at least the same priority as that given to energy - I know energy is very important but this package is no less important - so that we can move forward from the balancing point we have reached , as referred to just now by my colleague Mrs Trautmann .
Parliament is offering a number of proposals which , in my view , are generally fairly well balanced , and will produce a satisfactory outcome to negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
Thank you very much . We have high expectations of the Presidency in that regard .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs and would just like to draw attention to two points .
Someone in this House said that we have adopted a positive approach and I think that this is a trait which characterises all our work , in the agreements that we have reached and in those still to come .
A positive approach means that we have taken a realistic look at the interests at stake , at the value of the industries , at the work performed by workers in this sector and therefore at its significance in the European economy as a whole , but also at the role of the citizen , the consumer , starting with the least advantaged , who are set to benefit from the digital switchover if they are helped to make this transition : I know that some countries , including France , are running information and support campaigns in this connection , but if not followed up these citizens might well have difficulties .
We therefore approached the matter from the consumer , or user , point of view ; we looked at the possibility of having new services , even telecommunications services , which are better suited to new requirements , to the need to be better informed , more integrated into the great information network scenario .
I think that when Europe adopts this sort of approach , and the market too as far as the consumer is concerned , then Europe comes closer to its citizens ; and I think that the roaming costs initiative gave Europe a positive image in the eyes of many citizens and young people , who perhaps did not fully understand the role it could play in specific decisions affecting their life , their finances and indeed their personal budgets .
The second point concerns a balanced approach .
I think this is an approach which balances the many interests at stake , even the conflicting ones cited by Mrs Trautmann , and also the many sectors concerned : and here I am thinking of the digital dividend .
To have said that there is space for the various operators from the telecommunications to the audiovisual sector in a context which saw a meeting between representatives of the Committee on Culture and the ITRE Committee means , I think , that we have tried to adopt a balanced approach , and hopefully have succeeded .
Finally , I would like to see a strong European approach .
To me it would be completely incomprehensible if the proper subsidiarity authorities , the inalienable powers of the Member States , were to prevent the exploitation of that added value which Europe absolutely must manage to exploit .
I would like to call on the Commission and the Council to play up this ability to coordinate , harmonise and , in my view , act as Europe 's political guide .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I find myself in the uncharacteristic position of having the last word in this major debate so I will perhaps make a few broad-ranging remarks at the end .
But first of all I would like , regarding my own report , to thank the many colleagues who have contributed and have reinforced the determination of our committee to make and carry forward those improvements .
I would like to assure my colleagues that over the next couple of weeks we will be working to make those further improvements , particularly around the areas of data protection , on which we had a very successful meeting this morning : I think we can reach an agreement there .
On the question of data-breach notification , it is perhaps not surprising that we still have work to do because that was an entirely fresh piece of work that we did .
I cordially invite the Commission , who have already been involved , to help us complete the drafting because , after all , it was not in their original proposal .
The other point I want to make is addressed to Mrs Harms , as she is the only representative of the Green Party here .
I was absolutely astounded to hear from her colleague , David Hammerstein Mintz - who I get on very well with - that he considers my report to be dangerous to net neutrality .
We have spent a lot of time crafting a new proposal to actually allow regulators to intervene if they see net neutrality being trespassed upon .
Yet Mr Hammerstein Mintz comes to this Chamber , without talking to me beforehand and without submitting any alternative , and tells me my report is dangerous .
All I would say to Mrs Harms is that if the Green Group continue with this sort of scaremongering and demonising of our report , it will be dangerous for consumers because it will endanger everything else .
I cordially invite them to come round our table and to say why our report is dangerous .
Let us see if we can satisfy their concerns .
Many of you may well even be receiving daily e-mails .
I had one telling me that this report is a danger to net neutrality .
All I can say to you is that our intention is entirely the opposite .
In conclusion , we now all have a huge responsibility to help the French presidency reach agreement .
I want to emphasise that point .
There is a lot of uncertainty out in the real world , among the people who are poised to make the big investments - the next-generation networks - who want this package settled as soon as possible .
We can help do that by working together as we have done successfully .
It is a really big responsibility .
I pledge from my side - and I know my colleagues will come with me on this - that we will spare no effort in working with the French Presidency .
I want to pay particular tribute to Mr Chatel and Mr Besson for their deep engagement to this whole process and their real knowledge of the issues .
Together I am sure we can get this package through in the quickest possible time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the next part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( NL ) The new telecoms law that we are discussing today has far-reaching consequences for all of us Internet and telecom users .
Our Internet privacy is to be better protected .
Personal information stored on the computer or sent on the Internet ( including your surfing profile ! ) cannot be used ( misused ) unless you have given your express consent beforehand .
Cooperation between the content industry ( mainly music and film ) and telecom operators is encouraged in order to deal with the problem of piracy ( illegal downloads ) .
It is important for consumers to be well informed on what can and cannot be done on the Net , but access to the Internet must in no circumstances be denied .
It will be easier for people to take telephone numbers with them when changing operators .
It should not take more than a day to transfer a number , subject to measures to prevent abuse .
It is to be hoped that we can quickly reach agreement on this and that subscribers can enjoy the benefits of these improvements as soon as possible .
in writing . - ( GA ) In today 's highly connected , globalised world personal privacy and data protection should be priorities for all of us .
Privacy should not be compromised as happened in the case of the Harbour Report .
It is not the business of a national or European body to monitor , in an intrusive way , the use people make of the internet .
The European Parliament must act to undo some of the more regressive elements of this Directive .
As things stand , the connection that companies and state bodies have with the private use people make of the internet could increase through this Directive .
The protection of intellectual property rights cannot be used as an excuse to allow irresponsible bodies access to personal and private data .
in writing . - ( HU ) Approving the package of legislation on the agenda is an important step forward in letting broadband communication technologies gain ground .
It is crucial for these to spread so that , in line with our intentions , Europe can really become one of the most competitive regions .
We now only have to make increased efforts for effective telecommunications regulation because the development of this sector can make a great contribution to increasing employment .
The opening of the telecommunications market has gathered pace since the second half of the 1990s , noticeably improving the level of services .
However , we feel that there is still a considerable amount of work to do in the areas of strengthening competition and consequently breaking down consumer prices .
In addition to all this , the emergence of new technologies makes a review of the current legislation topical .
We feel it is a very happy development that a prominent pillar of the new framework regulation is a review of frequency distribution practices up to now .
In our opinion , the principle of technological neutrality must prevail in this matter , in the interests of increasing competitiveness .
It is also an important result that there will also be a new framework for cooperation by the national regulatory authorities in the future .
We should welcome the fact that the new regulation also has a legislative effect on consumer protection that is by no means negligible .
It creates more transparent conditions for setting prices and reinforces the freedom to change providers .
We feel that the importance of the framework regulation that is to be adopted lies in the fact that it will increase market competition without overlooking an appropriate level of consumer protection .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0457 / 08 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Policy on the supply of agricultural products
In view of the fact that fear of a food shortage has caused alarm at international level ( thus prompting certain countries to restrict or impose special taxes on agricultural products intended for export ) , is the Council now considering the possibility that the common foreign and security policy should focus on the security of the supply of those products and encompass specific agreements with the main countries which supply them ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Medina Ortega , at its meeting of 19 and 20 June this year , the European Council acknowledged that the recent escalation in food prices is a source of anxiety both in the European Union , where the crisis mainly affects low-income households , and internationally with particular reference to the developing countries .
The reasons behind this phenomenon are complex .
The first is the growth in global demand , especially among the main emerging economies .
The second is related to rising production and transport costs , caused in part by the rise in oil prices .
The third is linked to the way the financial markets work , to the speculation on international markets and local food markets .
Lastly , some major producing countries have had bad harvests because of poor climate conditions .
The General Affairs and External Relations Council next month will consider these questions again , looking firstly at the need to improve food security in coordination with the United Nations , and secondly at the international financial institutions and the G8 .
The IMF and the World Bank have scheduled meetings and I am very pleased that Mr Ban Ki-moon , Secretary-General of the United Nations , has set up a high-level team to consider the food crisis .
The European Union will play a full part in implementing the declaration made at the high-level FAO Conference held in Rome on 5 June this year .
Obviously , we will also have to draw on the upcoming United Nations and World Bank meetings , in order to develop and deepen activities aimed at boosting food production in the affected developing countries .
As you can see , the main policies that are concerned in this food crisis and can help resolve it are agricultural policy , development policy and trade policy .
The CFSP to which Mr Medina Ortega referred can make a contribution here , but only marginally , in the context of the political dialogue it is conducting with third countries aimed at encouraging them to formulate better agricultural policies ; that would improve food security in the developing countries and strengthen regional integration in the most seriously affected areas .
( ES ) Thank you very much for your reply .
I see that the Council is indeed concerned about this matter .
I would like to point out that hunger has been a constant feature of European history , for example the famous potato famine in Ireland which led to the depopulation of the island ; many other parts of Europe were also depopulated by famine , for example Ukraine .

We are living in a time when we have been given a reminder of what can happen ; we are discussing a community of 500 million people who for the most part consume foods from abroad .
Does the Council not believe that the time has come to draft an overall policy for comprehensive food security and for that food security policy to be one of the general policies of the European Union so as to ensure that this type of mass famine does not recur in the future ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr Medina Ortega is quite right .
I think that during our review of the common agricultural policy , at the meetings we will be holding on development policy and the exchanges of view and summits we will be organising with the developing countries , the Council will indeed focus closely on the question of food supplies and food security .
They are two separate issues although they must indeed be looked at together .
In any case , one of the French Presidency 's ambitions , looking in particular towards the October European Council , is to raise these issues and to look at them together .
Rather than the bizarre notion , proffered in the question , of looking at food security under the common foreign and security policy , would it not be better to return to food security as an original prime objective of the CAP , as President Sarkozy promised in his notable speech at the Paris Agricultural Show in February ?
He set food security , and the EU contributing more to food production in the world , as his top objectives in revamping the CAP .
What progress can the French Minister report towards the attainment of those objectives ?
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , we have here a paradigm shift from overproduction in Europe to fear for the security of our food supplies .
Do you believe that the WTO negotiations that are now being conducted under French chairmanship have any chance of reaching a satisfactory conclusion by December ?
Do you believe that the world market could be a golden opportunity for our agricultural sector ?
We have seen , of course , that prices have risen very sharply and that these prices naturally offer entirely new income opportunities for our own farmers in countries like France , Britain and , above all , the new Member States , and they would also create great income prospects elsewhere , especially in the LDCs , the poorest of the poor countries .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) In reply to Mr Allister let me say that I do indeed believe that food security must be a prime objective of our review of the common agricultural policy .
It is one of the objectives we want to highlight when we review the common agricultural policy .
When we undertake that global review we must , therefore , try to look not only at quantitative CAP objectives but also consider more qualitative aspects , so as to ensure that all our fellow citizens , wherever they may live , have access to high-quality food products .
In regard to Mr Rübig 's question , let me point out that today we are indeed benefiting from high world prices , which is an opportunity for European exports .
Given global demand as a whole , we may also turn out to be importers in various areas or find out that we are not producing enough .
During the multilateral trade negotiations Europe did what it had to do and , as you know , made a number of concessions in regard to reforms , in the framework of the CAP agreements .
It turns out , to our regret , that other countries are responsible for the blockages .
It is true that the Doha Round on development should pay more attention to the aspects of food security and balanced global food production than it is doing at present .
Subject : European Youth Pact
All areas of policy , in particular facilities for education and lifelong learning , employment and mobility , social integration , health and the possibility of independence and support for initiatives concerning entrepreneurship and voluntary work , concern young people in the European Union .
Will the Council , therefore , say how it intends to implement the European Youth Pact ( 7619 / 05 ) and to invest in policies which have an impact on young people ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , you rightly point out that a whole range of policy areas concern young people .
Thank you for doing so .
Youth policy is cross-sectoral by its nature .
It is precisely the purpose of the European Youth Pact that the European Council adopted in 2005 to mainstream the dimension of youth into various policies , in line with the Lisbon Strategy .
Our objectives are simple , namely to improve the educational potential in Europe , training , youth mobility and the vocational integration and social inclusion of young people .
We know that together we must make that pact even more effective and that we need concrete results .
To help us achieve that , as from 2009 the Commission will be drafting a three-yearly report on youth .
That report will provide an in-depth analysis of the situation of young people in Europe and thereby help us to highlight their concerns .
The EU certainly has major responsibilities here , but today , under the Treaties , Member State action is even more vital and we must ensure that within the EU we focus on best practice , whether at national , local or regional level .
We must promote all forms of synergy between the actors involved , such as enterprises , schools , associations , employment bodies , youth workers , researchers , families and also the social partners .
In that context , the Presidency of the Council is particularly concerned with promoting cross-border mobility for young people .
This issue will come up at the Council of 20 and 21 November , which will consider the report on mobility by a high-level group of experts headed by Mrs Maria João Rodriguez .
We want to see Erasmus , which has proved a great success , expanded .
We know that cannot be done overnight , but we hope Erasmus will become more democratic , more broadly based .
We also want to promote Leonardo-type apprenticeship programmes at European level .
Under the French Presidency we are looking to organise a major event focusing on developing the mobility of apprentices .
Similarly , under the French Presidency we want to make the health of young people one of our youth policy priorities , to obtain a better idea of health issues specific to young people , whether relating to hygiene or to combating addiction - to tobacco , alcohol and , of course , drugs .
In 2009 , the Council will play an active part in the general process of evaluating European cooperation in the field of youth .
Given that this will be a long-term process , it is important to ensure continuity of action between the various presidencies , which is why we have worked with the presidencies to come , the Czech and Swedish Presidencies , to ensure the continuity of this policy that is so crucial to the next generation of Europeans .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply and wish the French Presidency all the best in attaining its goals .
Following the conclusion of the Pact there was certainly also an agreement by the Council on the quantitative attainment of targets : a 10 % reduction in school absenteeism and a clearly defined quantitative reduction in youth unemployment over a specific period of time after graduation .
To what extent have these been attained at a time when statistics tell us that youth unemployment is still very high ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) It is true that youth unemployment remains very high , although on average the situation within the Union has improved over recent years .
I think we must focus on three areas of action .
First , we must ensure that we genuinely adapt training more closely to market requirements , especially to the needs of the employment market , and that training systems are more closely aligned to the competition strategy pursued under Lisbon .
The second is to establish a dialogue with the employers , with the social partners , to promote greater social responsibility on the part of enterprises and the social integration of young people .
In that respect all enterprises based in Europe , especially the biggest ones , have a major responsibility .
Thirdly , I believe that in the field of education we must also aim to create networks of excellence and promote mobility between our countries , just as we must promote the mutual recognition of diplomas and qualifications , so as to make the European labour market more fluid .
( DE ) Madam President , Minister , I would like to refer to a specific circumstance that I consider to be very important in the context of this issue .
In all the EU-wide surveys that have been conducted , it keeps emerging that it is young people who have the greatest enthusiasm for this European Union .
Young people are also the group who most often believe that they can benefit from the Union , in contrast to its fiercest opponents , who are mostly elderly , intransigent , disillusioned men .
It would interest me to learn whether , in the framework of this pact and perhaps in other frameworks too , you have projects that could further stimulate this interest , this favourable response to Europe , among young people .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Leichtfried , perhaps I can present my views in a rather less polarised manner .
I do indeed believe that young people are enthusiastic about Europe and it is true we must draw on that , which is not to say that members of another generation , those who built Europe , are less enthusiastic .
Unfortunately you have people for and people against at European level .
Opinion polls also show - as we saw again recently - that the opponents may sometimes be more radical , and we must do more in-depth work in this regard .
On the planned pact to mobilise young people and make the concept of Europe more concrete , I believe very strongly that we must promote the cross-border mobility of our young people and that - thanks to these programmes , which will receive more funding , although I know this will take several years and is a long-term project - when we review the framework of our common policies we must look at programmes aimed at further improving the mobility of our young people and children , be they students , apprentices or young employees on work experience or vocational training schemes .
I believe that is how we will really make the concept of Europe more concrete , ensure that their enthusiasm bears fruit and produce the new generation of Europeans you and I both hope to see .
Subject : EU overseas territorial anomalies
Does the Presidency deem it anomalous to have a country in South America considered to be a part of the European Union when at the same time we are stalling entry negotiations with Croatia , Turkey and other European States , who clearly have a stronger geographical claim ?
In the current post-Irish referendum climate , how does Council envisage processing applications such as these ?
Has this ever been discussed in Council ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr Evans , I am glad you are here because I am not quite sure what this question means .
Perhaps I have not understood it properly and you will be able to clarify it .
There are , in South America , certain outermost regions that form an integral part of the European Union and are , by that token , eligible for specific policies .
There is not , however , any South American state as such that is a member of the European Union - I am being very cautious here for perhaps I did not understand all the nuances of the question .
As for Turkey and Croatia , there has been notable progress since we opened negotiations with those countries .
In the case of Turkey , for example , the screening process , which is the first formal step for each chapter , has been completed for 23 chapters ; eight chapters have been opened to negotiation , and for one of them the process is provisionally closed .
Our presidency believes it will be able to open two further chapters .
In the case of Croatia , the screening has concluded .
Twenty-one chapters were opened , of which three are provisionally closed .
There was an accession conference on 25 July this year and the first , rather sensitive chapter on the movement of goods was opened and Chapter 20 , on enterprise and industrial policy , was closed .
As you know , progress with the negotiations depends mainly on the results achieved by the candidate countries .
The progress made in meeting the criteria for opening and closing chapters , as well as the requirements set out in the framework of the negotiations , including the revised accession partnerships , are crucial in this respect and we obviously refer to the Commission 's judgment .
Let me repeat , Mr Evans , that if my reply has been a bit off-centre , I would be very happy if you could tell me exactly what you meant by your question .
I will give a bit of clarification and put my question more broadly .
The President-in-Office has answered some of the points that I raised and I thank him for that .
He is right .
My position is that I think it is an anomaly that we allow countries like French Guiana to be a full part of the European Union with all the benefits and advantages entailed - not just French territories , but Martinique and Guadeloupe come to mind .
And yet within Europe - and the President-in-Office has referred to the negotiation process that is taking place with Croatia and perhaps with Turkey - we put up resistance ; there are countries in the European Union which are not happy about that .
But then there are other anomalies closer at hand - the Channel Islands , Jersey and Guernsey , which are not in the European Union , exempt from legislation .
They are tax havens where rich people are allowed to avoid paying everything that everyone else does .
Is this position , or are these anomalies , discussed in Council ?
Can the President-in-Office defend the situation where French Guiana is part of the European Union , and does he think this will continue , not just in the short term but in the long term ?
Could he look into his crystal ball and give me a bit of insight into the way the European Union is going in a global sense ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Thank you , Mr Evans .
Indeed , I feared I had understood the meaning of your question correctly and that I would not have to hear the clarification you have given .
More seriously though , firstly , the outermost regions , all those that we call overseas , form part of the European Union , an important part , wherever those territories my be located and whether they have ties with France , Spain , Portugal , the United Kingdom or wherever .
You referred to existing overseas départements .
Those départements have been French since the 17th century .
Their inhabitants have been French citizens since 1848 - so that is nothing new - and all that has been taken into account from the outset , since the constituent Treaty establishing the original European Community and then the European Union .
Another point you emphasise - but here I think it is a question of extending Europe 's influences overseas - concerns the type of policy to be pursued .
I believe it is important for us to make efforts there , not because a territory is French but because , let me repeat , it is also a question of influence .
The other point you made , which is something that concerns the Council - and I here I will name no names - touches on a difficult subject , namely how to prevent offshore havens , whether overseas or on or near our continent .
It is true that is a problem .
Some work has been done at the Ecofin Council .
A number of proposals were put forward and we are always trying to combat tax havens effectively , both at EU level and under international agreements to which the EU is a party .

( LT ) I would like to ask a not particularly serious question : should we be considering changing our name to the European and South American Union ?
Moreover , following the possible accession of Turkey , should Asia be incorporated as well ?
On a more serious note , though , EU citizens nevertheless possess very little knowledge of these overseas territories .
Would it be possible for the EU information campaign to provide more information on these issues so that these countries feel closer and more familiar , especially to young citizens of the EU ?
It would then enable them to have better understanding of these territories , and questions like this would not be asked .
My thanks to the Council .
I may have missed it , but I did not hear the Minister 's response to the second part of Mr Evans 's question in relation to the post-Irish referendum climate at Council .
First of all , could he indicate exactly what the post-Irish referendum climate at Council is , and whether it is impacting on the processing of the applications from Croatia , Turkey and the other European states which are named ?
In other words , what is the position now ; post the Irish referendum , at the Council table in relation to these applications ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) In reply , first , to Mr Paleckis , I believe he is quite right .
It is true that efforts are being made to educate and inform European citizens more about these remote but European regions .
I see that they appear on euro notes , which is at least some progress .
We need to go further , however , in terms of information and communication .
I would say to Mrs Doyle that the question she raised is a very wide-ranging one .
We must therefore concentrate on the ongoing negotiations .
As far as the Council is concerned , those negotiations are based on the proposals put forward by the Commission on the basis of the screening reports , which is the entirely usual basis .
We also made it clear that we were prepared to deepen relations with a number of other countries , in particular the Balkan countries , and that given the efforts that have been made , we would like to have closer relations not only with Croatia but also with Serbia and with other countries such as Bosnia and Montenegro .
Then there is the question of partnerships .
There will be an important summit between the European Union and Ukraine on 9 September .
In the current context of the conflict between Russia and Georgia we will also try to develop the partnership with Ukraine and , as you know , yesterday we noted the need to strengthen relations with Georgia .
That is my update on ongoing relations .
Then there is the problem of the situation regarding the Lisbon Treaty .
If we do not have the Lisbon Treaty , a number of Member States including mine - to take off my Union president 's hat - have said that in effect the current treaty was a treaty of 27 and that in order to enlarge we did indeed need the Lisbon Treaty .
I am telling you honestly , Mrs Doyle , that is the Council 's position at present .
Subject : Border Adjustment Measures ( BAMs ) on less carbon-efficient imports
Could the Council please outline its views on Border Adjustment Measures ( BAMs ) on less carbon-efficient imports from third countries in the post-2012 trading period of the EU ETS ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) The European Council considered your very important question at its meeting in March this year , when it pointed out that in a highly competitive global context there is a risk of carbon leakage in certain sectors , such as highly energy-intensive industries , which are particularly exposed to international competition .
It is a real problem , which needs to be analysed and resolved in a new directive setting up a system of quota exchanges in the Community .
The best way to tackle the question of carbon leakage and ensure that the Community system of exchanging emission quotas remains effective is still by concluding an international agreement , Mrs Doyle .
It is clear , however , that we must also be prepared to act if we do not get an international agreement and we are currently discussing the most appropriate measures to keep our industry competitive while also ensuring that the EU plays an exemplary part in combating greenhouse gases .
We believe it is important to do so in a way that will make sure that industries of all kinds have adequate visibility in relation to their investments , especially at a time when the economic climate has worsened and we are facing a slow-down of international growth , with all the signs suggesting that the situation will be the same next year .
In the proposal for a directive , the Commission undertakes , in the light of the outcome of the international negotiations , to submit an analytical report accompanied by appropriate proposals for tackling the problems that may arise from the risks of carbon leakage .
There are two possible options : to adjust the proportion of free quotas and / or to integrate importers of products manufactured by energy-intensive industrial sectors into the Community system , while making sure that system is compatible with the WTO rules .
The Presidency of the Council hopes , of course , that the Council and this House will be able to clarify these matters , so as to ensure that Europe has an industrial base that is its own and is competitive and that we know as soon as possible what mechanisms will be applicable , before 2011 .
I accept that border adjustment measures must be part of our toolkit , but on the shelf , used as a carrot and not as a stick in facing any international negotiations where , in good faith , we tried to arrive at an international agreement to combat climate change .
Could the Minister please comment on Article 20 of the WTO which allows for such a contingency , that is , a ban where conservation of exhaustible ' natural resources ' are threatened ?
Will carbon dioxide reduction goals come within that definition as clean air has heretofore ?
I would like the Minister to develop his thoughts on this .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Doyle , I believe , firstly , that as you rightly say we must use the various possible measures as a carrot rather than a stick , to ensure that there is no exemption from the obligation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
Secondly , we must find the right balance in relation to the demands of the industries , which are not always fair in that respect .
In relation to Article 20 of the WTO , we believe this measure does indeed respond to the legitimate objective of conserving exhaustible natural resources .
According to the experts ' report we have received , it therefore complies with the rules of international trade law .
I should like to welcome the Minister to this part-session here in Brussels , rather than in Strasbourg , and say how much I look forward to seeing the French presidency at future part-sessions here in Brussels , rather than in Strasbourg .
As a follow-up to that , would he accept that one of the best ways to tackle global poverty is to encourage entrepreneurs in poor countries to start businesses and to create wealth through trade ?
Given his apparent interest in border adjustment measures - which are really import taxes - how does he respond to the criticism that border adjustment measures are anti-development measures and really a European imperialist protectionist measure to keep out exports from developing countries and to keep poor people in poverty ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , in my capacity as President I shall remain calm in the fact of these absolutely unjustified and uncalled-for attacks , because we are certainly not alone in doing business in poor countries !
On a more serious note , I believe the mechanisms we are considering - and here I am also replying to what Mrs Doyle said a moment ago - are not a stick to be used against the developing countries .
Looking at it very objectively , however , in the context of finding a balance between competitiveness and combating greenhouse gases , we really must establish a good balance in relation to our major partners .
One of those major partners is the United States , which , as far as I know , does not have the same commitments today as we do in this area .
Another is Japan , which also has fewer commitments and is making fewer efforts .
Then there is Russia , of which I keep being told that it does not have the same values and that we must also know how to speak to it in realistic terms and that it is an emerging big power .
There is Brazil , there is India and of course there is China , which is a member of the World Trade Organization .
So I really do not see why we should stop being realistic and should be naive .
We must wage an exemplary war against global warming .
Europe is leading in that field and must continue to do so and keep its advantage in international negotiations such as Copenhagen next year .
In that context , however , it has no need whatsoever to feel ashamed of defending its interests against powers that are at least as rich as we are .
As was pointed out by other speakers during earlier questions , we have our pockets of poverty in Europe too .
Subject : High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Accra ( Ghana ) in September
The High-Level forum on Aid Effectiveness in Accra , which is due to take place this September , presents a real opportunity for donors and partner governments to make further commitments that can be timetabled and monitored to make aid work better for the poor .
How can the Council and Member States commit more ambitiously to the targets of the Paris Declaration of 2005 ?
Can the Council and Member States guarantee that not only will governments attempt to improve the efficiency of aid delivery through this declaration , but that the effectiveness of aid - in terms of how it brings about real improvements in the lives of the poor - will also be addressed ?
Can the Council give an updated response to Parliament 's Resolution ( P6 _ TA ( 2008 ) 0237 ) on the follow-up to the Paris Declaration of 2005 on Aid Effectiveness ?
Now that we are at the halfway mark , how does the Council propose to make governments accountable for meeting their MDG commitments , given the fact that there has been a drop in EU aid figures from 0.41 % of GNI in 2006 to 0.38 % in 2007 , a decrease of about 1.5 billion euros ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr Burke , your question concerns three aspects that are closely bound up with cooperation and development : aid effectiveness , the Millennium Development Goals and the volume of aid .
It is a very topical question , with the third High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Accra meeting as from today and with less than a month to go before the high-level meeting on the Millennium Development Goals , to be held in New York on 25 September .
Another major event will be the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development , to be held in Doha from 29 November to 2 December , which will review the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus .
The Council is hard at work in relation to all those conferences and has adopted a number of conclusions since June this year .
On aid effectiveness , the Council acknowledges that despite some progress much remains to be done .
We need to identify the sectors or projects where the Union can make a difference and bring added value in relation to the other donors .
No doubt we must also use the national systems and make the recipients of the aid more aware of their responsibilities .
That is the objective we have set ourselves for the Accra conference and we hope to see an ambitious strategic declaration in the context of the Accra action plan , setting out strong , precise and measurable objectives with a timetable for their implementation , to make our partners more aware of the importance of improving aid effectiveness .
The second point concerns the Millennium Development Goals .
All the partners , both donor countries and recipient countries , have a common responsibility to achieve these on a basis of sustainable development and must respect their commitments .
The Council adopted the EU Agenda for Action on the MDGs in June this year and we have set out a number of intermediate goals with a view to achieving them .
Lastly , on the volume of aid , it is true that we are concerned at the fall in the collective volume of official development aid , which fell from EUR 47.7 billion in 2006 to EUR 46 billion in 2007 .
Yet despite that drop , Europe remains the biggest donor , especially in Africa , and we hope the drop will only be temporary .
If the statistics provided by the individual Member States are correct , we should have a very large volume of development aid in 2008 and should be able to attain our Millennium Goals for 2010 and 2015 .
That is why the Council has asked the Member States to establish rolling indicative timetables to show how they aim to achieve their ODA targets .
Concerning cooperation within developing countries , I came across one case where the EU was giving EUR 1.2 million to a project in Ethiopia , and found that 17 % VAT was being applied by the Ethiopian Government .
I wonder , therefore , whether we have made any progress in dealing with developing countries that are receiving development aid .
I also wonder whether we have had any indications from Member States at this stage as to what provisions they are making in their 2009 budgets for aid contributions in 2009 .
Will there be a reduction owing to the economic downturn in many countries , and is the presidency being proactive with Member States to ensure that this is not the case ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr Higgins , the three multinational battalions that make up the EUFOR forces in eastern Chad and the Central African Republic are now fully operational .
The force , which is made up of some 3 200 troops , can now conduct all the missions assigned to it by the Council .
Let me remind you that Albania , Croatia and Russia , which will soon be deploying four helicopters in the field , also form part of that force .
Ukraine has opened negotiations but has taken no further action to date .
As you know , your compatriot , General Patrick Nash , is the commander of the operation and the Presidency of the Council wants to pay special tribute to his professionalism .
Following the joint EU / UN evaluation mission conducted in Chad and the Central African Republic from 18 to 24 June , Javier Solana reported back and made recommendations on the UN 's follow-up of the operation .
The Council approved Mr Solana 's report on 25 June this year and the Secretary-General of the United Nations will draw on it for his report , which will be debated by the Security Council in the near future .
I want to emphasise that ever since its deployment , EUFOR has acted in an impartial , independent and neutral manner .
It has helped improve security in eastern Chad and the north-east of the Central African Republic , by deploying within the space of a few months , far from the European bases and in a very hostile environment , a force that is significant and dissuasive by its very presence , patrolling the entire area to help make it more secure , providing escorts for humanitarian organisations at their request , helping open supply routes , protecting sites on request or offering alternative solutions to help them carry out their tasks .
Lastly , it has also helped ensure that the local police can be more active and broaden their usual field of action .
EUFOR acts within the terms of its mandate and its activities were observed during the rebel attacks on Goz Beida and Biltine in mid-June this year , when it evacuated , sheltered and safeguarded some 300 humanitarian personnel who had requested this and it also prevented the looting of the market in the Goz Beida area .
The Irish troops that were securing a site for displaced people reacted very effectively to direct firing .
In July , during the confrontations between Dadjo and Mouro communities in Kerfi , EUFOR deployed a reinforced company to secure the area and evacuate around 30 humanitarian personnel .
I want to stress that EUFOR coordinates very closely with the UN task force MINURCAT , which operates in the Central African Republic and Chad , and , as I said , it also coordinates very closely with humanitarian organisations .
( GA ) When the rainy season ends will war not ensue between government forces and rebel forces ?
Would the Council be able to tell us which of the other towns are ready to participate in the mission in terms of troops , equipment and as well as money ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) EUFOR was not involved in the clashes between the government and the rebels , so it is scrupulously carrying out its mission in an entirely impartial manner and keeping entirely clear of the confrontations arising from the domestic problems between the government and the rebels .
It is carrying out its mandate in a neutral manner , not interfering in the internal affairs of Chad and the Central African Republic and basically aiming to help improve security in eastern Chad and in the north-east of the Central African Republic .
Each time it intervened in the confrontations and the incidents to which I have referred , it did so because humanitarian missions were at risk .
It intervened in order to protect those missions .
I was in Chad in March of this year three weeks after the rebel offensive .
I spent six days there meeting different groups , and one of the things that came across to me was the need to bring representatives of the rebel groups to the table .
I am just wondering if any progress has been made on that , either by the UN or by the European Union in the sense that , at the moment , I understand that there are between 7 000 to 10 000 people under 18 years of age carrying arms .
If any progress is to be made , then the rebel groups have to be brought to the table by someone .
I am just wondering whether any progress has been made on that .
I just wanted to ask the Minister briefly about his views on the future of this mission .
It is , I believe , supposed to end next March .
Does he foresee the mission continuing under the UFOR flag for perhaps a further six months after that , or perhaps continuing under the UN flag ?
Does he envisage any possibility that the mission might end next March ?
As I said , I would just like his views on the future of the mission .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) In reply to Mr Burke and Mrs Harkin , I believe we have every reason to be proud of that mission .
Let me remind you that it is the largest-scale mission ever deployed .
In reply to Mrs Harkin , we are urging the need for a speedy transition to the United Nations to ensure that eventually MINURCAT can take over from the EUFOR mission .
The EU special representative on the ground , Ambassador Torben Brylle , is in contact with the rebel groups .
It would be a lie to say that all is well .
I believe that this mission is absolutely essential , that it really does all it can for displaced people , for people who are suffering .
We are faced with a real humanitarian tragedy , but it is also true that the mission still lacks resources - as we keep pointing out and lamenting - and that the Council is very keen to strengthen those resources before the United Nations takes over .
In any case it will be a long-term enterprise .
In reply to Mrs Harkin , let me say that we would therefore prefer a transition to an extension .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.05 and resumed at 21.00 . )

Follow-up to a request for the defence of immunity : see Minutes
Special Report from the European Ombudsman following the draft recommendation to the European Commission in complaint 3453 / 2005 / GG ( debate )
The next item is the report by Proinsias De Rossa , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the Special Report from the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following the draft recommendation to the European Commission in complaint 3453 / 2005 / GG .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am pleased to be here tonight , although I would have preferred it to have been a bit earlier .
Nevertheless it is important that this report be debated in Parliament .
This report concerns a complaint of maladministration against the Commission .
The case has been referred to the European Parliament by way of a special report from the European Ombudsman .
Referring a special report to the European Parliament is the last substantive step the Ombudsman may take in seeking a satisfactory response on behalf of a citizen .
It is therefore a rare occasion on which reports of this kind are taken here .
My report , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , endorses the Ombudsman 's conclusion that the failure of the Commission to deal with the petitioner 's complaint within what was objectively established by the Ombudsman as several years ' unjustified delay constitutes an instance of maladministration .
I would emphasise here that this report does not deal with the content of European law but with the manner in which the Commission failed to deal with a complaint , and I therefore want to indicate that I am not accepting the single amendment which has been tabled by the GUE / NGL Group to this report , which seeks to introduce elements relating to the law itself .
In the original complaint to the Commission in 2001 , the complainant , a doctor working in Germany , requested that the Commission open infringement proceedings against Germany , arguing that that country infringed Council Directive 93 / 104 / EC , commonly known as the ' Working Time Directive ' .
The case was that Germany 's transposition of that Directive insofar as the activity of doctors and hospitals was concerned , in particular as regards time spent on call by these doctors , was in breach of the Directive .
In the complainant 's view , this resulted in a considerable risk for both staff and patients .
The Ombudsman found with regard to that compliant that the 15 months it had taken the Commission before it started to deal with the complaint was a case of maladministration .
In the mean time , new German legislation seeking to properly transpose the Directive was put in place , and the Commission informed the complainant that it needed time to examine this new legislation in order to consider its compatibility with Community law and whether or not it had dealt effectively with the complaint that had been made .
Then , in 2004 , it informed the complainant that it had adopted new proposals to amend the original Directive , and it would examine the complaint in the light of those proposals .
One year later , in 2005 , the complainant again had to turn to the Ombudsman to the effect that the Commission was ignoring the Ombudsman 's earlier findings .
There is no evidence , since that proposal was prepared in 2004 , that the Commission has taken any further steps in order to proceed with its investigation of the doctor 's complaint .
Instead of taking one of two possible decisions - either to initiate formal infringement proceedings or to close the case - the Commission abstained from taking any further action as regards its investigation .
Indeed , the fact that the Directive was due for amendment ( which , incidentally , has still not occurred - and this is now 2008 ) is in no way relevant to the complaint .
Community law does not envisage the possibility of disregarding existing laws and judgments on the grounds that new rules are being considered and may be introduced .
My report further asks the Commission to provide a list naming the Member States whose legislation is not in line with all the provisions of the Working Time Directive and specifying the action it is taking with regard to this .
It urges the Commission to take prompt action in accordance with its prerogatives in all cases and in all Member States where the transposition of implementation , or implementation of the existing directives , does not comply with the law laid down by the legislative branch , and indeed the European Court of Justice .
I recommend this report to the House .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for allowing me to put my views on the Member 's speech and to put my views more generally on the case under discussion .
The complaint relating to the Working Time Directive is connected with the judgments of the Court of Justice in the SIMAP and Jaeger cases concerning on-call working time , as has already been said .
This is a matter which the Directive does not expressly address .
Furthermore , according to many Member States , the interpretation made by the Court of Justice gave rise to fundamental problems and had a far-reaching impact on the financing and organisation of public health care and emergency services .
In an attempt to tackle the problems caused by these judgments , the Commission undertook extensive consultation in 2004 .
It came to the conclusion that an appropriate solution was to propose an amendment which would clarify the application of the Directive in the field of on-call working time and time off in lieu .
This amendment was presented by the Commission in 2004 .
In view of the exceptional importance of these matters for public health care services , the Commission decided in 2004 that it would not institute proceedings for infringement of the law in cases where the law would be changed by the proposed amendment .
The Commission acknowledges that , in this case , the time taken was unusually long , but I have given the reasons .
In view of the fact that the existing acquis remains in force until such time as the proposed amendment enters into force , the Commission left it open as to how to handle this actual complaint , and also other complaints relating to this matter .
Furthermore , in justifiable cases , it instituted proceedings for the infringement of the law in connection with complaints relating to the Working Time Directive , but not falling under the jurisdiction of the amendment .
The Commission is also carefully monitoring and analysing resulting amendments to the national regulations in all Member States and the reactions of legislators , national courts and representatives of workers and employers to the decisions of the Court of Justice .
This is very important , since the questions included in the actual complaint to which the report refers are in actual fact topical for more than one Member State .
The Commission will shortly submit to Parliament , in about two months time , a detailed report on the implementation of the Working Time Directive , providing complex and up-to-date information on compliance with the acquis , including the SIMAP-Jaeger judgments , in all 27 Member States .
The report will also include reactions to several proposals in the existing report .
As regards the conclusions relating to the handling of proceedings for infringement of the law in general , the Commission is of the opinion that , in view of the specific context of the complaint under the terms of the Working Time Directive , relating to changes to on-call working time , it is not appropriate to deduce general conclusions on the handling of proceedings for infringement of the law which the Commission normally conducts .
The period of one year for decisions on complaints received by the Commission is usually appropriate , but is laid down expressly as a general principle which need not apply in all cases .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am speaking on my own behalf but also on behalf of the 34 Members on the Employment Committee who voted last May in favour of the own-initiative report we drafted for this debate .
We all agree with the report and appreciate and value what Mr De Rossa , who has our full support , has done .
We wish to state in a few short seconds that we are concerned not only about the background to the time spent on call by doctors and the Working Time Directive but because we are facing a situation of concern to us : European citizens do not receive a reply when they seek information from the Commission .
Secondly , we are concerned because the Commission would appear to be aware that there is a legislative lacuna when it initiates procedures to amend directives .
Although the time I have is very brief , I must tell the Commissioner that regardless of what we or the Commission might think about case-law or the law in force , it is under an obligation to implement the Treaties and move ahead , and that it has no authority to hold any rule or anything which may affect the Community acquis in abeyance .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr De Rossa for his report .
I listened very carefully to the Commission 's response , and I would like to repeat that this report is about how the Commission dealt with a complaint .
While the subject matter was obviously very controversial and topical , what we are talking about here tonight in this debate is how the Commission deals with complaints .
We support the Ombudsman 's conclusions in relation to the inordinate delay , as acknowledged by the Commission this evening in this House .
Let me just say that , on the point of complaints , people get in touch with the Commission because they have a problem and expect some sort of response - perhaps not an immediate one , but certainly nothing that takes months and years .
I would bring to your attention an issue concerning Equitable Life , where we had some light-touch regulation and not great clarity about how Community law was actually being implemented - and we have seen the dire consequences of that particular issue .
Lastly , there is a current complaint with the Commission about the application of Irish planning law .
While the Commission was very active and supportive initially , I fear that there is now a silence .
I would like some progress on that issue .
Mr President , although this report has no legislative content , it is especially important for the interpretation and development of European law .
For this reason , I congratulate the Ombudsman on the initiative to draft the special report , and also my colleague Mr De Rossa for supporting the position that the Commission 's discretionary power in handling complaints does not allow for arbitrary interpretations , especially against citizens .
The trust we would like European citizens to have in the Union is based both on the introduction of legislation to protect their rights and above all on their correct implementation .
The Commission ought to honour its role as custodian of the Treaties and not allow the Council 's decisions to be obstructed when reviewing European law , thus hindering the implementation of existing laws .
Moreover , the EU ought to have an immediate effect wherever procedures allow it to .
The Commission is obliged to demonstrate the States ' reluctance or inability to apply European legislation .
Thus , on the one hand , citizens will learn to check to what extent their national authorities adhere to their European obligations while , on the other hand , governments will at long last have to be answerable for these commitments .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr De Rossa , on his excellent report .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions , I am always very conscious of the fact that for many EU citizens we are the face of the EU .
When I say ' we ' I mean the Committee on Petitions itself , and the Commission , which also evaluates petitions .
In this particular instance , the complainant was effectively ignored and the Ombudsman 's verdict was that this constituted maladministration .
I am pleased to see that the rapporteur and the Committee on Petitions agree with his position .
European citizens have a right to expect that the Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , will ensure that European legislation is implemented in a timely and effective manner .
They have the right to expect a timely response as well as an effective one , and while the Commission has discretion as to how to proceed in a certain case - i.e. whether or not to instigate infringement proceedings - it does not have the discretion to fail to adopt a position within a reasonable amount of time , which was the case in this matter .
With regard to Amendment 1 , this is a matter that needs to be dealt with , but separately from this report .
Finally , just a personal comment on the work of the Committee on Petitions : sending in a petition is , for many citizens , their only contact with the EU institutions .
It is crucial that this system works in an effective and transparent manner .
The Commission is part of the process , but so too is Parliament .
We must ensure that sufficient resources are available to the committee to carry out its work in an effective and timely manner .
To fully understand this issue , we need to put ourselves in the shoes of the petitioner and see it from their perspective .
As an individual or a small group they are taking on the system .
If the system does not respond in an effective manner they see it as a bureaucratic nightmare , and this alienates the petitioner and probably everybody they speak to about the matter .
For the sake of the public and of the EU , that is something we must not do .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am speaking today on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations , but also as chairman of the Committee on Petitions .
I am pleased that all those who have spoken on this item so far are members of that Committee , as indeed is the President chairing today 's proceedings .
So we are very well acquainted with these issues .
Ladies and gentlemen , the reason for today 's report by Proinsias De Rossa , whom I congratulate on an excellent document , is a report from the European Ombudsman , with whom we , as the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , work together on a permanent basis .
Our collaboration with the European Ombudsman is highly satisfactory .
All of us come into daily contact with his work , since the Committee on Petitions is the body which Parliament has made responsible for relations with the Ombudsman .
All of us speaking on this item are aware that the length of proceedings is a nightmare for the European institutions , and therefore obviously also a nightmare for the citizens of Europe .
We must accordingly call on the European Commission to make every effort to carry out all the duties imposed on it more rapidly .
I would stress the crucial point in Proinsias De Rossa 's report , namely the first paragraph , which states that ' the European Parliament endorses the European Ombudsman 's recommendation to the Commission . '
Parliament endorses the Ombudsman 's recommendation , as it usually does , because , as usual , we consider his demands and arguments well-founded .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by addressing the Commissioner .
This morning , Commissioner , you tried to tell us what a fine programme the Commission had in store for the people of Europe , one that would provide them with good jobs and show the social face of the EU .
But when it comes to taking concrete action , the Commission cops out .
The present case concerns a complaint made by a German doctor and the action taken in response to it .
It was quite simply about at least reviewing compliance with the existing minimum standards governing working hours in the European Union .
The Commission could not even manage that .
Your reaction has been far removed from what one would expect of a guardian of the Treaties .
You say nothing for years , and then you even relax the standards .
That is what the public perceive as a betrayal of their rights .
With this silence and the amendments to the Working Time Directive you have inflicted massive damage on the project of European union .
That has to be made clear .
( PL ) Mr President , complaints submitted by citizens are an important source of information about infringements of Community law .
The case in hand , which has been dragging on for seven years , concerns the German Government 's failure to implement properly the directive on certain aspects of the organisation of working time ( that is Directive 2003 / 88 , which revoked and replaced Directive 93 / 104 ) .
In the Ombudsman 's opinion , the lack of an effective response on the part of the European Commission constitutes maladministration .
The unjustified period of time , sometimes amounting to several years , which the Commission takes to prepare its response in cases of negligence on the part of Member States gives cause for concern , as do the numerous cases of Member States ' failure to comply with judgments of the Court of Justice .
Such practices undermine faith in the consistent application of Community law , discredit the aims of the European Union , and diminish citizens ' confidence in the EU institutions .
The manner in which citizens ' complaints are examined must conform to the principles of good administration .
Complaints must be examined efficiently and in the shortest possible time .
( PL ) Mr President , complaints concerning the organisation of working time are matters of urgency .
Consider what may happen if working time rules are breached in the case of doctors : that could lead to a surgeon having to perform a complicated operation after being duty for 23 hours .
There is a whole series of professions in which improper organisation of working time can endanger life .
It is therefore of exceptional importance that complaints be acted on within a reasonable time .
Mr President , I have two points .
Firstly , I should like to endorse what Ms Harkin said in relation to resources .
Perhaps there is a problem within the Commission in terms of resources : if there is , we should hear that .
Secondly , it takes a very strong-minded citizen to persist with a complaint that is being ignored , and I fear for the many who do not have the time , resources or , perhaps , the ability to keep pushing against the system .
How many of those fall by the wayside - or , indeed , is there ever a record kept ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to emphasise just a few fundamental points which , in my opinion , still need to be addressed .
In this case , we are dealing with one complaint .
This complaint does not constitute a general rule , since reacting in a timely manner to citizens ' initiatives is fundamental and one of the most important obligations .
I think that , on looking closely at the extent of the agenda , it becomes obvious that the Commission proceeds rigorously in these cases .
This case was exceptional in that its consequences could have affected several individual Member States as a whole .
Therefore , in 2004 the Commission used its discretionary right and proceeded as it did .
At this moment in time , I think that time has clearly shown that it was not quite the best decision , but it is a decision which was within the discretionary options open to the Commission .
I should like to say that cases of infringement involving a failure to observe the law in matters relating to the Working Time Directive are conducted at the normal tempo , since , as I have already said , whatever the very serious grounds for the decision were , time has shown that it was not the best decision .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to thank everyone who has stayed back tonight and participated in this debate , and also the Commissioner for his response to the debate .
His acknowledgement that there were , in fact , exceptional delays , and that it was not , perhaps , appropriate that that delay should occur , is welcome .
Nevertheless , there is still a difference of opinion between the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman on the Commission 's interpretation of its right not to deal with a complaint when it considers that it should not .
We are of the view that this discretion does not extend to an eight-year delay , which is what we are talking about here .
I welcome the fact that the Commissioner has announced the publication of a report within two months which will outline the compliance of all of the Member States , including as regards the particular complaint that we are dealing with here tonight .
I believe that earlier action by the Commission could well have driven earlier change in the Working Time Directive , and might perhaps have resulted in forestalling , at an earlier date , the risks which patients and , indeed , doctors and nurses in the health service in our hospitals have run over these years , where they have been working and on call for anything up to 100 hours a week .
I think the dispute on this issue highlights the weakness of the current infringement procedures , and the manner in which political considerations as well as resource considerations can come into play on sensitive issues , which should be dealt with in accordance with the law rather than in accordance with political sensitivities .
Finally , it has to be said that normally complaints of this kind are dealt with between the Ombudsman and the agency , the Commission or indeed the Council , against whom complaints have been made .
It is very rare that we have to deal with this matter in this House .
It is a rare occasion that this House is asked to endorse the decision of the Ombudsman against the Commission .
It is a cause of deep regret for me that we have to do this but , unfortunately , that is the case .
Therefore , I would like the Commissioner at some point to indicate , concede and acknowledge that he has accepted that the delay was not acceptable ; I would also like to hear from him a commitment that some procedures will be put in place to ensure that complaints will never again be allow to run to this length of time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 ) .
Equality between women and men - 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Iratxe García Pérez , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on Equality between women and men - 2008 .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin my speech by expressing my thanks to the Commission for its 2008 report on equality between men and women , which takes a comprehensive approach both to policies to mainstream the gender dimension and towards specific positive discrimination measures .
Although , admittedly , we should point out that the Commission 's report has work matters at its core , it takes no account of many other issues and difficult situations which women encounter and we have therefore tried to incorporate them into this Parliament report .
I also wish to thank all my colleagues who have by their efforts helped improve the report as initially presented .
There is common agreement that despite the progress that has been made , there is still much to be done .
In that regard complacency is likely to be our worst enemy .
If we are unaware of the challenges and the work which is yet to be done it will be difficult for us to make headway on equality issues .
The outlook of this report is based on the principle of gender mainstreaming , and the report raises various matters which have a bearing on that principle .
They are all important and we can not ignore any of them : incorporating women into the labour market , domestic violence , women in education , balancing family life with work , and vulnerable groups such as immigrant women or the disabled .
All these aspects must be borne in mind and merit exhaustive study and analysis , but I would like in the time available to me to focus on the aspects which I regard as most important .
Domestic violence is the greatest social scourge of our time , not only in Europe but worldwide .
A social injustice in which women , purely because they are women , experience violence at the hands of men because chauvinistic values are still fairly deep-rooted in our society .
Accordingly it is necessary to encourage laws in Member Status to combat this social plague .
We have a very good example in Spain , where a few years ago the Law against Domestic Violence was incorporated into the national legal order ; it recognises the rights of mistreated women and implements a comprehensive policy ranging from prevention , to treatment and reintegration of the women affected .
As far as women and the labour market are concerned , we should be aware that we are a long way still from achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
Women 's employment has risen but unemployment figures for women are still much higher than those for men , and we must therefore take political measures , both through the European Commission and the Member States , which encourage women to join the labour market on the same terms as men .
Another fact of life which we cannot skate over is the difference in wages ; this has stood at 15 % since 2003 .
Greater measures which have the agreement of business and the unions are needed .
Also in this report we propose that the Community institutions and the Member States should declare 22 February as International Equal Pay Day .
A woman would need to work 52 more days a year to earn the same wage as a man .
On finding a work / life balance , we must change the fact that currently 85 % of informal carers are women .
We need more public services whose role is to provide childcare and care for dependants .
Similarly , as regards participation by women in public life , we should encourage initiatives to increase participation through social organisations , unions and political parties .
Electoral quotas were a decisive step which must continue as we strive for equality in democracy .
There are other key aspects such as access to education , the overturning of social stereotypes , the issues and difficulties facing women in rural communities , which we cannot ignore .
We must join forces to that end .
We must work closely with organisations and make the fundamental European Union principle of equality between men and women a reality , because by so doing we will be moving towards a Europe with more law and greater social justice .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the report and motion for a resolution on equality between women and men in the European Union .
Acceptance of the report emphasises Parliament 's undertaking with regard to equality between women and men and confirms Parliament 's support for the Commission 's approach .
I should like to thank above all the rapporteur , Mrs Garcia Pérez , for the support that she expressed for the steps taken by the European Commission in this field .
Equality between women and men is one of the fundamental values of the European Union .
It also represents an area in which Europe has often moved ahead of social developments .
In recent years it also has commenced important and ambitious initiatives .
Acceptance of the plan to achieve equal status between women and men emphasises the Commission 's willingness to use all means to bring Europe closer to real equality between women and men in all areas .
Furthermore , the Commission notes that Parliament 's motion for a resolution emphasises certain topics which are included in the plan 's priorities .
This involves in particular the position of women in the labour market , the work-life balance , a balanced accession to leading positions and also the fight to stop violence against women .
This approach complies with the Commission 's policy in this field and includes topics which were emphasised in the report for 2008 .
Although the progress made in the field of equality between women and men is obvious , we are still faced with important tasks .
We must continue with our efforts and strengthen the legal base .
The Commission shares the rapporteur 's view that a central role is played in the achievement of equality between women and men by the work-life balance .
We are well aware that it is mostly women who take responsibility for the family and the home .
This is why women , more often than men , have to interrupt their studies and careers , very often not returning to them .
In order to increase female employment , therefore , it is vital to have access to high-quality and affordable childcare .
The Commission will be presenting a report on developments in this field in the weeks to come .
Furthermore , in 2006 and 2007 the Commission consulted representatives of workers and employers on the topic of work-life balance .
In July 2008 , they indicated their intention to negotiate on parental leave .
The Commission is not at the moment submitting any proposals on this topic .
The Commission intends in the near future to present a package of initiatives relating to the work-life balance , in particular a report on childcare , a draft directive amending the Directive on maternity leave and a draft directive amending the 1986 Directive on ' assisting spouses ' .
The current situation of assisting spouses in agriculture and also in other sectors where there are family businesses is unacceptable .
It is not acceptable for people working regularly for family businesses in some countries not to have any right to social security and to find themselves in a position of great need in the event of divorce , death of the breadwinner or financial difficulty .
A policy of equality is of fundamental importance in preventing and combating violence committed against the opposite sex , since this is based on the imbalance of strength between men and women .
Effective measures against violence based on gender , on the other hand , make a contribution to protecting women 's rights in society and supporting equality .
Violence against women is unacceptable .
Rape , sexual abuse of girls , trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual or labour exploitation , domestic violence , workplace harassment , and also traditional or disfiguring practices - such as , for example , mutilation of the sex organs - impair the health , freedom , dignity and physical and emotional inviolability of women .
Our interventions must be thorough and exceptionally effective , in particular in cases where violence against women is committed by international organised crime , as in the case of people trafficking .
For this reason , the Commission considers that , as part of its working programme for 2009 , it will revise and rewrite the legislation relating to people trafficking , exploitation and sexual abuse of children , which is a terrible crime committed mainly against girls .
In conclusion , I should like to say that equality policy plays a fundamental role in changing thinking and behaviour .
It is therefore key in ensuring not only legal equality but also real equality between women and men .
The Commission therefore welcomes the support given to it by the European Parliament through this motion for a resolution .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say that this is a very comprehensive report and highlights many of the issues that must be dealt with in order to ensure equality between women and men .
I am particularly pleased to see that the issue of violence against women is dealt with , because for too many people violence against women is seen as a women 's issue , whereas in fact it is a societal issue , and until it is dealt with as a societal issue we cannot hope to eliminate it .
Furthermore , I agree with the rapporteur and her statement about the feminisation of poverty and about the groups that are particularly at risk , as well as the central issue of ensuring equal access to pensions and social welfare payments .
In this context , I would like to have seen paragraph 14 from my opinion taken on board , where I make this case specifically for carers .
Given that by 2030 the ratio of active to inactive people will be 2 : 1 , the role of family carers will become much more significant , and given that there are already 100 million carers in the EU - men and women but predominantly women - without proper access to social welfare payments or pensions , we need to ensure that this generation of carers does not become the next generation of poorer , older people adding to the feminisation of poverty .
Finally a personal comment on paragraph 9 which does not reflect the views of the Employment Committee : I believe that the text should be qualified by stating the need to respect national legislative processes when considering the issue of abortion .
There is a protocol to the Treaty of Maastricht which ensures that EU law will not override Article 40.3.3 of the Irish Constitution on the protection of the unborn .
During the Lisbon debate in Ireland , many citizens said to me that the EU was intent on pushing to have abortion available in Ireland .
Even though I said that this was not the case , many still argued that Parliament was pushing the agenda , and that is why I believe our intention needs to be clear .
The issue is not one 's view on abortion .
Mine , I suspect , may be different to that of the rapporteur , but that is not the point .
The issue is one of subsidiarity , and citizens , whatever their position on abortion , need to be able to rely on that .
I believe all of us in this Parliament should respect that as well .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the apt approach she took when drafting this report on equality between men and women .
As rapporteur for the Cultural Committee I would like to highlight the main contributions our committee made , which were obviously related to areas within our purview such as education , culture , sport and communication .
First , we proposed promoting equal behaviour in schools , and removing the gender stereotypes which are still too widespread in some media ; taking measures to change the segregation of labour in the different stages of the schools system so that there is equal involvement of teachers of both sexes at each stage ; eliminating any discrimination in terms of salary on grounds of sex in the fields of education , culture and sport and communication ; and encouraging greater participation by women in the management bodies of those sectors where women are in the minority .
As the rapporteur has already said , there is still a long way to go .
I am reminded of a couple of lines by Machado , who said , ' Traveller , there is no way ahead , you make your way by walking ' because , my friends , we will achieve equality even as we fight for it .
Mr President , on behalf of my political group I congratulate the committee on its report .
Congratulations are also due to my fellow Member for expressing Parliament 's view in her report , even though on certain points we suggested amendments to improve it and to show , through Parliament 's report , that we recognise what has happened on the basis of the roadmap for equality , and on the basis of the pact for gender equality .
We have had considerable quantitative success .
We still have to improve on how well we implement the measures .
We must ensure effective implementation and extended legal protection through the appointment of a competent body for complaints in each Member State by laying down sanctions based on the proportionality principle .
We also want the subsidiarity and free-choice principles to be maintained .
As far as work in the family combined with professional life is concerned , we do not want just working women to be covered .
Cover should extend to the unemployed , those who decide to be involved solely with their households , those in the liberal professions and those who are self-employed in family businesses .
We want to reinforce maternity and family leave .
We believe that the communication we are awaiting from the Commission will cover us at this point with a good proposal .
Since women study and work more , they deserve to be paid for all types of service provision .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's regular assessments , which give us a clear picture of the actual situation , are extremely important on the path towards creating gender equality .
Commissioner Špidla 's commitment to this matter is well known .
The first report on gender equality was prepared five years ago , and we are right to expect results now .
According to the 2008 report on equality between women and men , there has been some progress , but unfortunately it also mentions some frozen areas where there has not been any perceptible movement .
The wage gap between men and women has stagnated at 15 % over the last five years , and my colleague mentioned that this means 54 days , or up to 22 February .
The ratio of women to men is still unfavourable in decision-making , and the image of women suggested by the media is disadvantageous .
The biggest problem is that there has been no significant progress in precisely the area of employment and related issues , yet these really are crucial , partly because of the challenges to the demography of the EU and partly because of economic growth and ensuring equality .
These main priorities resolutely demand increased involvement of women in the labour market .
A quantitative success of the Lisbon Strategy is the 12 million new jobs that have been created , of which 7.5 million have been filled by women , but this does not mean an improvement in quality .
Compulsory part-time work , the planned 65-hour working week , the horizontal and vertical labour markets and segregation will unfortunately lead to the compatibility of work and private life remaining an intractable question that will continue to grow due to the lack of child-care institutions .
I consider it necessary that Member States prepare further coordinated strategies and methods , and implement them effectively in practice , and also that they provide real political support .
I would like to congratulate my colleague on her work ; she has presented an excellent report .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would obviously like first to thank my friend and colleague Iratxe García for the work she has done for this report , which I view as an important and complete piece of work .
I would also like to highlight at least four of the points raised in the report and mentioned by the rapporteur in her speech which are also important to my group .
First , the need for European institutions to take a step forward in view of the current wave of chauvinistic violence , and to do so both in terms of legislation and to establish a clear legal basis to enable all forms of violence against women to be combated ; this should include , for example , recognition of the right of asylum on grounds of gender-based persecution .
Secondly , with a view to ensuring greater participation by women in decision-making , it is necessary for all institutions and political parties to study this issue and take specific measures on it , and we do not rule out electoral quotas here .
Thirdly , it is important to acknowledge once and for all that in order to ensure total emancipation of women , women must be the ones who take the decisions on their sexual and reproductive health rights .
Fourthly , and expressing regret at the lack of progress in the wage differences between women and men in recent years , the notorious ' pay gap ' , it is crucial for the Commission and the Member States to assess the strategies and actions which , in concert with social stakeholders , should enable that situation to be corrected .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report and I support it in full .
I will also support the amendments on the labour market tabled by Mrs Figueiredo .
I have only one minute 's speaking time now , so I won 't bring up any special policy issues .
I merely want to say one thing which I think worth pointing out .
The rapporteur lists different measures which need to be taken in order to achieve equality between women and men .
When she does this , it results in a total of 45 items .
I repeat : 45 items !
In the EU and its Member States which have long claimed to prioritise equal rights between men and women , this report shows 45 different areas which need to be changed .
There is no need to say more , other than that I say yes to the report and , above all , yes to concrete action now !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , an important element in the report , in my view , is the call to make it easier for employees to return to work after a career break for maternity or parental leave and to remove the disparities in remuneration and education .
It is nevertheless hard to accept the direct causal connection made between life problems affecting many people and the fact of being a women .
Treating social life as a battle of the sexes , with the creation of a new enemy on the previous model of the class struggle , gives those who advocate it the right to unlimited interference in every sphere of human existence , including the functioning of the family .
The problem in Europe is not the struggle between men and women .
It is the lack of respect for rights and moral principles , manifested especially by unrestrained greed and selfishness .
As a woman I would prefer that equal rights did not result in equality with men in every respect , but rather led to arrangements that protect women and alleviate their burdens .
No longer being treated as an impersonal workforce , they could then make a creative contribution in many areas of the economy .
( SK ) This 2008 report on equality between women and men summarises a European Parliament report which has already been adopted and which created a great stimulus that needs to be applied in practice .
I view it as a reflection of the work of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and I should therefore first of all like to thank Mrs García Pérez for producing it .
In order to meet the Lisbon targets , it is essential to make the fullest possible use of the potential of women on the labour market .
It is also important for women to have the best possible access to postgraduate studies and life-long learning and also access to new technologies and the information society in order to be able to be competitive in the labour market .
I greatly admire the women heading large companies and also small family firms and creating new job opportunities .
Alongside her daily tasks as a wife and mother , a businesswoman also takes on management tasks in her company , assuming responsibility not only for the success of her family but also for the success of her company .
As a society , we do not always give sufficient recognition to the importance of this task for society .
Women in leading positions are forced to overcome many additional obstacles associated in particular with their family responsibilities .
Harmonisation of family and working life is one of the main prerequisites for increasing female employment .
It is therefore essential to propose measures to motivate fathers to take parental leave , dividing maternity leave between both parents .
Many women are aware today that they will not attain important positions on the basis of social support programmes , but only on the basis of their own abilities .
Chancellor Angela Merkel is an obvious example that we women also have our own firm position in world politics .
When we look at the history books , we read a lot about men 's heroics .
Women only appear in the background .
I am convinced that it is our responsibility to put the spotlight on the anonymous hoards of women involved in our society , without whom the world could not move forward .
( RO ) Dear colleagues , there are issues people talk about a lot , but little is done .
In the debate on the social package , we talked about the lack of instruments required to make the principle of equal pay for work of equal value applicable and to reduce the pay gap between men and women .
Without them , our commitments are only words and the legislation is useless .
There are also issues for which very little or nothing is done but that we do not even talk about .
People do not really talk about the 100,000 women trafficked every year , except here , late in the evening ; probably because they are goods , not citizens .
Most of them are trafficked for prostitution .
We request firmer integrated actions against trafficking networks , as well as concerted actions to discourage the demand for prostitution .
Without demand , there is no reason for trafficking to exist .
People also do not talk about the situation of women working as housekeepers in the domestic environment ; they are invisible .
Without any social rights or with minimum rights , they face the same risk of abuse as women do in their own families , including the risk of exploitation .
For those who work in foreign countries , the non-exercise of political rights adds to the fragility of their social and economic situation .
Correct regulation of their situation is not only a present matter of justice , but it could prevent the maintenance of the high poverty rate among older women in the future .
Another subject we cannot talk about is the women in my country 's government , because they simply do not exist .
Dear Commissioner , dear colleagues , we consider it is time to go from making statements about what we should do to doing what we should do .
( PT ) Mr President , evidence shows that discrimination against women persists and ultimately affects women workers , whose wages are on average over 15 % lower than men 's .
In some countries , including Portugal , this figure rises to over 25 % , a situation that has actually become aggravated in recent years .
We therefore call for the upgrading of employment , decent wages , compliance with social , health and safety standards and a reduction in the working day without loss of pay .
This could help to create more jobs with rights for women and ensure better reconciliation of work and family life .
The adoption of measures to combat the labour precariousness that affects women in particular and to enhance collective bargaining in defending male and female workers must be encouraged .
The adoption of public measures and actions to improve women 's access to sexual and reproductive health services and to raise their awareness of their rights and the public services available to them must also be encouraged , while respecting their dignity .
Mr President , there is enormous discrimination against women in the United Kingdom , sadly .
I know my own committee - the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - have their heart in the right place .
However , most of the discrimination comes because the employment laws are so onerous for small businesses recruiting young women that they simply discriminate in a covert way .
I think it is the classic law of unintended consequence .
You make a law here , you make a law there , and what actually happens is that nothing happens , which actually reinforces the position .
I do not mean to sound ungallant , but when I look round my committee - the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - I see that their mindset is deeply locked in the 1970s - they have not moved on .
I am afraid that life is not like that any more , and when I hear people talk about the emancipation of women , I am sorry , but as an Englishman , that happened a very long time ago .
I do not know what problems other countries have , but please do not lay all this on the United Kingdom , where we do not have the problem , because , although , again , I say your heart is in the right place ( the law of unintended consequences ) , you are making a real bollocks of it .
Mr President , it may be a useful coincidence that I am speaking after Godfrey Bloom , who seems to inhabit somewhere deep within the 19th century .
He is , indeed , the man famous for saying , not so very long ago , that women should clean behind the fridge and that that was one of their major roles in life .
If it is me who has not moved on , then I am proud , because I do not wish to be associated in any way , particularly as an Englishwoman , with comments such as those .
What I do want to say is that this excellent report has raised very many important issues , and I thank the rapporteur for that .
I also thank the Commissioner for the comments he made .
One particular point I wish to pick up on is the whole question of trafficking .
As a representative from London - and , indeed , a woman representative from London - I have had a particular interest in this subject , because London is one of the places very much affected by trafficking in women .
Member States are currently being asked to sign the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking .
Although some of the Member States have signed this , there are others - 15 , in fact - that have not yet signed , and indeed there are two that do not seem prepared to do so .
I would therefore ask that all EU Member States ratify this convention against trafficking , and that everyone here , including all the members of the Committee on Women 's Rights , take it upon themselves to go back to their governments and push them to do even more work than they may already be doing about the whole vile and evil trade of trafficking in women .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report presented by Mrs Pérez and the European Commission .
The statistics showing that female employment has increased in recent years to a level of 57.2 % sound good , but , as the report states , a whole range of problems remain .
Women still occupy only one-third of the leading positions in private companies and in other areas , including politics .
A large proportion of new jobs are not covered by long-term contracts of employment and so future prospects are uncertain .
These are the kinds of jobs which often go to women .
They are still regarded as people whose main responsibility is care of the family , with earnings from work representing just a supplement to the family budget .
This is why women are still worse paid than men for the same work and with the same qualifications .
These stereotypes continue to represent one of the instruments of discrimination against women on the labour markets .
I find the willingness of employers to give women allowances to help them with childcare and thus facilitate their further professional and career development to be very unsatisfactory .
( RO ) We talk about the need to combat violence against women , encourage women 's participation in civic activities and an aspect that falls under the activity of the Committee on culture - discrepancies between women 's and men 's education .
Although women obtain better results than men in the field of education , there is still a pay inequality between genders in the labour market .
Personally , as a member of the Committee on Culture and Education , I submitted an amendment to the opinion drafted by CULT regarding this report .
I consider it to be essential to eliminate from the mass-media the images presenting women in degrading situations , taking into account the impact that the media of mass communication have on public perceptions and attitudes .
Ensuring equality between women and men in all the fields of action of the European Union 's policies is still a current issue in Western society .
( SK ) The report begins with a paragraph stating that equality between women and men is a fundamental principle of the European Union , a principle which has been in place for more than 50 years .
The second part of the report , however , continues with 46 paragraphs containing recommendations , invitations or requests for this principle to be observed .
There are also fundamental recommendations such as equal access to funds , education , health care or remuneration .
There is a request to combat violence against women , a request to combat trafficking in women and much more .
Such reports are certainly important and I congratulate the rapporteur .
On the other hand , however , it talks about the inadequate implementation of documents already adopted .
It points to inadequate control and sanctions .
It also points , however , to the insincerity of politicians who outwardly declare support for equality between women and men but , in practice , do not observe it , and this is why expectations are not as we would wish .
( PL ) Mr President , when we analyse the resolution on equality between women and men , it is difficult not to support it .
I refer in particular to the points concerning violence against women and the need for education from the earliest years about discrimination against them .
We are well aware that a proper upbringing and education is the best way to root out discrimination and violence against women .
EU citizens are fairly uninformed about trafficking in women and largely unaware of the existence in our times of this dreadful , brutal trade , which is unacceptable in a civilised world .
I therefore believe significant resources should be allocated to an information campaign .
It must be pointed out , however , that despite all the difficult problems we are discussing , there has been significant progress towards equality between women and men in recent years , and it is especially noticeable in rural areas .
( RO ) Mr. President , equality between men and women should be a basic principle of the European society .
The latest Eurobarometer survey indicates the fact that women in the rural environment are not involved in making decisions in the communities they belong to , have no stable job and most of them undertake only household responsibilities , this percentage reaching 98 % in some areas .
Nevertheless , over 50 % of women want to have access to the European labour market , as well as to obtain a qualification that would facilitate their employment in public administration , agriculture , social assistance or education .
Also , an important percentage of women want to benefit from the facilities available at European level for starting a business .
Consequently , I believe that the initiatives of women from the rural environment to get actively involved in society , to permanently improve and participate in the economic development of the region they come from should be supported .
Elimination of discrimination requires a joint European effort .
Programmes such as the European Social Fund and Progress in partnership with local governments and authorities should allocate larger funds to support women in the rural environment .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the discussion .
Generally speaking , when looking at the developments , it can be said that there has been significant progress , but ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that there is still a long way to go .
This is why the Commission is trying to pursue complex negotiations , using all the tools available to us .
I have referred , for example , to the legislative proposals already prepared and to the intention to tighten the penalties for people trafficking .
I should also like to say that the endeavours to achieve equality are of course based on a deep ethical foundation and , even if we were to find no reasons based on social balance , stability of the social systems or economics , it would still be right and necessary to proceed consistently .
However , I should like to say that real equality of opportunity is the foremost priority of the European Union and no society which cannot achieve equality of opportunity has any long-term future in global competition .
It is not only fair and ethically undeniable , but it is also beneficial .
I think that it is absolutely fundamental for this reason too that we move ahead , not being satisfied with the developments which may in some respects be interpreted as progress , but where very many things , on the other hand , may still be regarded as only modest results .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I welcome the words of all my colleagues who have spoken on this item because I believe that it allows us to establish that despite varying emphases and some differences , the common objective is shared by each and every one of us .
I would also like to tell the Commissioner that I am very pleased with his speech and with his contribution during this debate .
Each and every one of us would sign up to his speech in full .
Therefore I would like to say how pleased I am , but would add that what is needed now is a genuine political willingness to implement all the initiatives which are currently on the table .
He will therefore have this Parliament on his side if he continues to emphasise the importance of this issue and persists in his efforts to implement all these initiatives .
I would just like to note one aspect : the importance of men 's role in the fight for equality between men and women .
Involving men in this task is essential .
The fact that today male colleagues have participated in this debate may , I believe , be a reflection of the fact that men must also stand beside women in the fight for equality .
I will close by mentioning one of the issues raised in this debate , by a colleague who said that women have been saying the same old things since the 19th century .
I would like to point out to him that women in my country in the 19th century were demanding the right to vote : they could not even vote .
There is therefore , a clear difference .
Much progress has been made , that much we cannot deny .
We must thank all those women , all those organisations who have worked in the fight for equality .
This , however , cannot mean denying the obvious : there is still a long way to go , we still have a lot of work ahead .
By all of us persisting , men and women , we should achieve genuine equality between men and women .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Ladies and Gentlemen , many topics have been touched on in this debate .
I stress the issue of maternal and parental leave .
Europe is confronted with a demographic problem resulting not only from the economic problems affecting our continent but also from the failure to provide young mothers with proper support .
It is immensely important for a woman who has had a baby to be provided with support that gives her and her child the necessary security and ensures that she is not prevented from returning to professional or social life .
Mothers must be protected in such a way that they can return to their place of work in due course and take care of their families properly , and we must place great emphasis on making sure these arrangements are treated equally seriously throughout Europe .
in writing . - ( RO ) Although it is one of the European Union 's good students as regards the legislative framework and the number of governmental initiatives and programmes for reducing gender inequality , Romania has shortcomings regarding important aspects that accentuate and perpetuate inequality between women and men .
As regards the access of women to management positions , Romania ranks among the last countries in Europe .
Out of the 331 Members of Parliament , only 37 are women , just above 11 % of the total .
Nevertheless , the percentage of women in Romania 's local administration is even lower .
Sweden has almost an equal number of women and men Members of Parliament .
Also , in Romania , almost a third of women work part-time , as compared with only 7.7 % of men , for a remuneration on average 15 percent lower than that of men .
This situation is closely related to the persistence of gender stereotypes , which makes most of the household duties fall to the responsibility of women .
Unfortunately , gender inequality and the related prejudices are present not only in the family environment , but also in the education environment of Romanians .
Studies show that school activities in Romania tend to form gender differentiated mentalities , as well as the social-economic orientation activities organized by the teaching staff .
Therefore , I emphasize the importance of including the issues regarding the importance of education in reducing gender inequality in the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Equality between men and women is a fundamental principle of the European Union . Yet the figures in the 2008 report show that there is still no equality .
Indeed , the pay gap has remained at 15 % since 2003 .
In light of that situation , I believe we must strengthen European legislation , for example by compelling employers to carry out wage and salary audits , with a view to reducing that gap in pay .
It is also important to look at the special situation of women living in rural areas , who are never declared as ' working ' on the official labour market .
Because they have no definite professional status , those women , who certainly work since they help their husband within the family farm , encounter a great many financial and legal difficulties in regard to access to retirement pensions or social security .
I will support any measure that will improve the situation of those women .
Lastly , I welcome the proposed measures to improve women 's access to sexual and reproductive health services .
Such access is indeed a vital condition for the exercise of their freedom .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur and emphasize the importance of the content of this report for the achievement of the economic growth objectives undertaken in the context of the Lisbon Strategy .
Both the European Union and the Member States should provide a better model for society .
Despite the progress achieved , inequality between men and women persists and this is why we have to take action .
I would like to draw attention to a problem that very many women are dealing with every day and in relation to which very few of them receive a favourable sentence , namely sexual harassment .
According to a national study conducted in Romania , in 90 % of the cases , the victims of sexual harassment were women and 1 out of 9 people in the urban environment have dealt with a sexual harassment situation .
In over 55 % of the cases , the aggressor was the victim 's professional superior .
I think a reassessment of the strategies and actions in this field is required in order to increase women 's living and professional standards and Member States should accelerate the enforcement of Community legislation on equality between women and men with regard to the labour market , including as regards sexual harassment .
in writing . - ( RO ) Time has come to give up stereotypes and act firmly in order to provide real equal chances to women and men .
Over the last ten years , progress has been unquestionable as regards the increase of women representation in European top politics , but still insufficient .
On the contrary , remuneration discrepancies have remained relatively constant in recent years .
European companies still contribute to the fundamental exclusion and firm and more courageous decisions are required , together with a much more efficient media campaign for this purpose .
The general participation of women in the decision-making process is subject to obvious distortions in Romania , as well , which is the only country where not a single woman holds the position of Minister and , in Parliament , women represent only 9 % .
The Romanian society has the duty to fight mentalities , gender discriminations in all its daily forms .
I have confidence in the positive effects of using electoral quotas to represent women .
We can find best practice models in Nordic countries , and not only there .
No matter if we opt for an electoral system based upon proportional representation by guaranteeing the gender parity of candidates , as well as the equal visibility in the media ( Belgium ) or for distributive quotas established by law ( Finland , Sweden , Spain , France ) , I believe the situation of women who want this type of involvement in the political , economic and social life could be improved in Romania .
European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission , by Giles Chichester and Angelika Niebler , on the European Network and Information Security Agency ( ENISA ) , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - B6-0159 / 2008 ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 2004 the European Network and Information Security Agency , known by the acronym ENISA , was founded .
Its task is essentially to improve network and information security in the European Union and to promote closer cooperation among the Member States .
ENISA 's mandate is unquestionably complex .
Computer viruses , spam mail , phishing and Trojans are real threats in a world of virtual data .
Hacking threatens private and public networks .
The damage done to our modern communication society is immense .
Security is the Achilles ' heel of our computer systems .
This is where we are vulnerable and endangered ; when I put it that way , you will understand how important this agency is to us .
On the other hand , this agency does not have a large staff , but it still has this mammoth task to perform .
This raises the legitimate question whether ENISA can actually perform its tasks in the way in which it currently operates .
We have very often discussed , both in the chamber and in other bodies here , how ENISA might perhaps be further developed .
The latest proposal from the Commission was that ENISA be merged with the planned European Authority for Telecommunications Markets .
That proposal was not embraced by Parliament or by the Council .
Instead , Parliament and the Council decided before the summer recess that ENISA 's mandate should be extended for three years .
The ultimate purpose of our question to the Commission is to ensure that this debate is structured over the next three years .
By asking the question , we also want to grasp the nettle and challenge the Commission to state its position on the points we regard as critical .
In its present form , can ENISA perform the tasks that are expected of it ?
Is the Commission thinking about replacing ENISA with another organisation ?
Is it absolutely essential that these tasks be performed by an EU agency ?
In the Commission 's view , what general changes to ENISA 's structure should be considered ?
I look forward to the Commissioner 's reply .
I am keen to find out how far advanced the deliberations are in the corridors of the Commission .
We in Parliament , of course , shall subsequently be called upon to form our own opinion on the future shape of ENISA .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the honourable Members will know that in accordance with the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the ENISA Agency , the mandate of ENISA automatically expires on 13 March 2009 .
However , the Commission believes it is essential to ensure the continuity of network and information security activities .
That was a view shared by Parliament and by the Council in the debates on the proposal for an amending regulation extending the mandate of ENISA .
Therefore , the measure extending the mandate of ENISA for a further three years is justified .
It is true that the evaluation of ENISA launched by the Commission in 2006 identified a number of problems , but it also identified positive aspects of the Agency 's achievement in the light of the limited means at its disposal .
The Commission responded to the concerns identified by bringing forward a proposal for a regulation establishing the Telecoms Authority .
We note today that the Council and Parliament agree that ENISA should be kept separate from a new body to be put in place as an alternative to the Telecoms Authority , and the Commission still sees the need for an efficient body able to monitor security and integrity issues .
That is why it is important to continue the work of ENISA .
However , I also strongly believe that network security challenges will require a strong , coordinated European response .
Recent cyber-attacks in Estonia and also in Georgia - the serious cyber-attack there during the summer seems to have gone unnoticed - have shown that one country on its own can be very vulnerable indeed .
I therefore call on the European Parliament and the Council to open , early in 2009 , an intense debate on Europe 's approach to network security and on how to deal with cyber-attacks , and to include the future of ENISA in those reflections .
During the debate on the prolongation of the ENISA regulation , calls were made both in Parliament and in the Council for a debate on the goals of a possible modernised network and information policy , and on the most adequate means to achieve them .
It was explicitly stated that the prolongation of ENISA should not prejudice the outcome of that debate .
In order to facilitate such a debate , the Commission services will , in the second half of 2008 , develop a questionnaire to be submitted to public online consultation on the possible objectives of a modernised NIS policy at EU level , and on the means to achieve those objectives .
This will , of course , be done in consultation with ENISA and its management board .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Parliament and the Council have approved the extension of ENISA 's operation until the end of 2012 .
This three-year extension will enable further debate on the future of ENISA and the wider question of increased security of networks and information in Europe .
In my view , the revision procedure ought to begin immediately .
It should transform the body from a temporary foundation into a permanent one ; above all , this must be accompanied by a simultaneous increase in staff and an updating of the extremely important Articles 2 and 3 in its Rules of Procedure .
This solution will allow the body to get to work as soon as possible under an upgraded and improved mandate .
Let me remind you here - and this is the Commission 's view , too - that only a European agency can guarantee the security of networks and information .
I should also like to point out that today the overwhelming majority of partners agree that ENISA is the most able and qualified body to develop a new , dynamic European policy for the security of networks and information .
In the past , ENISA was harshly criticised .
I must remind you , however , that the evaluation report in 2007 was able to evaluate ENISA only in its first year of operation ; as a result , the evaluation is no longer reliable or , of course , timely .
Recent evaluation studies by independent bodies have restored the truth .
It is essential for appropriate resources to be made available so that the body can operate more effectively .
Finally , let me tell you that the Greek Government wishes to support a viable solution : it has undertaken to cover the maintenance expenses of an ENISA office in Athens in order to facilitate the body 's work and operations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the facts behind today 's debate on the oral question by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on ENISA are certainly very different from when this question was submitted .
For a start , the Council and the European Parliament have agreed to the extension of the body 's operating regulation until 2012 .
At the same time , the European Commission 's proposal to establish a European authority for the purchase of electronic communications has been treated with circumspection by the Council and the European Parliament .
Instead , the Council and the European Parliament are in fact proposing the BERT recommendation , with fundamental responsibility for better implementation of the regulatory framework for telecommunications services , without getting involved in issues of network security or integrity .
However , these issues are indeed exceptionally important , as you , Commissioner , rightly pointed out a little while ago and in your statement earlier today .
You stressed that the recent attacks on Estonian cyberspace and that of other countries show how vital it is that we come up with a convincing and coordinated European response immediately .
Now , this is precisely the role ENISA can and must play , once it is operating under an upgraded and improved mandate with clearly defined duties and aims and , of course , once it has the requisite means and human resources available to it .
This time I hope that the Commission will contribute significantly and genuinely here by assisting ENISA in its work to reinforce the security and integrity of networks .
This is vital to boost the confidence of companies and , of course , European citizens in European networks .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , network security - it sounds like a specialised field of knowledge , but the security of networks is influencing more and more aspects of our daily lives : mobile communications , the Internet , which is squeezing its way , rather like an octopus , into more and more areas of everyday activity , ambient intelligence - the computer intelligence that is built into our environments , be it to assist elderly people or to control complex work processes .
All of this shows us that we are becoming more and more dependent on such advanced forms of technology .
They rule our lives and the growth of our economy .
How dependent we have become was recently demonstrated in Estonia .
You mentioned , Commissioner , that Georgia was affected too .
People are less aware of that case , but if we had needed a more spectacular example than Estonia , we got it there .
We saw how a modern , network-driven economy suddenly became dependent on that factor , on that technology , how it was attacked and how its security really did come under very serious threat .
That is also the reason why the Commission , in which Commissioner Liikaanen held the portfolio at that time , rightly recognised the need for a network-security agency .
This is why we were taken by surprise when ENISA was evaluated after only a year , before it was fully and properly resourced , and the agency 's very existence was called into question .
That certainly shocked us at the time , and I am therefore delighted that we are conducting this debate here .
Why did we call this agency into question after only a year ?
How do you intend , do we intend , to fashion ENISA 's mandate in such a way that it can operate like an agency that deals on equal terms with the agencies that exist in the United States , Japan and China ?
I should like to thank you for your recognition , following the second evaluation , of ENISA 's achievements .
Nevertheless , day after day we Members of Parliament discuss this culture shift , this climate change that affects our economies , that forces us to give up our economic dependence on fossil fuels and switch to other energy sources .
Every day we put our heart and soul into these efforts here .
We all know that changing our systems is the only option .
To that end we need intelligent solutions , and we need network security , for security is paramount .
This is why I am grateful that we are holding this debate as a building block in the construction of a more robustly resourced ENISA and of greater network security .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in conclusion I would like to say that there is unanimous support in the Council , and broad support in the European Parliament , for extending the duration of ENISA for three years .
Both arms of the legislature agreed to reach a first-reading agreement as soon as possible , in time before the automatic expiry of the current regulation .
As I understand it , the Council plans to adopt the amending regulation as an ' A ' point at a forthcoming Council meeting .
The problem would then be resolved and , after the Commission has presented a paper on the basic problems underlying the cyber-attacks , Parliament can then take that on board and start a real debate on the future of our responses in that area .
The debate is closed .
How marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men ( debate )
The next item on the agenda is the report ( 2008 / 2038 ( INI ) ) by Eva-Britt Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Gender Equality , on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and especially the shadow rapporteur for excellent and constructive contributions to the report .
The Presidency of the Council has highlighted the importance of combating gender stereotypes .
This is one of the six priority areas of the Presidency .
Therefore I consider that it is important for us here in the Parliament too to give our views on the problem of gender stereotypes and how they affect equality between women and men .
In order to avoid any misunderstandings , I would particularly like to state and be very clear that in the report I am definitely not recommending any new legislation in this area , neither at EU nor at national level .
The measures I propose refer to national , self-regulating bodies which already exist and which represent producers , advertisers and consumers .
These bodies should work to increase awareness of the importance of gender-stereotyped advertising .
The Member States should also ensure that there are bodies to which the general public can turn with complaints .
I also think that the European Institute for Gender Equality which is being set up should carry out research into how equality is affected by this type of advertising .
We need to know more .
So why is this important ?
It is important because advertising is everywhere , in our homes , in public spaces , in newspapers , in the media , etc .
Of course we are affected , whether we are aware of it or not .
Companies would not invest billions in advertising if it did not have any effect .
Advertising and marketing today are not just about trying to sell goods or products , but about selling a whole lifestyle , a form of culture .
We have to behave in a certain way and act in a certain way to live up to expectations of different norms .
It is particularly important to combat this phenomenon where it affects young people who are seeking an adult identity , future education paths , etc .
I want all people to be able to choose without consciously or unconsciously being influenced by various gender-stereotyped norms .
Today it is impossible for an advertiser to make an advert for a product which increases environmental problems or hastens climate change .
I have a vision that in the future it will be just as impossible to sell products which have a gender-discriminatory or gender-stereotyped message .
I am also convinced that with increased awareness of the importance of advertising , consumers , both men and women , will start to refuse to buy products which use this kind of advertising .
I am also just as convinced that consumers will favour companies , producers , which have a conscious advertising policy and which do not permit gender-stereotyped advertising .
This will be an important success factor for companies and advertisers who demonstrate their responsibility by influencing and contributing towards greater equality .
After all , this is the goal we all say that we share .
This is one factor among very many , but it is an important one .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the EP and the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , for addressing a very delicate issue on how marketing and advertising affects equality between men and women .
Advertising plays an important role in the financing of the media .
It reduces the cover price of magazines and newspapers and ensures that much audiovisual content is available free to consumers .
This is important for freedom of expression and diversity , a question which is often debated in this House .
What we have seen over the years is an accumulation of bans or controls on advertising - cigarettes , alcohol , fatty food - and soon there will be new rules for how car manufacturers advertise CO2 emissions .
Advertising is a soft target because it is much easier to regulate it than to address the underlying problems , which are often more complex - though the report which we are discussing tonight favours further controls on advertising , this time from the subjective area of gender politics .
As Media Commissioner , I recognise the underlying policy concerns , but I also wonder what will be the impact of these concerns if they are carried out on a whole industry and on the general public .
As it has become more difficult to advertise because there is less money and because of all the bans , advertisers have reduced the role of advertising in their marketing expenditure .
There are other ways to market products without advertising them in the media : product promotion for instance .
That is very bad for media pluralism , because most of all the written press - the newspapers and the magazines - do not get enough income in order to continue to be published .
The report does not take into account the positive aspects that support the objectives of the report in order to protect citizens .
Let me give you some examples .
Article 3 of the Audiovisual Media Service Directive contains strong wording on human dignity and non-discrimination in relation to audiovisual advertising .
The Commission , I can assure you , will ensure that Member States ' transposition of this Directive reflect what the legislator wanted .
Neither does the report underline the valuable role that self-regulation has played .
Let me give you an example here , too .
You should be aware that it has been responded to well in cases of , and I quote : ' objectionable stereotyping ' , and I will give you a very concrete example .
The fashion industry has stopped its ' porno-chic ' campaigns , which stigmatised women as pure sex objects .
So there are legislative measures in order to solve the problems .
We should have , in this respect , a very realistic approach .
Advertising is a short-form medium , glimpsed on a page or in a 30-second video spot .
What the report calls ' stereotyping ' may be just a quick way to link a product to a particular group of consumers .
It can also reflect poor creative work .
There is , on the other hand , good advertising and bad advertising , and as Media Commissioner I have to accept that the freedom of expression also includes the right to fail - even to fail badly - even if we do not like it .
If I asked the plenary here to take a decision on that , I think that the right to fail would not be hampered .
As the report acknowledges , there is no conclusive research that links stereotyping with gender inequality .
Policy-making requires a strong evidence base , not just strongly-held views , and that is what we are basing our policy proposals on and why the Commission supports the positive recommendations made in the EP report .
Best-practice exchange , for instance , among the regulators is something that we always encourage .
Education , research and further debates should certainly continue .
I would like to underline that for nine years now , as Media Commissioner , I have been pleading for courses in schools on media literacy .
I believe that this would be the most important thing : if we could awaken the critical appraisal of youngsters in order to read advertisements , to reject the bad advertisements , something which is really not relevant to our society .
I would like to concentrate on best practice , for instance I like the Spanish example of awards for advertising that handle gender issues well .
That is the right way to proceed , and that is why we should accentuate the positive and see whether we can make further progress , because it is worthwhile fighting for this .

on behalf of the PPE-DE . - ( ES ) Mr President , true freedom ends where the freedom of others begins , and the freer the media are , the freer a society is ; the loss of freedom begins precisely in censorship of advertising and continues into editorial content .
Therefore , the European People 's Party has submitted amendments to this report to correct a number of totalitarian aberrations which run counter to the principle of a free society .
European marketing and advertising already exercise self-regulation and there is sufficient legislation in the Member States .
Marketing and advertising are not only in the realm of the media , they form part of our daily lives and , fortunately , there are excellent professionals working in those fields who , for the most part , are aware of the sway they hold over social balance .
Therefore , the European People 's Party will vote against the amendments and paragraphs presented by the communists as they cast aspersions of widespread chauvinism and sexism among workers in the sector , and that is a fallacy .
In the European People 's Party we believe in equality between men and women , but we believe it must be advocated without giving anyone else a bad name .
We believe that childhood and youth must be protected and that children and young people must be brought up by their families and society as a whole .
Brought up with values which help them to be better people .
I believe that the sectarian use of equality , which is the aim of this report , is a serious mistake and the EPP will not , of course , allow it .
We very much hope that our amendments will be adopted so that we can support the report .
Otherwise I shall abstain from the final vote out of respect for the subsidiarity of Member States and for respect for professionals in the marketing and advertising business .
I do not believe that criticising national laws and overstepping the powers of this Parliament will be good for us because it will reduce our credibility in the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is not as anodyne as the late hour at which it is being debated might suggest and I want to thank Mrs Svensson for the work she has done and for her cooperation .
Marketing and advertising are ubiquitous in our society and contribute to the creation of social constructs that sometimes have adverse effects , in the form of discrimination or the retreat into simplistic gender stereotypes .
Advertising is certainly also a source of creativity and such representations are sometimes used intentionally for humorous purposes .
But advertisers must not forget that they have an important educational role to play , that we must develop the critical faculty of young people , with a view to eliminating all forms of discrimination resulting from what are at times degrading images based on gender that could put the dignity of the individual at risk .
The purpose of this report is not to question editorial or creative freedom but to encourage the actors in this sector to improve existing self-regulation systems , to cooperate with the competent authorities to improve the codes of good practice and to be aware of their responsibilities in relation not only to gender equality but also to physical and mental health , which is sometimes threatened by pressures arising from criteria of beauty that are set as the desirable norm .
That is why I ask Members to reject the many amendments seeking to delete parts of the text , since it would then lose all its substance .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I do recognise the problem described by the rapporteur .
I imagine a reconnaissance mission coming from the planet Mars .
They come to earth and by way of preparation they just look at advertising to get a picture of the people on earth .
Then they come here and see to their surprise that women are not just interested in cleaning products and do not just sit waiting all day until their husbands come home from work , women are independent and intelligent and earn their own money and so are also consumers , and besides that there are other kinds of families on earth that you never see in the adverts , such as single-parent families and gay couples with children , and immigrant families , and , for instance , people in wheelchairs or with speech impediments .
You never see them in the adverts .
I certainly agree with the rapporteur as far as that goes .
Having said that , though , I agree with the comments by Commissioner Reding and also my EPP colleague . There is still something like freedom of expression .
Therefore I do not believe we should interfere in any way with the content of adverts .
Best practice is a better idea .
Of course I cannot name any brands here , but I am thinking of an Italian fashion label that has been breaking taboos for 20 years now , and of other products too .
Apart from that the report is much too broad , because the title says ' marketing and advertising ' , when it also concerns school books , TV , the Internet , video games and much else besides .
Quite honestly I think the EU should stay out of this .
There is also something about adverts for sexual services .
That is completely beside the point .
Taste and morality can vary and I do not think we can impose them uniformly from the EU .
Finally , if you look at the picture that has been drawn of women in advertising in the past 50 years , I note with satisfaction that women are much cleverer than we think .
They do not let the adverts stop them from simply becoming independent .
Finally , if we really want to do something , I have two concrete proposals .
Firstly , if we do not like the advertising , we consumers go on strike , and secondly , I suggest that at least one woman should be appointed to one of the top four posts in the European Union .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I wish to draw attention to the existence , both on television , including public television , and on billboards , of advertisements whose content or form degrades the persons appearing in them .
Those in question are usually , but not always , women .
Depriving them of their dignity , treating them as objects , depicting them as being on a lower intellectual level or as capable of arousing interest solely in the sexual sphere , leads to a lack of self-esteem in unprepared persons exposed to such material .
It reduces their efforts to achieve life plans and limits their ambitions .
Such advertising affects young people above all , which can make its impact more severe .
It is one of the many results of omnipresent consumerism .
For many people , profit - even if earned by indecent means - is more important than treating human beings as subjects with an intrinsic value that has to be protected .
It is therefore important that advertising of this kind be restricted by legislation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , equality between women and men is one of the values and goals of the European Union .
The EU intends to establish that equality in every area of activity .
It is unthinkable that the realm of advertising should be excluded .
I therefore welcome the report by Mrs Svensson , who has addressed this important issue and presented a balanced report .
You have my sincere thanks .
Advertising affects us subconsciously .
One major effect is the way it creates gender stereotypes .
Discrimination in advertising runs counter to the aim of equality .
The EU is not doing enough to eliminate sexism and discrimination in the media .
We must therefore make it clear that Europe is a Europe of values .
We do not want any misogynist advertising , any advertisements that degrade women into objects or revel in crude clichés about women .
The same applies , of course , to adverts about men .
I would be delighted if , on the contrary , advertising helped to shake up our well-worn role perceptions , our images of men and women .
Regrettably , however , the advertising industry has drawn up battle lines against something that should actually be taken for granted , namely respect , and particularly respect for women .
I fail to comprehend why the advertising industry is raising such a storm in a teacup .
I call it a storm precisely because it seems to have caught the ear , unfortunately , of many female Members of this House .
For all that , we can surely agree , in fact , on the following basic principles : we need to be more awake to discrimination in the media , and we also need national monitoring authorities with which complaints can be lodged .
Something similar already exists , by the way , in many Member States .
This is why I cannot understand what all the fuss is about .
I had even wished that we would go further in this report .
For this reason I hope that we can indeed agree to support what is now on the table , for we need this report as a basis , and we should not water it down any further .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , despite the report 's many positive aspects in drawing attention to the negative influence of media , marketing and advertising that caricature and objectify human beings , discriminate against them and deprive them of their dignity , I must nevertheless protest at some of its arguments , which are manipulative and aimed at the creation of a modern egalitarian society devoid of ethical models .
It is true that various hormonal and psychological therapies make it possible to experiment on people , but such experimentation causes serious trauma and should be banned , just as experiments on animals are restricted .
Both masculinity and femininity , the dual form of the human somatic constitution , are personality-forming elements .
It is impossible to change roles , since they are inscribed in human nature .
Drawing attention to the influence of advertising is all well and good , but it would be better to postulate ethical-legal control based on prior acceptance of a universal value system , founded , best of all , on divine law .
( SK ) Sometimes we are not even aware that the consequences of advertising policy have far-reaching effects on the retention of stereotypes , which means an almost insurmountable obstacle to the changes needed to achieve the defined targets , including the Lisbon targets .
Despite this , however , we can also state that advertising as such has its great positives .
We should realise that advertising policy , especially in relation to men and women , is putting a brake on the process of harmonisation of working and family life , since it very often presents a picture of a woman who is happily and smilingly on top of all her , sometimes conflicting , tasks arising out of her different social roles , very often performed under considerable time pressure .
The problem is not just the maintenance of outdated stereotypes of the male and female roles , but also the further reinforcement of them , since the experts warn that advertising not only reinforces but also creates expectations .
One of the most astonishing indications of this is the number of girls suffering from anorexia .
Since marketing and advertising use or misuse existing stereotypes , it is pointless for the European Council to adopt resolutions combating stereotypes since they will be completely ineffective .
The solution , however , will definitely not be some specific European code of conduct .
The problem with marketing and advertising cannot be ascribed to the media as such .
It is a pity that the report , in attempting to solve the problem , chooses a path which will either be impracticable or not achieve the target .
( BG ) President , Commissioner , colleagues , I find the report very important and very necessary .
The environment that surrounds us all the time is of exceptional importance for the formation of attitudes , conduct and approach to problems , equality included .
Marketing , advertisement , media , Internet and television can provoke seriously both a positive and a very negative attitude towards the idea of gender equality .
Without restricting the freedom in the activity of media , organizations and institutions dealing with marketing and advertisement , without imposing censorship , we should consider the negative consequences , denounce the presentation of women in an unfavourable light , as subjects provoking violence , sexism , or their being shown as a combination of " hot ” female images and even hotter , tempting alcoholic drinks .
Isn 't this humiliating ?
Since we consider equality a partnership , we think that the tolerance of marketing and advertisement to this problems is equally valid for men .
Advertisement and marketing should create a way to understanding equality , should reflect ethical models of equality of man and woman , not distort the philosophy of equality with the objective of profit .
Thus marketing and advertisement should create an environment for social understanding , for social prospects .
The report underscores the need of spreading in the media the principles of gender equality by programmes and materials intended for different age groups , popularization of good practices of respect , appreciation of the difference between the sexes , of non-discrimination .
This will form a culture of equality and will create equality .
( SK ) Advertising is an integral part of our life and it has an indisputable effect on the public 's behaviour and the formation of public opinion .
In the report , the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , makes points with which I agree .
These are mainly points indicating the need to protect children and youths from negative advertising .
Advertising the sale of sexual services and prostitution corrupts children from a tender age .
I have a different view from that of the rapporteur as to how the defined target can be achieved .
It is difficult at the European level for us to interfere with media freedom and not adhere to the principle of subsidiarity .
I do not think that we will succeed in adopting a European ethical code in the field of marketing and advertising .
Our anxiety about the young generation must be addressed mainly by parents and teachers .
I am convinced that the main responsibility lies with parents and teachers who are in a position to teach children to use television and new technology sensibly and responsibly .
( PL ) The resolution puts too much emphasis on the issue of inequality between men and women and on gender stereotyping .
Negative stereotyping needs to be mentioned , and gender inequality is a major element in bad advertising , but it is not the only one .
In the first place , many psychological experiments show how children - especially children , but adults too - learn aggression , negative attitudes and negative behaviour from television and the other media .
Following on from what Commissioner Reding had to say about education at school , what I , as a psychologist , find important is that research shows people are convinced that television and advertising , in particular , do not influence them as much as they do in reality .
Marketing and advertising in the media manoeuvre between information , promotion and manipulation .
The problem lies in distinguishing between them .
Where free advertising does not comply with moral , social and psychological principles , it is harmful .
That is probably the most important point .
( RO ) I would like to propose some practical means by which we could approach the issue of the negative influence of publicity on gender equality in Europe .
From the point of view of the applicable European legislation , a key issue is the principle of the country of origin .
This is also applicable to publicity , so that a production accepted by a national broadcasting board in a Member State must be accepted for broadcasting in all other Member States .
We have recently dealt with clear examples of gender discrimination , promoted by publicity productions that could not be suspended from broadcasting in the European Union countries .
Thus , I consider that measures of exception from the country of origin principle should be introduced , when it is found that the European pact for gender equality has been infringed by offensive media productions .
Since we are discussing a field falling under Community competence , namely trade in audiovisual services , I believe fines to be enforced by the European Commission to producers promoting discriminatory imagines through publicity should be introduced .
( EL ) Mr President , we are in favour of both the market economy and competitiveness .
On the basis , then , of healthy competition , we want the truth to be told ; products ought to compete on the basis of genuine facts .
Freedom does not mean unaccountability , nor is advertising a ploy allowing anyone to show off their products .
We were speaking this morning about tackling discrimination , and it is very strange that those who support the abolition of discrimination do not want to protect human dignity by applying self-regulation to advertising .
I congratulate the Commissioner because she has often shown through her proposals that she is taking measures to protect minors and safeguard values with the help of the media and especially modern technologies .
( DE ) Mr President , I support the view that parents and legal guardians bear great responsibility in the way they deal with children .
Today , the business world sees and treats children as important consumers .
This is why it is necessary to make them aware from a very young age of the power of advertising and its potential adverse effects .
I do not believe , however , in the idea that we should regulate it uniformly throughout Europe .
As the Commissioner also said , in the education system we must try to show children a path from a very young age , making them aware of both the opportunities and risks that are inherent in advertising .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Thank you for the debate .
I would like to clarify one thing - the report is from the European United Left , nothing else .
With regard to the amendments , I would like to remind you that 53 amendments from the different political groups were adopted by the committee , including four amendments tabled by Mrs Herranz García .
Freedom of expression was referred to .
It goes without saying that freedom of expression is sacrosanct .
There is nothing in the report about any new legislation , either at EU level or in the Member States .
That is a matter for individual countries .
What we are doing in the report is focusing on the bodies which already exist , self-regulating and joint bodies in which producers , advertisers and consumers find the best methods together .
The Commission says that more conclusive research is needed into how equality is affected .
I agree with that and that is why this has been highlighted in the report .
We need more research .
We need to arouse critical thought !
This is precisely what the report is about !
Increasing awareness and thus also critical thought !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 3 September at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The fight against stereotypes is one of the six priority areas of the Equality Roadmap for 2006-2010 .
This is a matter of principle , the practical impact of which is extremely far-reaching and thorough , since stereotypes create a scandalous situation for women and form a significant barrier to their success - whether it be in their job-hunting , their workplace , their career progression , their participation in decision-making or in balancing their work and private life .
Stereotypes establish and maintain inequalities in every area of life , thus causing untold damage to the whole of society and significantly reducing the effectiveness of efforts to create equality .
I feel that well-planned , coordinated action and campaigns against stereotypes are needed , important elements of which include the social consciousness that starts in childhood , education and the application of proper practices .
The marketing and advertisements that appear in the media have an important role in forming the image that is created of women - the disadvantageous image contributes significantly to maintaining the scandalous situation , and at the same time this trend can be turned around by showing the reality , opportunities and skills in a realistic way .
We therefore have to work on preparing these possible tools and measures , through which we can promote positive change .
Similarly , it is vital that the existing legislation is applied appropriately .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , Eva-Britt Svensson 's report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men is one of those documents aiming at intervention in matters that are not of the highest importance in view of the problems currently facing the European Union .
In some respects the report is simply not serious .
For the rapporteur , gender stereotyping is a greater problem than the brutalisation of media content , especially with regard to children .
Given the existing advertising codes in force in the media , the claim that advertisements arouse hatred on gender lines is an overstatement .
The report does not mention the growing problem of gender discrimination among EU citizens of the Muslim faith .
I fear that , with regard to equality between women and men , the Muslim press is not monitored .
That is a very serious problem for EU Member States to resolve .
The proper relations obtaining in the field of equal treatment of men and women in traditional , historical European society do not require intervention at the present time .
Individual cases of degenerate behaviour in this area can be combated by means of the existing legislation .
Cloning of animals for food supply ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question - to the Commission by Neil Parish , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the cloning of animals for food supply .
author . - Mr President , I should like very much to welcome Commissioner Vassiliou here this evening to listen to our oral question , especially at this late hour .
When we deal with cloning , it is not only a case of food safety , but also we in Europe believe that , under the common agricultural policy , we are producing food to a very high standard and also to a very high welfare standard .
The problems with cloning concern not only the welfare of animals but also consumer confidence in food that may come from cloned animals .
You only have to look across the Atlantic Ocean to the United States of America to see how to stop cloned animals from entering the food chain .
For instance , if a cloned bull is worth EUR 1 000 at the end of its life to go into the food chain , then the people who have bred that bull have to put up a bond , which may be worth EUR 3 000 , and when they destroy that animal and make sure that it does not go into the food chain , they get the bond back .
It is quite a simple way of keeping cloned animals out of the food chain .
I think we have to take this matter very seriously and I would urge the Commissioner to look at this again .
I will go through some of the problems with cloning , especially from a welfare point of view .
Cloning entails serious health and welfare problems for clones and their surrogate dams ; animal health problems come from invasive techniques required to produce a clone ; there is the suffering of surrogate dams which carry cloned foetuses , and high levels of ill health and mortality in early life for cloned animals .
The OIE Scientific and Technical Review identified that only 6 % of cloned embryos resulted in healthy , long-term surviving clones .
The EFSA report also points out an increased proportion of pregnancy failure and disorders in surrogate dams of cloned embryos .
These disorders and the large size of clones make caesareans more frequent in cattle carrying clones than in conventional pregnancy .
Mortality and morbidity is higher in clones than in sexually-produced animals ; the welfare of both surrogate dam and clone can be affected .
On the ethics side , the European Group on Ethics has doubts as to whether cloning animals for food supply is ethically justified .
It also does not see convincing arguments to justify the production of food from clones and their offspring .
If you look into the figures of what has happened when animals are cloned , cloned calves are often 25 % heavier than normal , leading to a painful birth ; 25 % of cows pregnant with clones at day 120 of gestation develop hydroallantois .
Reports in 2003 show only 13 % of embryos planted in surrogate dams result in calves delivered at full term ; only 5 % of all cloned embryos transferred into recipient cows have survived .
EFSA 's opinion cites a study where out of 2 170 cattle receiving embryos only 106 live births occurred - 4.9 % - and only 82 survived more than two days .
We also have to consider the problems that occur not only on the animal welfare side but also in the gene pool of animals - and this is a farming aspect also .
Take the Holstein Friesian - it is thought that there are only about 50 strains of the Holstein Friesian .
If we start cloning bulls and the heifer from a cloned bull is then put back on to the offspring , so the same father is used , then we will create an even tighter gene pool .
There are then problems with disease and with genetics being carried over to those offspring .
Therefore , we need to make sure there is hybrid vigour .
The industry itself cannot explain why a cloned animal has the cell of the parent - an older cell .
Therefore , again , there is the risk of producing an animal that is not as strong and as healthy .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to submit proposals prohibiting the cloning of animals for the food supply and the placing of cloned animals on the market in meat and dairy products .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I want to thank Mr Parish for raising this question , because it is a question to which the Commission has given a lot of consideration and considers important , and it is indeed something which preoccupies us .
The European Commission - as Mr Parish said - has asked EFSA to provide an opinion on food safety , animal health , animal welfare and the environmental implications of the use of live animal clones .
The final opinion was adopted on 15 July this year , and the Commission is now evaluating the necessary steps to be taken .
This opinion refers to uncertainties in the risk assessment due to the limited number of studies available .
It also refers to the fact that the health and welfare of a significant proportion of clones have been found to be adversely affected , often severely , with a fatal outcome .
The Commission is aware that , even though the efficiency of animal cloning has improved in recent years , adverse health affects on animal health and welfare still occur today .
There are indications that mortality and morbidity rates in clones after birth are higher than in sexually-reproduced animals .
However , most surviving clones are normal and healthy , as determined by psychological measurements as well as by behaviour and clinical examinations .
The Commission closely follows the scientific developments in this area .
In 2004 the Commission also financed a pan-European research project called Cloning in Public , addressing ethical , legal and other societal aspects of farm animal cloning .
The project was coordinated by the Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk Assessment and aimed to promote public debate on the issue of biotechnology .
As far as the involvement of the public is concerned , in autumn 2007 the Commission launched a public consultation on the ethics of animal cloning for food supply , and in September 2007 it organised an open round table on the same topic with representatives from academia , industry , NGOs , civil society , international organisations , industry etc .
In order to increase public participation , the round table was also broadcast on the internet , and its proceedings have been published .
Last but not least , the Commission has recently launched a Eurobarometer survey on consumers ' attitudes to cloning for food production .
Its purpose is to ask the public about their opinion and their awareness regarding cloning and food derived from the offspring of cloned animals .
The results will be made available very shortly .
The Commission takes ethical considerations fully into account when dealing with sensitive issues such as cloning .
The Commission has given its attention to the ethics of animal cloning since 1997 , when the group of advisers to the European Commission on the ethical implications of biotechnology issued an opinion on the ethics of cloning .
Due to the state of the art of technology at that time , the opinion did not address the use of cloning for food purposes .
It is for this reason that the Commission asked the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies , the independent advisory body to the Commission in this field , to give an opinion on the ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply .
Their opinion was published in January this year .
Considering the current level of suffering and health problems of surrogate dams and animal clones , the European Group on Ethics expressed doubts as to whether cloning animals for food supply is ethically justified .
It advocated that at the moment there are no convincing arguments to justify the production of food from clones and their offspring .
The Commission is currently examining the concerns expressed by the Group .
Under international rules , restrictions to imports of products must be based on legitimate concerns , not be discriminatory , and be proportionate to the objective pursued .
According to global trade rules , imports of food products from third countries might be suspended if they present a serious threat to animal or public health .
On the basis of the studies conducted and the opinion of EFSA , the Commission will consider whether restrictions must be imposed .
I am sure this will be done very shortly .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , today 's discussion is absolutely essential as a means of drawing attention to the dangers inherent in cloning .
I am very grateful to Neil Parish for having put this oral question to the Commission .
One thing is quite clear , namely that animal health equates with food safety .
As we know , there are various types of cloning processes : therapeutic and reproductive cloning as well as DNA cloning .
What we are discussing today is reproductive cloning .
Reproductive cloning means creating a genetically identical copy of something : a plant , an animal and perhaps one day - if we feel the need to overstep all boundaries - even a human being .
When cloning is used in animal breeding for food production , however , there are problems .
The first of these to which I wish to refer is the high loss rate .
We know from the Americans that only a very few clones survive .
Consequently , cloning for food production is not financially viable .
From the very beginning , the clone has the genetic age of the original . That is to say if the original is a six-year-old cow , the clone will be a calf whose genes are six years old .
In the cloning process the cloning genome is inevitably damaged .
This makes the clone susceptible to diseases and parasites .
When cloning occurs over several generations , Commissioner , there is a cumulative depletion of the genetic diversity on which species depend for their survival because it enables them to adapt to changes in their natural surroundings .
Lastly , the question arises whether mankind can presume to intervene in the most natural biological processes , even if it is done with the best intentions .
It seems to me that there is no need to alter something which has worked for millions of years .
Human being have too short a lifespan , in any case , to experience the effects of their actions over long periods of time .
I hope we shall not find ourselves in the same dilemma as Goethe 's sorcerer 's apprentice , who could not rid himself of the spirits he had conjured up .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , I completely agree with Mr Parish 's proposal : two types of zero tolerance are needed here .
Firstly , cloned animals should not enter the food chain in any way ; we are all agreed on that .
We also agree completely , and we would ask the Commission to ensure , that cloned animals from Argentina , Brazil or elsewhere outside the Union should not be imported or brought into the European Union in any way .
This is the double zero tolerance which I believe is the essence of Mr Parish 's proposal .
Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Parish have both said that there is still a huge amount of risk , that there are no real , appropriate controls or monitoring , and there are inadequate test samples , inadequate trials , and any trials relate only to pigs and cattle , so there is a huge amount of risk .
In fact , it could be summarised by saying that they should not enter the food chain , and it would naturally be absurd and idiotic to obstruct genetic engineering and bioengineering research .
Research is one thing , but the food chain is another thing , and thirdly lengthy , reliable checks that are independent of organisations in the sector are needed , as well as independent monitoring for more and longer periods . Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , from experience with other issues that tackle food safety , as well as raising adequate questions linked to the relations between humans as the dominant species and the animals , we know that public perception depends very much on specific knowledge of the matter .
Consumers are increasingly sensitive with regard to the suffering of , and injuries to , farm animals .
Therefore , they have to be properly informed about the risks posed by the cloning of animals .
An educational campaign is needed , explaining to them what an incredibly wasteful process cloning has been so far .
It was expected that EFSA would not find clear safety concerns related to food products from clones of farm animals , compared with conventionally-bred animals .
However , EFSA also underlined in its recent report that the practice has major repercussions on the health and welfare of animals .
The issue raises societal problems , which advise us strongly to ban animal cloning for food , as well as the import of cloned animals and their offspring .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , our civilisation lives from the exploitation of animals and will certainly long continue to do so .
We kill animals to satisfy many needs , but we also set ourselves certain standards .
We Europeans , at least , impose limits on the suffering of animals and support their wellbeing .
Our legislation prescribes that an animal is not an object .
Cloning animals is a controversial scientific achievement .
Cloning animals for economic purposes , on the other hand , is an ethical abuse .
It is not animal husbandry but animal production .
It is based not even on the principle of the production line , but that of the photocopier .
We should reject it on moral grounds in the name of respect for animals , but also in the name of our own humanity .
It is only one step from treating animals as objects to treating human beings as objects .
It is already only a short step from cloning animals to cloning people .
On behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations , I support the resolution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wonder what we are hoping to achieve by a moratorium on cloning animals for food supply ?
What do we hope to achieve by applying the precautionary principle and preventing the import of cloned animals ?
What do we hope to achieve by ceasing to treat animals as mere objects and inflicting unnecessary suffering on them ?
Dolly the Sheep died ill and malformed .
The Dolly the Sheep experiment was a failure .
However , it would appear that we have not learned from it .
Cloning can reduce genetic diversity ; it can generate greater vulnerability to animal diseases ; it can generate a situation where sentient beings , our animal cousins , which can feel and experience pain , undergo greater suffering .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I want to thank Mr Parish most sincerely and I can fully support his comments .
It has been proved that cloning causes suffering to animals , and the EFSA came to the same conclusion .
If we allow animals to be cloned for food production , we come up against the following problems , in addition to animal suffering and ethical objections : it is very questionable whether consumers actually want to eat cloned meat at all , it is not certain how safe it will be and , finally , the public debate about cloned food has not even really started yet .
I therefore really object to the fact that the Commission even dares to propose allowing cloning to be covered by the definition in the new foodstuffs regulation .
By doing so , it is indirectly showing that it can support animal cloning for food production .
I am therefore urging the Commission , in this report too , to reconsider its position .
In view of all the objections , I also call on the Commission to put forward proposals for a total ban on animal cloning without delay .
Mr President , it is right and natural to want to improve stock quality by breeding from our best animals .
Artificial insemination and embryo transfer provide for that .
Cloning , however , is quite different : it is , as the United Kingdom Food Standards Agency has observed , a quantum leap way beyond giving Mother Nature a helping hand .
Quite apart from other ethical issues and the danger of copycat science in the human field , animal welfare is a real concern .
The premature ageing and health deficiencies seen in high-profile cloning cases that have made the headlines , such as that of Dolly the sheep , are good reminders of those welfare issues .
Devoting more money to tackling animal disease would serve us better than experimenting with nature .
From a consumer perspective , there is also a food quality issue , since cloned herds would all share the same vulnerability to the same strains of disease , whereas genetic diversity is one of our best protections against rampant outbreaks of disease .
In fact , whichever way I look at this subject , I can find nothing to convince me that animal cloning is right , necessary or in the public interest .
( PL ) Mr President , if the protection of biodiversity is a priority of the European Commission , then there should be no talk of cloning .
I would like to hear the arguments in favour of cloning animals for food .
Are we to be guided solely by economic considerations ?
What about the ethical , social and health issues ?
Before we decide to allow such food to be sold on the EU market , we must have our citizens ' permission for such a step .
I myself am not sure I would be able to swallow a pork chop from a cloned pig or milk from a cloned cow .
Instead of genetically modified food and food from cloned animals , we should be thinking more about action in favour of a return to natural foods that are ecological , healthy and contain no chemicals .
Let us leave cloning in the realm of research .
In my opinion , the road from the laboratory to the knife and fork of the European consumer is still long , because there are still too many question marks .
And because there are so many questions still unanswered , I am convinced we should not act hastily in this matter .
Nor should the Commission act against the opinion of Europe 's citizens .
Even if food products derived from cloned animals were allowed on the EU market , I am convinced that , if they were clearly marked and people had to take a conscious decision to buy them , they would not find too many takers among EU consumers .
If we introduce products derived from cloned sheep , poultry , goats or cattle , we shall destroy the image of the European agricultural model , which sets such great store by protection of the environment and the wellbeing of animals .
( PL ) Mr President , I also fully support Neil Parish 's proposal for a ban on the use of cloned animals for food production .
However , for some considerable time now I have been watching the Commission strive to impose legal arrangements on Member States that will lead to the introduction of genetically modified foodstuffs for mass distribution , and in future perhaps also meat from cloned animals .
In many countries , including Poland , local authorities have passed resolutions demanding that whole regions , and even a whole country , be kept free from GMOs .
Under pressure from industrial lobbies , the Commission is ignoring these resolutions and pressing for the introduction of genetically modified foodstuffs on the market .
EU Member States owe the public a clear answer : are they in favour of healthy , natural foods or genetically modified and cloned foodstuffs ?
We must not be hypocritical about this .
Let me also ask the Commissioner how she intends to protect the public against the unwitting purchase of food that may in future come from cloned animals ?
Such food will not be specially labelled , since exporters will attempt to smuggle it into the European market .
Mr President , I am going to be the different voice in this argument , because , through the ages , man has manipulated the breeding of animals and enhanced their productivity to meet his needs .
There is a clear continuum : natural service to artificial insemination , to embryo transfer , to embryo splitting , in vitro fertilisation , blastomere nuclear transfer , foetal nuclear transfer and now somatic cell nuclear transfer .
Every new development has been seen as too far , and each time the technique has been improved and perfected , the benefits have come through and the anticipated problems have faded away .
Now the farmers ' unions are beginning to foresee benefits to animal health and welfare through the use of cloning .
The Food and Safety Agency says : ' There is no indication that differences exist in terms of food safety between food products from healthy cattle and pig clones and their progeny , compared with those from healthy , conventionally-bred animals . '
Nor does it see any environmental risks - and there are benefits : safeguarding high-value animals and their genetics , conserving and even reintroducing endangered breeds , eliminating dangerous pathogens and their transfer internationally , improving productivity and competitivity , and encouraging research and development in Europe rather than elsewhere .
So why do we Europeans repeatedly fall into the knee-jerk trap of distrusting any new development and of rushing to ban new things ?
Look at what happened with GMOs .
So let us discuss and debate , and base our arguments on science and facts .
I urge the Commission to follow developments carefully , encourage research , clarify the science , defend the facts ; but do not ban .
Let us drop this inaccurate , illogical and misguided resolution .

Mr President , lest Mr Purvis think he is alone , let me try and walk a middle line .
This is a very worthy debate and it is a shame it is being held at this late hour .
I listened to the first part in my office and it was riveting - which can be rare for a European Parliament debate - because it is practical .
I would like to mention a number of points .
What concerns me in the debate now is the link between genetically-modified foods and the cloning of animals .
I am not among those calling for a ban on GMOs , because in Ireland we use a large volume of genetically-modified animal feed ingredients and need to continue doing that .
The concerns on cloning , well voiced by the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture , Mr Parish , are on the welfare side , and clearly there is concern that animals suffer .
That is an issue that needs to be looked at .
Calling for a ban on cloned animals in food production may not address that issue if the research stage of that process is concerned .
Therefore , while my immediate reaction as a Member of the Committee on Agriculture was to support this resolution - I am glad we raised this issue and applaud the Committee and its Chair for doing so - my gut instinct now is that Mr Purvis is perhaps on the right track , and that an outright ban might be a step too far .
I await the Commission 's very considered opinion .
Mr President , let me first of all welcome the opportunity of holding this debate .
I think it has been very timely .
This is a subject that gives great concern .
What I do not like is that we in Europe do not have sufficient control to ensure that cloned animals do not enter or reach the food chain .
I understand the need to allow animal breeding and development , and I understand fully what Mr Purvis is saying - and I have no wish to bring to an end the ability of science to develop in any way , shape , size or form - but I strongly believe that we must set in place clear criteria and controls .
I share Mr Parish 's concern about the welfare of the animals .
I do have great concerns about animal welfare , because a very high percentage of cloned animals suffer at a very early age .
Let me repeat : I do not oppose , or wish to stand in the way of , futuristic developments .
In the past we have made many mistakes .
Let us not do so on this delicate subject .
Let us protect the food chain from cloned animals .
I am opposed to them in the food chain .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the opinion of the European Parliament on this new technology and its consequences is of course of the utmost importance for me and I welcome the views of the honourable Members .
In particular , I wish to say that EFSA 's opinion gives us new food for thought , and many factors need to be taken into account .
I agree that novel food is not the right tool to deal with the question of food from cloned animals and this is something that can be discussed during our deliberations on the proposal for novel food .
I wish , however , to make a clarification here because I heard a number of speakers speaking about cloning and genetic modification as if they were one and the same thing .
No : genetic modification and cloning are two separate techniques .
Expert opinion states that cloning does not alter genetic material and clones are merely genetic copies of animals .
In finalising my comments , I wish to assure you that in any future actions the Commission will carefully examine all factors at play .
The debate is closed .
I have received the proposal for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 3 September at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Even if strict conditions are respected and EFSA concludes that cloned meat is equivalent to conventional meat , animal cloning for food supply is , to many people , a risky and morally unacceptable practice .
The current level of suffering and health problems in cloned animals reinforces that claim .
If conventional methods work , then why should we encourage a technique that causes so many animals to suffer and die ?
It neither improves breeding , nor food safety nor the security of provision .
It clearly provides no obvious benefit to the consumer .
Furthermore , European consumers have , on several occasions , expressed their wish not to have food products from clones or the offspring thereof on their table .
It is a legitimate call and sends a clear signal , so why are we even considering cloning for food supply in the first place ?
People want to have control over what they eat and they are concerned that cloning will ultimately be forced on them .
If we do not wish to further alienate the public from the European project , I believe we had better listen to their will and enforce it .
Therefore , I call for no cloning of animals for food supply .
in writing . - ( SK ) I was amazed when reading the text of this resolution .
I should first of all like to say that I shall vote for it , but I have a few comments :
Paragraph B : ' whereas cloning processes show low rates of survival for transferred embryos and cloned animals , with many cloned animals dying in the early stages of life ... '
What would the future for humanity be if man took the same remarkable degree of care and if we stopped freezing human embryos ?
Paragraph C : ' ... mortality and morbidity levels in cloned animals are higher than in sexually produced animals and late pregnancy losses and disorders are likely to affect the welfare of surrogate mothers ' .
What would the future for humanity be if the whole of society gave such support to mothers of families as we give to the protection of surrogate animal mothers ?
Paragraph D : ' ... given current levels of suffering and health problems of surrogate dams and cloned animals , the European Group on Ethics ... questions whether cloning animals ... is ethically justified ... '
What would the future for humanity be if this Group took into consideration the suffering of women who become surrogate mothers in order to improve their financial situation or the stress suffered by women following repeated unsuccessful artificial fertilisation attempts or consistently forbade the use of human embryos for research purposes because it is morally impermissible .
Lucky animals , because this resolution also shows that they are in some cases better protected than man .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 09.00 . )
Situation in Georgia ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures - Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures ( amendment of Directives 76 / 768 / EEC , 88 / 378 / EEC , 1999 / 13 / EC , 2000 / 53 / EC , 2002 / 96 / EC and 2004 / 42 / EC ) - Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 648 / 2004 ) ( debate )
The first item is the joint debate on
the report by Amalia Sartori , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures , and amending Directive 67 / 548 / EEC and Regulation ( EC ) No 1907 / 2006 - C6-0197 / 2007 - ,
the report by Amalia Sartori , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 76 / 768 / EEC , 88 / 378 / EEC , 1999 / 13 / EC and Directives 2000 / 53 / EC , 2002 / 96 / EC and 2004 / 42 / EC in order to adapt them to Regulation ( EC ) ... on Classification , Labelling and Packaging of Substances and Mixtures , and amending Directive 67 / 548 / EEC and Regulation ( EC ) No 1907 / 2006 - C6-0347 / 2007 - , and
the report by Amalia Sartori , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 648 / 2004 in order to adapt it to Regulation ( EC ) No ... on Classification , Labelling and Packaging of Substances and Mixtures , and amending Directive 67 / 548 / EEC and Regulation ( EC ) No 1907 / 2006 - C6-0349 / 2007 - .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my colleague Commissioner Dimas , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Sartori , for her thorough work on this difficult proposal .
Her hard work made agreement with the Council possible at first reading , which the Commission is delighted about .
Once again , we are dealing with chemicals and the protection of people and the environment from their potentially dangerous effects .
Chemicals are not purely a European problem , or a European monopoly .
They are produced , traded and used throughout the world , and the risks associated with the use of chemicals are the same irrespective of location .
Therefore , it stands to reason that we have endeavoured to achieve a worldwide system to describe and label these hazards .
The legislation we are going to adopt today creates the basis for globally uniform environmental , health and safety information relating to potentially dangerous chemicals .
Health and environmental protection will become transparent and comparable worldwide only when harmonised standards of measurement are used to determine and label the dangers posed by chemicals .
We must not underestimate the economic advantages either .
European enterprises will save money because they will not need to evaluate chemical hazard procedures that apply in different countries according to different criteria and different systems .
Professional users of chemicals and consumers throughout the world will also benefit from this harmonisation .
People who use chemicals will no longer have to become familiar with several different systems in order to know what level of threat a chemical may pose .
The compromise presented by the rapporteur is balanced and takes particular account of issues such as workability and the clarity of the provisions .
Although the amendments proposed by co-legislators are numerous , they do not alter the underlying principles or the basic structure of the original proposal by the Commission in any significant way .
Therefore , the Commission is able to go along with these proposals .
Even when we were preparing the proposal , the Commission was concerned to leave the current very high level of protection of human health and the environment untouched .
I am very pleased that Parliament and the Council share our basic view on this .
The close , constructive cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission greatly benefitted the negotiation process and , as I have already said , this means that we can accept all the compromises that Mrs Sartori has suggested .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I have already reminded the Commissioner , in recent months we have repeatedly addressed the issue of the classification , labelling and packaging of chemical substances and mixtures , a system better known by its abbreviation ' GHS ' , for which I am rapporteur .
For this reason , instead of discussing the technical details of the dossier again , I would like to begin by thanking my colleagues and the shadow rapporteurs whom I worked with to create a constructive and extremely satisfying dialogue based on extensive collaboration and transparency .
I would particularly like to thank everyone for the support and faith shown in me .
This gave me enough backing for a successful outcome to the negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
I would also like to thank the draftsmen of the opinions of the relevant committees - Mrs Laperrouze , for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and Mr Schwab , for the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection - who were involved on the basis of an enhanced cooperation procedure .
The opinions adopted by these two committees in fact supplemented and enhanced the proposal , making it more efficient and easier for end users : by these I mean consumers , businesses , trade associations , supervisory authorities and Member States .
I would like to mention the excellent work carried out by parliamentary officials and members of the groups who assisted us , as well as representatives from the Commission and the Council .
Over the last few months we have all worked towards trying to minimise the number of amendments and to reach a consensus on particular compromises .
After two months of tripartite technical discussions with the other institutions , we have achieved a satisfying compromise package with the Council , approved by COREPER on 27 June and which , if today 's vote is successful , will allow us to conclude at first reading .
With this new legislation , we need , on the one hand , to maintain the commitments we have assumed at international level - and thus ensure that the UN GHS is consistent with our own legislation in terms of content - and on the other , we must meet the existing deadlines imposed by our own legislation in REACH .
With this new regulation , we will at the same time succeed in both offering better protection to users of these substances and in making our firms more competitive and efficient .
Under these new rules , which are identical all over the world , countries will not be allowed to consider the same product more harmful or less harmful than in other countries .
So far this has not been the case .
Not only is this illogical , given that the same substance presents the same risks no matter where it is , but it is also extremely risky when these products are exported by one country to another and end up being used by people who have no notion of the dangers of the product they are using .
I believe , therefore , that for users and workers in this sector , particularly in the extremely high number of small and medium-sized enterprises , our proposal can be an effective response not only for all of our citizens and all Europeans , but for people all around the world .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate Mrs Sartori , our rapporteur , and the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups .
I think the work we have done , though not easy with a text of 2 000 pages , has brought real progress .
I will speak first of all on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , for which I was draftsman of the opinion , and then I will speak on behalf of my political group .
The Committee on Industry has adopted various amendments , and I am briefly going to mention the main ones .
The situation of SMEs had to be taken into account : they expressed their interest in this matter during the preparatory consultation by the Commission .
Out of 360 companies , 45 % , employing fewer than 250 employees , responded to this online consultation held by the Commission between 21 August and 21 October 2006 .
Our Committee was keen to highlight the fact that apart from providing necessary information , the purpose of the GHS is also the protection of consumers and the environment .
Our Committee called upon the Member States to introduce a procedure that helps all suppliers , particularly SMEs , in certain sectors of production , to determine the correct classification , labelling and packaging of these substances and mixtures .
Our Committee was also keen on consistency with REACH and therefore tabled amendments concerning tonnage .
Lastly , out of more than just a desire to avoid the duplication of legislation on packaging , our Committee wanted to anticipate the possibility of disputes over the interpretation of the Regulation 's requirements , in this case between the supplier and a Member State and the need for a procedure to ensure classification is harmonised .
I now come to my role as shadow rapporteur for the ALDE , and will outline some of the guiding principles of our approach .
Of course we welcome this initiative .
A global approach is totally consistent with the objective of protecting health and the environment more effectively while allowing for trade in products .
Since it is a global system , it is important that the future regulation does not introduce constraints on European firms that do not apply to their international competitors .
It would be desirable for the proposal to be consistent with REACH as regards both timeframes and a tonnage-based approach , and where the annexes are concerned , not least Annex VI .
As regards the information affixed to finished products , given that the European Commission has chosen to include post-manufacturing , the guiding principle has to be the quality and relevance of information and not the quantity .
Our group felt it was important to recognise the existence and value of other sources of information , particularly NGOs and industry , but also the importance of tools for communication such as the internet .
The confidentiality of some information must also be protected .
Lastly , this legislation must not generate an increase in animal testing .
Because of the tight schedule , but also the complexity of the annexes , I recall that MEPs decided not to amend them .
The aim of this was also to facilitate the negotiations .
This was a major concession by Parliament .
However , we have noticed in this case that one of these annexes raises a serious problem of immediate conformity and implementation for the industries concerned .
Annex VI is a list of substances with harmonised classifications at European level .
A similar list already exists , however , and the industry uses this existing list to classify and label mixtures .
But when the transfer took place , modifications were made to this list and it will have to be applied as soon the GHS comes into force , though in the case of technical adaptations , the timeframe for this is at least 18 months .
Many SMEs are concerned about this change .
It is essential that we reach agreement in the first reading with the Council , and stop publishing provisions as soon as possible to give the industry and users time to adapt to the new system and make it operational by the end of 2008 .
Consequently , I am asking the Commission to put forward a solution that gives the industry sufficient time to bring itself into conformity with the regulation 's requirements , without having a disproportionate impact .
Following the trialogue , apart from the problem with the Annex , the text being put to the vote seems like a good one to me .
I would just like to highlight a few salient points .
We have talked a great deal about PBTs .
They are not covered by the United Nations GHS .
Parliament has secured agreement from the European Commission to push for their classification at United Nations level .
Parliament has also secured the removal of the division of the ' eye irritation ' category into sub-categories , which would undoubtedly have led to an increase in the number of tests on animals without adding any real value .
We can also report that tests on humans for the sole purpose of this regulation are banned , and that the UN 's GHS is a dynamic process ; a mechanism has been found to enable changes to the UN GHS to be taken into account by the European GHS .
Confidentiality is protected in a balanced way .
Consistency with REACH is guaranteed and Parliament has accepted a zero threshold for inventory and notification , though originally we wanted a threshold of one tonne for certain categories of products .
This zero threshold was accepted because substances and mixtures exclusively for R & D purposes are excluded from the scope of application .
I think we have done a good job and I am hoping for a good vote and for the GHS to be applied properly .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to say that it gave the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection great satisfaction to see the compromise presented by Mrs Sartori on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
We believe that , with this solution , we have found a very good compromise and a very good solution , both for the chemical companies in the European internal market - most of which operate globally - and for consumers , and that we have also achieved a very good compromise for consumers with sensitivities .
This was possible only because of the amicable , unwavering cooperation between the rapporteurs .
I would particularly like to thank Mrs Sartori for the way she led the negotiations - including in trialogue - as in the end , there is no doubt that this was critical to achieving a solution that met everyone 's expectations .
I am happy with the result because I believe , from the point of view of the internal market , and of enterprises - particularly chemicals enterprises , whose experience of the European level in terms of REACH has not been 100 % positive - that the Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals ( GHS ) , as a universal guideline set up by the United Nations , can be implemented on the European internal market in a very non-bureaucratic way and with a practical orientation .
This will bring direct competitive advantages on the internal European market for enterprises that are active on this market , because harmonised labelling is a significant step forward compared to the existing regulation , which still varies in some peripheral areas .
Commissioner , in the trialogue discussions , we also briefly discussed the fact that legislation on the transport of these consumer goods has still not been harmonised and that it would therefore be worth considering whether we should shift our focus to legislation on the transport of chemicals in the coming months .
Secondly , not opening the annexes was the right thing to do - and here I would like to support Mrs Laperrouze of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , with whom we also enjoyed excellent cooperation - because this move enabled us to prevent the discussion becoming like the one regarding REACH .
Even though it meant that certain individual points that we would have liked to improve were missed out , with the wisdom of hindsight , it was indeed the right path to take .
Nevertheless , I would like to lend my express support to Mrs Laperrouze 's desire to create a transitional deadline in Annex 6 for the substances that were amended in that annex , because when we started the consultation , we could not predict that they would not be covered by the solution we decided on .
Commissioner , I would very much appreciate it if you would comment briefly on this in your answer .
Users of chemical consumer goods are not , as a rule , conversant with the composition of these goods .
When discussing the GHS , we therefore placed particular importance on implementing it in a way that would be practical for consumers .
Although it was not possible to consider each individual case in detail , we found a solution - at least for the most common consumer goods , such as washing powder and detergents - that makes consumers aware of the quantities of chemicals these products contain , while also enabling people to use them in the future in the same way as they have done in the past .
Perhaps I can give you an example : it used to be possible to use washing-up liquid only in large bottles containing several litres .
Increasingly environmentally friendly technology in the manufacture and use of these products has enabled the quantity of washing-up liquid required to be reduced further and further , so that now , the largest containers found in kitchens are just 300 ml or 500 ml .
No doubt the concentration of the chemicals in these products has increased but for consumers , this is compatible with the present GHS solution because we know that people use these products every day , so we did not need to overclassify them .
That covers all the points relevant to the internal market . Thank you for your attention .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in a situation such as this one , where we are all in agreement , our debate risks becoming repetitive .
For my part , I would just like to make three very brief political points , since I fully agree with what my fellow Members have said .
The first point naturally is recognition for the perseverance that our rapporteur has shown since the start .
From the very first meetings , she has demonstrated a political determination to close the dossier at first reading , and in fact she has almost forced us to do so , by twisting our arms .
However , we were all convinced that this was necessary if we were to introduce legislation swiftly to obtain an immediate classification of all substances and make a real step towards tougher standards to protect consumer health and - I agree on this point - the health of workers who use these substances in many different sectors , particularly in the more difficult context of a small business .
Secondly , we have avoided the increasing danger of reopening old discussions that had been shelved with the adoption of REACH , something that I was particularly keen to see .
At an international level , I believe that even the fact that REACH is increasingly being used as a benchmark at international level by other countries , which are using it as a model to adapt their own legislation , is extremely satisfying .
In any case , the provisions relating to the classification of substances that we are about to vote on must be adapted and integrated so that they correspond to the principal regulation on the classification , labelling , and packaging of substances and mixtures without adding any new elements .
Ultimately this means , as all my fellow Members will know , that the GHS is not the last word on the subject of the classification and labelling of substances .
There has been much discussion of PDT .
We must not forget that this is an ongoing process . For now we are implementing what we already have , and classifying substances on which the UN has already carried out a risk analysis .
As soon as we have new risk categories and the results of new studies , the GHS will be updated accordingly , so this is an ongoing process .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the environment and public health affect every citizen and this legislation is directly connected with both .
The Parliament voted in favour of the REACH system which is now in place and which protects people 's health and the environment from the danger of chemicals .
The aim of REACH is to ensure that manufacturers and importers register , classify and authorize chemicals .
An essential part of the system is providing the public with information by labelling these chemicals .
I can only praise this legislation and the Commissioner for giving the EU system equal ranking with the UNGHS ( UN Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling ) .
The public will be informed about the dangers of chemicals through pictograms which shall indicate the risks concerning explosions , fire , cancer and poison .
There will be advantages for industry as countries all over the world accept the GHS system . And the public will have more confidence in chemicals which have signs and clear and definite labelling .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) We talk a great deal about taking the initiative on climate change but , if we really had a holistic approach to the environment , we would have directly copied UN legislation here too .
Now we are removing acute toxicity category five .
Why are we doing this ?
Well , for the bizarre reason that otherwise there would be an increase in the number of substances which would have to be classified and labelled .
Thus the reason has nothing to do with any kind of environmental logic or health logic .
No , we do not want to copy category five because it would mean increasing the number of substances , despite the fact that the point of the whole thing is to have a common global standard which would make things easier for trade and , in this case , also for the environment and information to consumers .
I fought for reintroducing acute toxicity category five , but unfortunately I did not succeed .
Another thing which we were behind and actually succeeded in getting through together with the Council was preventing the proposal for a reduced classification threshold of 10 kg .
I would like to thank the Council for standing their ground .
The Commission also had a positive input .
If the proposal had gone through , REACH would have been undermined .
REACH was about evaluating chemicals , finding out whether they are dangerous and registering them .
However , REACH evaluates and registers only the 30 000 most commonly used chemicals , those with the highest volume .
The other 70 000 chemicals we use would be dealt with under this legislation .
For this reason it is very good that we retained it and that no lower limit was imposed for when chemicals are to be classified .
If the proposal had gone through , REACH would not have had a complement in the GHS .
I am very glad that this was not the case and therefore I can support this .
I am also pleased that we succeeded in preventing an unnecessary division into categories for animal testing , e.g. eye irritation tests .
With these two victories under our belt , I can vote in favour of this report .
However , I would really like to emphasise that , although we have not succeeded in including the very hazardous PBT chemicals or a priority list for evaluation here and now , at least we have gained a text that says we will promote this at UN level and that it will be included in the UN system .
Now I would really like to see the Commission working hard to achieve this aim , because it is very important .
Otherwise our chemicals policy will have failed completely .
It is very important that these substances are now quickly incorporated in the UN system , as we did not manage to take the first step here .
So what happens for consumers ?
They won 't be as well informed as they could have been about the danger of chemicals , and that is disappointing .
But they will at least get a decent standard and basic protection to protect themselves from hazardous chemicals .
So in the end it was a compromise which no one is satisfied with , and maybe that is what usually happens .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , chemicals are a natural and important part of our environment .
Even though we often do not think about it , we use chemicals every day .
The modern world could not function without them .
They keep our food fresh , our bodies clean , they help our plants to grow , they fuel our cars .
Properly used and properly handled , chemicals make it possible for us to live longer , healthier lives .
This proposed regulation , which complements REACH and aligns the EU system for classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures with the UN Globally Harmonised System , is a reasonable and balanced proposal .
If we want to utilise the benefits of chemicals at a reasonable cost then we have to accept that there will be risks .
We need therefore to strike a balance between risks and benefits and control the risks of chemicals through careful labelling , science-based regulation and innovative technologies .
We also need to strike a balance between properly implementing the European Union 's international obligations signed up to at the United Nations Economic and Social Council at the World Summit on Sustainable Development which was held in Johannesburg in September 2002 , while at the same time avoiding unnecessary burdens on business through impractical and over-demanding labelling .
To this effect , I tabled several amendments to the proposal .
I feel it is particularly important to ensure that classification of products does not lead to confusion among consumers or health care providers .
Too much information is equal to no information .
This is why I tabled an amendment on the packaging of products , for example , with awkward shapes or that are so small that it is technically impossible to attach a label .
In these cases , hazard labelling information should be supplied in some other appropriate manner such as tie-on tags .
I would like to thank particularly the rapporteur , Mrs Sartori , for supporting my amendments and for the excellent work she has done on this report .
While existing regulations on identifying and communicating the hazardous properties of chemicals are similar in many respects , some differences are significant enough to result in different classification , different labelling and safety data sheets ( SDS ) .
The Globally Harmonised System ( GHS ) will hopefully merge these different classifications in an effective way .
The benefits of chemical use far outweigh the risks and this is especially so since the introduction of the registration , evaluation and authorisation of chemicals legislation known as REACH .
We must all be aware that chemicals , through the different steps from their production to their handling , transport and use can pose potential risks to human health and the environment .
In this context , the UN-EU GHS agreement is expected to be an improvement in human health and environmental protection and will also offer greater clarity to enterprises , particularly those involved in international trade .
The potential but manageable risks involved with chemicals underline the need for our legislation on a globally harmonised approach to packaging and labelling of chemicals , and it is in this respect I am pleased that the Council and Parliament agreed to a text on 27 June , and I congratulate again our rapporteur on the work done on this complex but very important file .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Those who work in chemicals manufacturing will be particularly severely affected .
According to a Finnish study , around 32 million EU citizens are exposed to carcinogenic chemicals in their workplace every day .
It is our duty to ban the most dangerous chemicals and exercise control over all chemicals in general .
This was the very purpose of the chemicals legislation REACH which we decided on last year .
The result of REACH can be debated .
I myself thought that the final result was watered down and lobbied to pieces by industry , but at least it is there , the world 's most wide-ranging chemicals legislation .
The GHS , the Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals , continues and complements REACH .
The GHS aims to pass information about chemicals on to workers and consumers .
The aim is to classify and label the thousands of substances and mixtures which surround us .
The GHS is in fact a UN Convention which we must now implement at EU level .
Once the GHS has been passed - unfortunately not until 2010 for substances and as late as 2015 for mixtures - all chemicals will be easy to identify .
It is about better information for the millions of workers who come into contact with chemicals every day , for consumers who must be able to know what they are buying .
Labelling will also help to improve public health in general and the environment .
Industry will be able to enjoy more consistent legislation which will facilitate international trade .
This is a major step forward and that is why we in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left support this compromise .
However , it is a pity that we did not go as far as we could have done .
Chemicals which are persistent , bioaccumulative and toxic , PBTs , will not be labelled .
Instead this compromise means that the question of PBTs will be dealt with at UN level .
This is a serious flaw in the agreement .
Why not decide that PBT chemicals are to have the same status as all the others and also be labelled .
Now we have to hope that other countries exert pressure on the question of PBTs .
I also believe that this will be the case in the long term .
Despite this , this is a decent compromise which will lead to millions of Europeans , workers and consumers , receiving more information about the tens of thousands of chemicals around us .
This is a major and important decision for everyone suffering from cancer , allergies or skin diseases as a result of chemicals .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , with the REACH Regulation now beginning to take its terrible toll on productive industry , especially on smaller businesses , and the numbers of animal experiments rising sharply , here in the form of come some more instructions from the world-government zealots of UNESCO on how to classify , label and package the results of its previous idea .
Being equally thirsty for anti-democratic global domination , the commercial and political elite which constitutes the European Union hastens to implement these instructions , just as they did to implement REACH .
They made a barrage of assurances of their good intentions which may for the moment protect or delude their so-called stakeholders , but which will not satisfy the great number of the unemployed which these measures are already beginning to produce .
A crumb of recognition for public opinion falls from the master 's table in the form of Amendments 10 , 12 , 39 and 42 , to place reducing animal experimentation in certain circumstances before adherence to the letter of the legislation .
I understand that this is due to pressure from the influential environmental groups upon which the EU depends for so much of its support , and placing the welfare of non-human primates above that of humans , as expressed in Amendment 40 , is surely going too far to placate them , but finding anything deserving of a positive vote in the oppressive and obsessive process of EU legislation is a rarity worthy of note .
For the rest , there is no reason why sensible standards of safety should not be adopted voluntarily by democratic nation states with independent judiciaries and free public access to judicial systems .
Supranational edicts may appear to be an easy option , but the centralised unaccountable power they contribute , directive by unmandated directive , is not just their sting in the tail but their principal awful effect .
The claim put forward in recital 7 to the effect that this legislation will provide a competitive advantage to industry and , as Amendment 1 adds , in particular to small and medium-sized enterprises , is simply ludicrous .
As always , the EU 's big business overlords will benefit from the failure of their smaller competitors .
They will become even larger fish in a smaller pond or flee abroad , and far from kowtowing to the EU and its ridiculous restrictions , traders overseas will trade much more profitably with each other than they will with us .
The boom is over .
The recession has begun and under the burden of EU regulation such as , our economies are sinking like stones .
Each traveller on this gravy train can tell his electorate whatever he likes in their own language without fear that they will overhear what his colleagues in other states are telling their electors .
There is no general EU electorate and there cannot be one until perhaps in a century or two everyone speaks one language , and until that time comes EU democracy will be a joke , and a dark and dangerous joke at that .
But your privileges are enormous .
Why should you care about this or the crazy counterproductive laws you continually rubber stamp ?
And why should I care , because I am retiring at the end of this month ?
When I read Amendment 28 it made me realise why I have had enough of all this nonsense .
It says : ' Preparation means a mixture or solution composed of two or more substances .
Mixture and preparation are synonyms ' .
Well , however would we survive without this supernanny state explaining such things to us , and how on earth have I survived to the ripe old age of 68 when I spent my infant years chewing the leaded paint off the wooden frame of my cot ?
I suppose it gave my antibodies something to do in the days when we actually had antibodies .
Each leaden edict brings the collapse of the EU closer .
I rejoice in that , but I deplore the damage which you are inflicting on 27 former democracies , year by disastrous year .

Madam President , it makes clear sense to me that , since chemicals are manufactured and traded globally , the description of hazards on their packaging should not differ between countries , as that is both prejudicial to consumers and a disadvantage to those who accurately describe the hazard .
However , I note that at present the ' globally-harmonised ' system is not very global .
It is more sporadic than global .
I wonder whether other countries will follow the EU 's example in embracing this UN system , and what the impact might be for businesses in Europe if they do not .
In implementing these measures we need to strike a balance .
Firstly , it is crucial for there to be no over-classification of products , which would confuse consumers and health-care providers .
Secondly , we need to implement these international obligations without placing unnecessary burdens on our businesses .
A number of companies have raised concerns over the cost of implementation .
There will be high IT and training outlays and repackaging costs , which we must not underestimate , especially in the case of small business .
I would echo the concern that SMEs could fall victim , especially if they trade overseas , in which case these costs may well be more than they can bear .
( FI ) Madam President , the debate on the very recent European Chemicals Regulation , REACH , is still in our memories .
It was one of the toughest legislative packages this term .
The regulation on the classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures we are now dealing with is partly based on , and complements , the REACH Regulation that has just entered into force .
That is why it gave rise to a lot of questions beforehand .
The Commission 's desire for an agreement at first reading initially seemed a bit too ambitious , given that Parliament had previously indicated its interest in legislation on chemicals .
I can therefore only admire the creditable work and leadership of my colleague , Mrs Sartori , with respect to this technical report , and how she managed to avoid the temptation of revising the regulation too much and , for example , incorporating new paragraphs and classifications of substances in the annexes , which would have slowed down and even prevented the regulation 's entry into force .
The report which we worked through on the committees is likely to achieve the targets set for the regulation , especially regarding the harmonisation and simplification of legislation .
GHS and REACH complement one another and do not just facilitate the work of the producers and distributors of chemicals .
Instead , clear and safe labelling will mean a return to consumer confidence in them .
When the work of the Committee began , people were worried that the GHS Regulation would mean that a large number of detergents , for example , would have to be classified as corrosive in the same way .
This way , for example , agents for unblocking pipes and washing-up liquids would have the same classification and package labelling , with the result that consumers would not be able to distinguish between hazardous products and milder detergents .
Now , however , the classifications of substances reflect their actual potential danger as well as can be expected .
The aim of this system , based as it is on a UN agreement , is that the same criteria should apply to the classification and labelling of chemicals and the regulations on the transportation , sales and use of chemicals all over the world .
Under the agreement it would be fully operative by 2008 . We still have a few months left to go .
Madam President , the global harmonisation of the classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures is to be welcomed , and the European Union should play a leading role in protecting our citizens against dangerous chemicals .
The whole initiative comes from the United Nations , and is therefore a global project .
The globally harmonised system is a promising sign of global cooperation in environmental issues .
That is why I support the adoption of the compromise on the Sartori report .
I have tabled more than 20 amendments in order to ensure the appropriate labelling and safe use of chemicals .
Seventeen of those amendments were approved by the ENVI Committee .
However , the same Environmental Committee also adopted several amendments from the rapporteur which would weaken consumers ' rights regarding information on the hazards of the chemicals in products .
The Socialist Group and I voted against those proposals because the interests of consumers are vital to us .
I am satisfied that the new compromise does not include these anti-consumer amendments , and I therefore propose to accept it .
I am not totally happy with the compromise , but we cannot delay putting the GHS into our legislation .
Let us accept , as a basic principle , that companies should not invoke business confidentiality when they place hazardous chemicals on the market .
Concerning hazards , consumers must have the right to have all necessary information .
Of course , the devil is in the details , so we will see how the GHS will work in practice , how hazard signs will be indicated on the products by industry , and whether consumers understand the signs and warnings .
The information should be clear and easily understandable .
Altogether , I hope that GHS will be a good tool to present the outcome of REACH to the public , so that chemicals are trusted much more by consumers , which will help our industry as well .
My assistant Gergely Simon , who has done much work on this and other dossiers , will leave Parliament in the near future .
I would like to thank him for his contribution to our common goal , which is a chemically safer Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , we all know that chemicals are produced and traded throughout the world , and the dangers and risks are global too .
Therefore , we need guidelines in the form of clear classifications and labels , which apply globally .
I would have liked the European Union to be the engine driving very clear labelling and strong consumer protection , but I have heard many speakers here that say that , rather than being the engine , the EU should be sitting in the brake van .
I can live with this political agreement , but I am not very happy with it .
Yes , we managed an important step towards greater safety for people and the environment .
I am also pleased that , despite the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety in connection with threshold values for labelling , which was all too industry-friendly - the volumes of data used for the classification should have been included on the label - we managed to limit the damage in the negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
I am glad that there are no longer any tonnage-based threshold values for the requirement to label and also no more accepted loopholes for industry , and that the proposed classification system redirects the focus towards alternatives to experiments on animals .
However , I would have liked to see the labelling of persistent , bioaccumulative and toxic substances improved , and a new ' acute toxicity ' category created , because that is extremely topical and a matter on which we ought to have shown willingness to take action .
I believe that we have sent out an important signal for greater safety for people and the environment today , but we cannot rest on our laurels .
Obviously this topic is going to keep us busy in the future , as there is plenty of room for improvement .
( FR ) Madam President , there are already global accounting regulations , global food standards in the Codex Alimentarius , global tax standards and UN model double taxation conventions .
Now we are going to get global standards for the labelling , classification , packaging and tonnage of chemical substances .
The 2002 global legislation of the UN Social and Economic Council , the general harmonised system , is being transposed into Community law .
There is certainly some value for everyone in global harmonisation - for consumers , users , SMEs - but beyond these 2 000 pages and procedures , annexes and lists , the regulation shows that European standardisation is not enough to deal with globalised problems .
Global problems need global solutions , which means that the British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , is right : between UN level and global level , the European level is increasingly out of date , obsolete and , ultimately , useless .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , it is no longer tolerable for differing national legislation on trade , in particular in hazardous substances , to be in force within the single European market .
Unification of the classification and labelling of hazardous chemicals and mixtures is good news for consumers , since the proposed harmonisation improves the protection of their health and the environment .
It is also good news for the competitiveness of European industry that this complex regulation relating to the transportation , supply and use of hazardous substances will apply not only in the European Union , but also in other countries around the world thanks to UN recommendations .
The regulation ties in with REACH , but it also introduces hazard classes and categories .
Labels will contain instructions for handling and compulsory graphic symbols and pictograms which will be intelligible to people anywhere in the world .
New requirements for packaging and fastenings will provide protection against vessels being opened by children and also provide for markings for the blind .
Critics warn of the high costs of re-labelling , the creation of ' safety data sheets ' and the introduction of new packaging technologies .
I am , however , convinced that these short-term expenses will be lower than the long-term savings in costs associated with the repeal of the present differing labelling of products depending on the destination .
The implementation time , which is staggered over the period 2010 to 2015 , is also sufficiently considerate for industry .
I greatly appreciate that Amalia Sartori has managed to reach an excellent compromise within Parliament and also with the Council .
After many months of discussions on the provisions of the Commission 's proposal , she has managed to achieve a great improvement and balance and therefore I urge that we adopt the proposal tomorrow at first reading .
It is an example of the splendid work carried out by the parliamentary rapporteurs with the Council and Commission teams .
( PL ) Madam President , today we are discussing a very important regulation that arose from a debate , and later a UN decision .
In this debate , which was crowned by the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of a globally harmonised system of chemical classification and labelling , all Member States , and not just the UN , played a very active and significant part , particularly the European Union , and also the Commission .
This means that the system that was hammered out there is our system too .
It is therefore good that today we are adapting our regulations on the use of chemicals to conform to this system , while at the same time we are ensuring and wish to ensure that our citizens - EU citizens - are protected and that our environment too is protected from the consequences of the use of hazardous substances , because the aim of this harmonisation , classification and labelling of hazardous substances is meant to be an improvement to the level of health protection , and also to the state of the environment .
Chemistry affects people the same way the world over .
When you buy a product , you do not have to know what is in it .
You should know , however , that you are buying a safe product .
You should be able to trust the manufacturer and the product acquired .
Here our role lies in labelling , which still differs to a great extent .
A product labelled as hazardous in one state is toxic in another , and harmful in a third .
It is unthinkable that the economy and trade in chemical substances should function in this way .
This is why I am pleased to welcome our report and discussion today .
I believe we are engaged in something very important .
I would like to draw attention to one final matter , namely the consequences linked to the need to provide information on labelling .
I am talking about information that all those who manage waste need to know .
Chemical product waste , which is and will continue to be a matter of enormous importance in our environment , must also be included in this section , which closes the whole cycle of chemical product and substance management and , subsequently , of hazardous product waste disposal .
Let us give European citizens a good product , and let us give them a sense of chemical security .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Sartori 's excellent work looks like the best legislative outcome for updating and therefore ensuring better regulation of certain aspects of chemical processing .
The report is praiseworthy not only because it satisfies the UN 's harmonisation programme ; it seems coherent , addressing the needs of producers and consumers , as well as the environment of course , in so far as this is objectively possible .
As usual , some of my fellow Members are not completely satisfied . I get the impression that this is due to an ideological radicalisation in the face of technological and scientific progress that all too often , on the pretext of environmental protection , tries to coerce us .
Coincidentally , for completely different reasons to those mentioned , countries outside the European Union , not least China , are putting the economy first by allowing chemicals to be manufactured , transported and stored under conditions that are in serious breach of everything that we quite rightly want to protect here .
The Sartori report is a fundamental step forward , harmonising the classification of substances and the labelling and packaging standards of hazardous substances and mixtures .
Doubtless this will help improve safety and prevent risks to the health and safety of consumers and workers and the environment .
It is currently possible for countries to classify the same substance very differently , according to different classification systems in force , and these differences can be so great as to present a risk .
Substances that in Europe are classified as hazardous may , in countries such as China for example , not carry any warnings on their labels .
Not only does this situation create an unfair competitive advantage , but it is a serious threat to consumers everywhere and this , ladies and gentlemen , although you often criticise it , is unfortunately especially true in a global market .
( SV ) Madam President , before I started working on environmental issues , I have to admit that my knowledge of chemicals was relatively limited .
However , the more I have learned , the more sceptical I have become about our use of such a large amount of chemicals in society today .
Not very long ago I read , for example , that consumption of chemicals used in cleaning in ordinary households has increased dramatically in my country , Sweden .
No one knows the true effect this is having on our health .
What we do know is that already many children , not only in Sweden , are now taken to casualty every year because they have swallowed household chemicals which are acutely toxic , despite the fact that the chemicals today bear a warning label which says that this is the case .
Thanks to our decision later today , this warning will now unfortunately disappear from many products .
Together with some colleagues , I tried to change this and ensure that this labelling of common household products would remain .
This will now not be the case .
I deeply regret this , as it means that important consumer information will be lost .
Nevertheless , I welcome the fact that the EU is now getting harmonised classification , labelling and packaging legislation to complement REACH , and that it has been drawn up on the basis of the voluntary international system which already exists .
This makes things easier for consumers and companies alike .
Once we have reached this decision today , it will be of the utmost importance for all nationally responsible authorities to take responsibility for getting information about the new labelling system out not only to companies but also , more widely , to different consumer groups .
I would therefore like to take the opportunity to urge the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen to follow up how , and how successfully , this is actually carried out so that we know whether the consumers of Europe understand what the labelling means from now on .
( RO ) Madam President , this proposal for a regulation , together with the other two , the regulation on detergents and the decision to amend the downstream legislation , represent the harmonisation of the European and the world legislation on classification , labelling and packaging of chemicals .
Their enforcement shall have beneficial effects on human health , environmental protection and chemical industry and the development of trade under conditions of safety and the information of consumers is very important .
The GHS implementation must be correlated with the enforcement of REACH Directive for producers , approximately 27,000 in the European Union , of which 95 % are SMEs , and with the development of trade with non-EU countries , namely 25 % of the European Union 's volume .
I request the Commission not to give up the proposal for enforcing the new regulation , during the entire product management cycle , including when the product becomes waste .
I congratulate the Rapporteur on her work .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate the Commission and the rapporteurs , because they have managed to bring about a constructive debate on the UN proposal and the REACH plan that we adopted previously , and this has resulted in progress .
The greatest benefit is standardised labelling , from the perspective of the Committee on Internal Market , consumers and companies .
Let us not forget that chemical substances will not be safer because of the labelling !
Safer use and better choices by consumers create greater safety , so we must establish that this draft legislation is a step forward in this respect and should be welcomed .
Finally , I would like to say and to draw your attention to the fact that we have joined forces behind the UN as the European Union , and we must now do everything , in collaboration with the UN , to ensure that the rest of the world also adopts it .
I propose this so that we may find followers for our legislation on the chemicals industry in the rest of the world , at the Transatlantic Economic Council and in other international fora . Thank you very much for your attention .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Sartori , together with her shadow rapporteurs and the Council and the Commission for reaching an agreement on the GHS package at first reading .
We have managed to achieve the target that had been set for us , which was to get the new system up and running quickly and in line with the REACH Regulation , while at the same time ensuring a high level of protection of human health and the environment , as well as meeting the commercial needs of firms , which can now target foreign markets more easily .
Once the GHS is in operation , firms will be able to operate based on a single classification system for substances , harmonised at international level , and which , among other things , will allow easier access to legislation on substances via the European Chemicals Agency .
With this regulation , which applies international criteria for the classification and labelling of hazardous substances and mixtures in the European Union , we will ensure that our firms are ready to open up to the global market .
There will also undoubtedly be benefits for the consumer , who will be able to recognise hazardous substances such as toxic and corrosive substances and irritants more easily .
The GHS labelling system , with its uniform pictograms , that are easy to understand , will help identify the risks of substances contained in everyday products such as detergents and soaps .
In addition , the GHS , which for many substances requires special safety devices to seal packaging , will help protect our children from dangerous accidents in the home due to the accidental ingestion of toxic or corrosive substances .
Of course , the GHS will require a certain amount of effort from firms , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , which should have confidence in the new system .
The system will in fact introduce seven new risk categories and a new classification for the transport system .
This is why we are particularly pleased with the agreement reached with the Council , which also took into account the support , information and running-in requirements , particularly for SMEs .
The agreement also took account of the consensus of all parliamentary groups on the need to minimise animal testing and any duplication of these tests as far as possible .
For all of these reasons , my group will be voting in favour of the package tabled .
( SV ) I would just like to reply to what my fellow Member Mr Booth said here about the environmental movement wanting to protect people but not animals .
He seems to have misunderstood this .
It is a question of classification .
The texts to which Mr Booth refers state that you must not manipulate a chemical mixture solely for the purposes of classification in order to come in under a certain threshold , that you must not be allowed to do lots of animal tests just to avoid labelling .
This would lead to us seeing chemical mixtures which contain dangerous substances , but of different kinds , and which therefore do not exactly reach the threshold for labelling .
In these cases the aim would thus be to carry out animal testing solely in order to get out of labelling .
It is for this reason that we need these texts .
Here animal health and human health are going hand in hand .
Animal testing is avoided but people gain proper information about the chemicals so that they can take the correct action to protect themselves against them .
Mr Booth has really misunderstood this !
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this vigorous , lively debate has shown that we are dealing with an important and far-reaching subject .
I think we can say today that taking this step concludes the intensive legislative work carried out in relation to the chemicals industry and the manufacture and use of chemicals in Europe - work that has taken many years .
I would like to make this very clear , thinking about the very useful image that Mrs Breyer used . Who is sitting in the engine , and who is sitting in the brake van ?
One thing is certain : as far as legislation on chemicals is concerned , the European Union is the engine for the whole world .
Nowhere else are there regulations such as we have introduced , and nowhere else are demands being made of the chemicals industry such as we are making .
Therefore , the Commission strongly believes that , in connection with the horizontal legislation for this sector , we now need a few years in which to put into effect what we have already decided , and that we should not immediately embark on any other major projects .
It is with good reason that the REACH legislation provides for review periods , and we should observe the periods decided on by the legislator very closely .
This means that the Commission will always present the reports and suggestions on time .
As far as major horizontal initiatives are concerned , let me repeat that the Commission does not intend to make any further proposals within the foreseeable future .
I can also reassure you about the global effectiveness of this system .
All the information available to me shows that all around the world , all those involved are indeed working hard to implement the system decided upon by the United Nations .
We are definitely at the forefront when it comes to actual implementation .
I think many major countries have been waiting for exactly what has happened here today , because they want to base their own legislation and their own implementation on what we do in the European Union .
I expect that we will now see these procedures being brought to completion in many other countries .
Mr Schwab raised a very interesting question - that of whether we should have transitional deadlines for the conservation threshold values in Annex 6 that have been deleted as a consequence of the compromise between the parties .
I can only say that the Commission does not have a problem with transitional deadlines .
Personally , I believe they are essential and appropriate , but this omission in the law has not come about by chance .
It is part of an overall compromise and , taking all the circumstances into account , I do not think it would have been proper for the Commission to allow the question of transitional deadlines for a few products to cause the compromise to fail .
However , we will make sure that what the legislators wanted is achieved in an appropriate form .
I share the concerns of those who have voiced their misgivings about animal testing .
I very much hope that this legislation does not lead to an increase in the number of tests on animals .
It is important that testing on primates is absolutely prohibited in connection with this legislation .
I want to say again , emphatically , that the Commission will put all its energy into restricting animal testing as much as possible .
For me , this means that we must keep increasing our efforts to find recognised alternative methods to replace animal testing .
Everyone who has concerns about this will find me on their side .
In conclusion , let me say that I believe that we have a piece of legislation before us that represents a ' win-win ' situation for everyone involved .
I am very grateful to everyone who contributed to it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely satisfied with the debate that we have had .
I would like to thank all of my fellow Members who have contributed today and I would also like to thank them for their words of support for the work that I carried out , which was only possible with their help , and with the help of the shadow rapporteurs and draftsmen of the opinions of the Committees on Industry , Research and Energy and the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
It seems that the vast majority of Members who spoke are satisfied with the results that we achieved .
I welcome the view of the person who said that even the GHS is an ongoing process , and moreover it is a working method that we have established .
In these situations it is precisely that and we are aware that the world will continue to change and develop and that is the reason why in this regulation , as in REACH and other regulations , we were careful to provide a very specific and precise regulatory framework and to leave room for future modification based on these criteria , although the criteria themselves are predetermined .
This is what I understood from the Commissioner who spoke just before me on the possibility of endorsing part of the debate that has taken place .
We are conscious of the fact that we are today ratifying a regulation that enjoys broad support , which will help bring benefits for consumers and workers in this sector , who represent the vast majority of the population .
We know that these are rules that will be used as a framework and as an unquestionable and unassailable point of reference .
Again , this is a constantly changing world , and with reference to these rules that will be handled by the Commission .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The proposal for a decision enforcing the Globally Harmonised System of Classification , Labelling and Packaging of Chemicals ( GHS ) represents an important step in the protection of the environment , the consumers , who will have more power to choose , as well as of companies that want to enter the international market .
The harmonised use of labels and the uniform description of dangers generated by chemicals ensure greater confidence of consumers in such products , also facilitating international trade , since industry shall be able to enforce the same labels for all the regions where it exports .
Moreover , the harmonised system of classification of substances is an essential factor for ensuring the free movement of goods in the internal market .
Nevertheless , we have to make sure that this regulation does not increase the number of tests on vertebrate animals for the purpose of harmonising the classification criteria , but that they shall be performed only if there are no alternative solutions guaranteeing the same quality .
The Globally Harmonised System of Classification should allow the use of methods not involving tests on animals , even if their validation supposes a long and costly bureaucratic process .
Since tests on animals have never been validated officially , the authentication of alternative tests seems a burden , but research in this field should be encouraged .
in writing . - ( DE ) Increasingly frequently in the modern world , consumers come into contact with different substances , and sometimes also hazardous substances .
When using some products , including those used daily by many , information about the substances they contain is vital if they are to be used safely and in a way that does not endanger health .
The Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals ( GHS ) , developed in 2002 at UN level with active participation by the EU , is to be implemented this year by all Member States .
One of the main advantages of this system is the use of universal hazard pictograms .
Consumers and traders can thus see at a glance whether a product contains certain substances that can also be dangerous .
In addition , the GHS introduces standardised definitions , such as LD50 ( lethal dose 50 ) , that clearly indicate the hazard associated with the substance .
The Community , and we in the European Parliament , have made it our goal to restrict animal testing for the purposes of assessing substances as much as we possibly can .
Furthermore , the definitions have been stated more precisely and clearer guidelines worked out for the authorities in the Member States .
Successful implementation of the GHS represents an important milestone in making the European internal market a reality and will also be of benefit in terms of international trade .
Type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the report by Anja Weisgerber , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles and amending Directive 2007 / 46 / EC - C6-0342 / 2007 - .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again , we are talking about the car of the future - a topic that the European Parliament has already dealt with intensively this week in another connection .
Today we are discussing a technical opportunity that may be able to help us solve the environmental problems caused by vehicles .
Let me repeat : it is something that may be able to help us .
We do not know whether its potential can be implemented on a large scale , but we should make the most of the opportunity .
That is what this is all about .
We all agree that sustainable mobility will be one of the key challenges that we will have to tackle in the years to come .
We do not want to restrict the right of European citizens to individual mobility .
On the other hand , there can be no doubt that this right to individual mobility - plainly speaking , the right to drive cars , to own and use a car - must be exercised in such a way that it does not destroy our environment , and that means that we need cars that do not harm the environment .
A comment in passing : it is not just because of the state of the environment that this is essential and urgent ; it is also becoming increasingly important in economic terms .
The traditional internal combustion engine is out of date because fuel consumption is so high . We must do everything possible to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels wherever it occurs .
Against this background , the question arises of whether we can facilitate the development of hydrogen powered vehicles .
That is the idea that led to the suggestion made by the Commission , namely type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles .
I should like first to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Weisgerber , for her constructive , successful work on this proposal .
I am delighted that , thanks to her work , agreement at first reading was possible .
At this stage , we do not know which technology is best for sustainable mobility .
If you read the newspapers and watch television , you are confronted with a different conclusion every day .
While some talk of fuel cells , others enthuse about the electric car , and still others mention innovative high-performance batteries .
There are many options to compete with hydrogen power ; electric engines and fuel cells at the very least .
Our task is to stipulate the necessary safety regulations for promising technologies while maintaining strict technological neutrality .
Obviously , hydrogen is one of these technologies .
Hydrogen can replace conventional fuel and make a sizeable reduction in the harmful effects of road traffic on the environment .
However , I would like to add , in brackets , that all these considerations make sense only if we can produce hydrogen in an environmentally friendly way .
If hydrogen is produced using dirty energy , then all we are doing is shifting the problem .
The proposed regulation will integrate hydrogen powered vehicles into the European type-approval system .
That way , hydrogen powered vehicles will be treated like traditional vehicles , in that a single permit will be sufficient for the entire European Union .
This permit process is less cumbersome and much more affordable .
Manufacturers can take care of all the formalities at a single point of contact , thus making considerable savings .
This makes European industry more competitive and means less administrative hassle .
Hydrogen has different properties to conventional fuels such as petrol and diesel , so the proposal makes a priority of determining the necessary safety requirements .
In particular , we must ensure that storage of hydrogen in the vehicle is absolutely safe .
This regulation will make all hydrogen powered vehicles put on EU roads as safe as conventionally powered vehicles .
Hopefully this will also increase the public 's faith in unfamiliar new technologies .
The proposal also introduces a system for identifying the vehicles , so that they are easily recognised by rescue services .
Close cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission has had a positive effect on the outcome of the negotiations , so that I can only agree with all the proposed modifications your rapporteur , Mrs Weisgerber , has made .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fossil fuels are finite .
Demand is increasing , pushing prices up - we see that every day at the petrol station .
The expectation that oil , natural gas and coal will run out in the future is one reason for the rising prices .
Therefore , we need to start immediately to investigate technologies that could replace fossil fuels in the future .
One of these alternatives - and the Commissioner quite rightly emphasised that it is only one , but it is an alternative - is hydrogen technology .
Naturally , hydrogen vehicles are not yet ready for the market , but a variety of projects are under way to change that .
The EU ' highways ' project has just been completed , with an encouraging report .
EU research ministers set up a long-term public-private partnership in February with the aim of getting hydrogen and fuel-cell technology ready for the market between 2015 and 2025 .
It is planned to invest a total of approximately EUR 940 million in this research programme in the next few years , with public authorities and private investors contributing half each .
We see that the stage is set for hydrogen vehicles to be ready for the market .
The fact that the price of fuel cells is still high cannot be used as an argument against hydrogen technology , as that is the way with all technologies of the future .
The first 0.5 megapixel digital camera was developed many years ago for space travel and cost around EUR 10 million , but nowadays , almost everyone has a digital camera .

The present regulation will , in the future , provide harmonised technical regulations for the approval of hydrogen powered vehicles throughout Europe for the first time .
Unified criteria are essential if this technology is to be promoted and a high level of safety and environmental protection maintained .
Hydrogen powered vehicles are not included in the EC type-approval system at present , so Member States can issue one-off permits for this type of vehicle .
This is done in some Member States , but in others it is completely unknown .
With permits being issued in this way , there is a risk that each Member State will set its own permit conditions and the internal market will be disrupted .
This would lead to high costs for manufacturers as well as to safety risks .
Hydrogen is one of the energy vectors of the future .
Therefore , our task , which we are fulfilling by adopting this regulation , is to establish the political framework conditions for the use of this technology of the future by creating unified approval criteria .
I am glad that , across the parties , we have managed to achieve agreement at first reading , and that the cooperation with the Council and the Commission was so good .
My thanks for the excellent cooperation go therefore to the shadow rapporteurs ; I would also like to mention Mr Bulfon and Mr Manders by name .
That is what made agreement at first reading possible .
Our focus was on the issue of labelling hydrogen powered vehicles .
Hydrogen powered vehicles are just as safe as passenger cars powered by diesel or petrol .
Under the regulation , they will have to pass safety tests that are just as strict as those for all other vehicles .
However , it makes sense for rescue services to know if they are dealing with a hydrogen vehicle when they arrive at the scene of an accident , so that they can take certain details into account .
This should not mean that hydrogen powered vehicles are viewed adversely because , as I have already said , they are just as safe as vehicles that run on other fuels .
That is a very important point that I want to get across today .
We therefore suggest that hydrogen vehicles should bear discreet labels on the components that contain hydrogen .
Working with the Commission and the Council , we made further improvements to the Commission 's text and substituted ' identification ' for the word ' label ' , because in the long term , this label should and could be replaced by electronic identification that involves an intelligent emergency call system called ' eCall ' .
Other questions also arose .
At the end , perhaps , I will return briefly to the question of hydrogen filling station infrastructure but for now , I am looking forward to the lively discussion and am eager to hear what you have to say .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( SL ) I would like to thank my colleague Dr Weisgerber for her excellent report and express my satisfaction that we have reached such a high degree of consensus with the Council so quickly .
This regulation puts us convincingly on the side of the new energy and environment policies , which will certainly have a positive effect on public health too .
I agree with the Commissioner that we have to take full advantage of this opportunity .
This regulation is one of the opening moves ; it is part of the answer to contemporary energy and environmental challenges , where hydrogen plays one of the key roles .
We do not mean just hydrogen alone , but hydrogen as well , and not just individual Member States , but the entire European Union .
It is very important to engage correct dynamics to provide the entire implementation context .
In this we should also take into account everything that our citizens are considering , starting with the infrastructure .
The dynamism of development , and especially the problem of the rapid development of new technologies , is very important in this exceptionally demanding energy situation .
I see very significant possibilities for the new technologies , in the sense that they enable the decentralised production of hydrogen to take place ; also , if solar technology is involved , it is actually possible to disperse production of , and reduce dependency on , the currently known energy sources .
It is my opinion that the Commission could successfully promote and accelerate development in this direction .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I want to warmly thank Anja Weisgerber as the rapporteur on behalf of the committee and , of course , as a member of my own group who , once again , I think , has shown her mastery of complex , technical dossiers , having also worked very effectively on a number of the emission dossiers as rapporteur for the opinion .
But I am delighted now that she has her own report , and I congratulate her on the very thorough way that she has approached this important task .
I know how much work is involved , having been the rapporteur myself on the overall Type Approval Directive .
I also want to thank Günter Verheugen and his team in the Commission for moving very quickly and in a timely way to give us this important proposal , which will effectively incorporate into the master Type Approval Directive the specific requirements for hydrogen vehicles .
I think , by the way , that shows the important of finally having now achieved this common type approval framework for motor vehicles , that we have the flexibility to be able to respond and include these new developments in it .
In that connection , I just want to emphasise what a number of colleagues have said already , but particularly from my perspective , having worked with the Commission as a Member of this Parliament on the Cars 21 group , which was formed to put in place a competitive automotive regulatory strategy for the 21st century - that is what Cars 21 meant - and this is clearly a 21st-century proposal .
But the important thing is that it gives the manufacturing industry - but not just the big manufacturers , the many companies who are involved in developing the systems and components that will help move forward the hydrogen-powered vehicles - it will give them a clear legislative framework within which to work now .
They do not have to wait for it .
That is a huge benefit , and it means that we will have one framework for Europe - one framework - and that means that , if you then comply with those requirements , you can sell your vehicle everywhere else .
But , actually , this is not enough , and I am pleased that Anja has included in her report a specific request to the Commission to say , ' We want to make hydrogen vehicle safety requirements global requirements .
Across the world people are working on hydrogen vehicle standards .
It is absolutely the right time to put that into the global vehicle working party , because we should start as we mean to go on and have that set of global standards for hydrogen vehicles .
At the same time , we want Europe to be a leader in developing those technologies , and we can achieve both with the foundation of this proposal .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , an EU-wide , unified permit procedure for hydrogen powered vehicles would overcome at least one of the barriers to the development of environmentally friendly forms of mobility .
There are already several promising projects in the area of local public transport , which mean that series production of hydrogen powered passenger cars is not far away at all .
However , we have to ask how the hydrogen will be obtained .
Whether the final result , in terms of CO2 , is favourable depends very much on how hydrogen will be produced in the future .
It is no use if manufacturing it produces more CO2 than is saved by hydrogen power .
At the same time , however , we must ensure that the appropriate filling station infrastructure is created and built , because even hydrogen powered cars have to be filled up .
This is a challenge for the Member States , particularly .
The clear guidelines in this report create a legal framework that facilitates the further development of this promising technology and many other innovations .
The president of this Chamber , Mr Pöttering , has reported on hydrogen powered vehicles from his own experience .
It would be worth considering using his experience to adapt Parliament 's fleet accordingly - at least it is a suggestion worthy of consideration .
Finally , I would like to thank Mrs Weisgerber most sincerely for her warm cooperation in the assembly and production of this report .
in the name of the ALDE group . - ( BG ) The inclusion of hydrogen-driven vehicles in the overall normative framework of the European Community is of exceptional importance , because the currently existing statutory procedures on type approval do not guarantee that vehicles of identical quality can be released on the entire market of the European Union .
The adoption of an European Union regulation would guarantee that all hydrogen-driven vehicles released on the market are manufactured , tested and identified in accordance with a common standard and that their safety level is at least the same as that of conventional motor vehicles .
The common regulation would also guarantee alignment of the efforts to introduce hydrogen as a fuel in an energy sustainable manner so that the common environmental balance from the introduction of hydrogen as a fuel in the case of motor vehicles would be positive .
The all-European regulation should also provide common requirements in respect to the monitoring of these motor vehicles and the necessary infrastructure - the fueling stations .
The adoption of a regulation of the European Union would also guarantee application of the common standards in respect to the production and exploitation of hydrogen-driven vehicles manufactured in third countries - the United States , the Asian Economic Community - and would help defend the interests of Europe .
Let me point out that at the lack of action at European Union level member-states would adopt differing standards in respect to hydrogen-driven vehicles , which will lead to an unfavourable situation concerning the common market , saving on costs as a result of large-scale production and delay in the development of the vehicles .
At the moment when one , only one approval will suffice for each type of vehicle so that it could be released on the European Union market , EU member-states should open up for hydrogen-driven vehicles .
Approval will accelerate the introduction of this environment-friendly technology powering vehicles , which in turn will allow the environmental benefits from using hydrogen-driven vehicles to appear sooner .
Last , but not least , investment in the production of hydrogen-driven vehicles , of the materials for their manufacture and the means of their monitoring would receive additional impetus , which would contribute to the faster introduction of the hydrogen technology in European Union countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , the introduction of hydrogen powered vehicles will have an impact on environmental and health protection and on the greenhouse effect , and is of political and economic significance given the shortage of traditional hydrocarbon fuels .
The main step that needs to be taken so that they can be introduced is to establish a directive on type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles .
I have two comments to make concerning the draft directive and amendments .
Firstly , the draft excludes the need to check the instructions for servicing and use when type-approval is being performed .
Hydrogen fuel , with its very high energy value , is a particularly hazardous product , and vehicle users will be dealing with it for the first time .
Secondly , the setting in the draft of a review date of one year from its establishment in order to give consideration to conclusions arising from its functioning and established international norms in this area .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group supports the introduction of the directive .
I thank Mrs Weisgerber for a businesslike report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , on reading the explanatory statement for the regulation under discussion , I was unpleasantly surprised .
On the one hand , hydrogen allows for the storage of energy and , on the other hand , it practically eliminates a significant proportion of emissions .
The Directive , however , provides for categorisation according to traditional systems .
Put more simply , this involves the use of hydrogen through combustion .
Apart from the problem of combustion of a methane-hydrogen mixture , something which I know about since my dissertation concerned combustion , it would be necessary for normal engines to also use urea to achieve clean combustion products in accordance with EURO 5 to 6 for the elimination of nitrogen oxides .
One of the objectives of the European Union is to expand the use of hydrogen in transportation in the near future and there should be dramatic growth by 2020 .
It is true that the technical problems associated with the storage and handling of hydrogen require clear , unified regulations , including the labelling of systems working with hydrogen .
I fully agree with the rapporteur on this .
I should also like to point out that many countries prohibit parking vehicles with pressure vessels in enclosed spaces , especially underground car parks .
Simple labelling is essential for this too .
Hydrogen fuel cells are one of the promising experimental vehicle drive systems .
Many cities in the European Union have long been operating buses using this energy source .
I believe that the regulation under discussion will provide for the unification of the basic requirements for hydrogen powered motor vehicle equipment .
I hope that it will provide a better framework for the further rapid development and operational verification of the different components of hydrogen vehicle systems .
It should considerably speed up the practical usage of hydrogen cells in particular but hydrogen must not be widely used in ' traditional systems ' , in other words combustion engines , as this makes no sense to me .
With this proviso , I warmly recommend approval of the document on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Weisgerber 's report is a perfect example of they way European politics adapts to changing markets and moves quickly to create proactive standards and legal bases for technological innovations .
The Council intends to deal with standardisation in a few months and draw conclusions on that .
In that discussion , the questions of how quickly standards respond to technological progress , how quickly legislators respond to technological progress and how quickly standards adjust to economic reality will once again play a role .
I believe that this report on type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles will make Europe the trailblazer of a unified regulatory platform for the development of hydrogen powered vehicles .
It is a valid point that it has still not been determined whether , in the end , the use of hydrogen as a fuel for vehicles will conform to the principle of sustainability and be ecologically sustainable , but nor can it be excluded yet .
Therefore , I believe that , with this report , we are creating a good foundation for further research for the leading research institutes in the European internal market and particularly for the leading enterprises .
This is particularly important given the background of the discussion on CO2 policy for vehicles and the desire to achieve greater diversity amongst the various technologies in order , ultimately , to establish with certainty which vehicle and which engine technology is best for the environment and for people .
From the point of view of the internal market , I think we should particularly welcome this report , because a truly integrated internal market can be achieved only by harmonising type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles in the different Member States to make the most of the synergy effects of this market .
As was pointed out earlier on , any worldwide type-approval should naturally also be founded on this basis .
We hope we will get it all sorted out .
Wishing you every success !
Madam President , I would like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Weisgerber , and the shadows for producing this report and negotiating a very good agreement with the Council and the Commission , while preserving Parliament 's priorities .
At a time when petrol prices in Europe have doubled and citizens in Europe and people around the world are ever more concerned about the effects of climate change , it is clear that we need new hope for future fuels .
This European-wide law on hydrogen-powered cars can pave the way for full-scale production of these cars and provide European drivers with real alternatives in the not too distant future .
Sales of alternative-fuel vehicles , for example , in the United Kingdom alone have grown from just a few hundred in the year 2000 to over 16 000 last year .
Sales of electric cars and other alternatives have soared , but hydrogen cars are only on the cusp of large-scale production .
I believe that this new law will boost the development of these vehicles , while ensuring they are reliable and safe .
With the help of the law , mass production is now predicted to start in Europe by 2015 , with around 5 % of total EU road stock set to be hydrogen-powered by 2025 .
The environmental benefits of hydrogen cars will depend on the energy source used to produce the hydrogen .
They can directly tackle air pollution caused by petrol and will reduce our dependence on oil , but they will only help tackle global warming if hydrogen is produced in a sustainable way .
That is why I strongly back Mrs Weisgerber 's negotiated amendments to ensure hydrogen fuel is produced sustainably and , as far as possible , from renewable energy .
It is important to stress that hydrogen-powered cars can be just as safe as those that run on petrol and , in the event of an accident , emergency crews need to know what they are dealing with .
That is why Mrs Weisgerber has ensured that vehicles will be readily identifiable by emergency services .
This legislation does what only the European Union can do in a strong internal market . It ensures a European-sized market for goods with common rules and high safety requirements .
It is this market that is capable of producing the hydrogen cars of the future and I believe this law today , when we vote for it , is crucial to achieving that goal .
( LT ) The Commission proposal on type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles is very important for solving the problems related to the search for alternative vehicle fuels , environmental protection , climate change and people 's health .
I would like to draw your attention to a few issues that are of great importance in the development of hydrogen powered vehicles .
Firstly , the main problem of hydrogen powered vehicles lies not in the vehicle manufacturing process itself , but in refuelling .
So far there are only about 40 hydrogen filling stations in the whole of Europe .
There are two such filling stations in France , for example , and one in Spain , while there are none at all in the new Member States that joined the European Union in 2004 and 2007 .
In the United States , only California has a significant number .
That is why I agree with the speaker that it is necessary to create a standardised hydrogen filling station network across the whole of the EU as soon as possible .
Without appropriate infrastructure , hydrogen powered vehicles will remain unitary .
Secondly , hydrogen is merely an energy carrier , not an energy source , and that is why it is important that hydrogen fuel is produced in a stable and environmentally friendly way .
We need to be more active in carrying out scientific research that would lead to avoidance of the use of fossil fuels and suggest alternative methods of splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen .
One such method could be photolysis , although thorough scientific research still needs to be carried out here .
Furthermore , pollution-free hydrogen production would allow it to be used in areas outside transport .
Thirdly , I agree with the Commissions proposal to use mixtures of natural gas and hydrogen , but only as a transition fuel and only in countries that have a well-developed natural gas infrastructure .
I would also like to emphasise that the United States and Canada are leading the way in the field of development and manufacture of hydrogen powered vehicles , while Japan is catching up , and we ourselves should not fall further behind .
( PL ) Madam President , a future with hydrogen powered cars is an exciting prospect .
Although much time has yet to pass before this technology is widely applied , it is nevertheless of exceptional importance that the regulations on their type-approval are harmonised now .
The principal objective of the regulation we are looking at today is to introduce EU criteria for the type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles in order to ensure the proper functioning of the market .
The different type-approval criteria in individual Member States are currently hampering the functioning of this market , causing an unnecessary rise in production costs , threatening safety and - something we must not forget - constituting a significant barrier to the development of hydrogen technology in the EU .
In particular , we must not allow this point to pass us by because hopes for the substitution of oil in the transport sector lie specifically with hydrogen , along with biofuels and electricity .
Perhaps the most important thing , however , is that the process of hydrogen combustion gives rise not to carbon dioxide , a substance that is still harmful to the environment , but to water , with the obvious consequence being to cut down on air pollution and reduce CO2 emissions , something to which we are devoting a great deal of effort , not least within the forum of the European Parliament .
Clearly the attainment of all these objectives will depend on the spread of these technologies , which - as the rapporteur , whom I congratulate on a very good report , rightly points out - depends , among other things , on the existence of a network of hydrogen filling stations .
Such stations should come into being at the same time in all Member States to enable every European consumer to have access to them .
I also hope that vehicle manufacturers will respond to rising consumer demand for hydrogen powered vehicles so that a common market in this sphere can function properly .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this is a good example of how politics is able to take action , because type-approval permits for hydrogen powered vehicles will be available in the future , even though the technology itself is not yet available .
We talk a lot about reducing CO2 produced by vehicles , particularly trucks .
This could be one way of reducing CO2 emissions , but it is important - and I am speaking as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , for which I was the shadow rapporteur - that we generate the hydrogen from renewable energies .
This also offers the possibility of storing energy from renewable sources , which we could then use for vehicles , and that would be a good direction to take .
We should continue to concentrate on this in future .
However , it is also important to create a filling station infrastructure .
We see , for example , that the infrastructure for CNG vehicles is still very patchy .
The vehicles are available but the customers , the drivers , are still holding back from purchasing them because availability of the fuel is not guaranteed .
We need to keep the focus on that in future discussions .
( PL ) Madam President , may I take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur , and also the Commission , on an initiative that is aimed at seeking out new power sources for vehicles and sources from which energy may be obtained .
There are three important objectives : firstly , our continuing escape from dependence on oil .
The second objective relates to CO2 emissions .
Finally , the third objective - and this is an important one - is to stabilise and lower the costs of vehicle use for those using them .
In my view , the document under discussion covers three areas , and these are : one - the labelling of hydrogen powered vehicles ; two - requirements for filling stations ( their siting and introduction ) .
Finally , the third area that I consider important is the safety of operation of hydrogen vehicles .
This regulation firstly establishes a legal framework that lays down how we should utilise this energy and secondly provides the infrastructure requirements , ensuring that the basic ex ante conditions for developing the new technology are essentially met .
( RO ) In the transport sector , constant efforts should be made towards introducing alternative fuel vehicles in the market , which contribute to the significant improvement of air quality in the urban environment .
Common standards for the approval of hydrogen-powered engines are required in order to guarantee the safe use of hydrogen for vehicle propulsion .
The use of hydrogen as fuel , either as fuel cells or as internal combustion engines , generates no carbon emissions or greenhouse gases .
The type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles is based on the specification and meeting of the technical requirements for hydrogen-based components .
Taking into consideration the characteristics of hydrogen , vehicles require specific treatment from rescue services .
I emphasize the need for Member States to invest in the infrastructure required for the storage and distribution of alternative fuels , without which the number of less polluting vehicles cannot increase significantly .
( PL ) Madam President , as I wished to keep within the time limit , namely one minute , I failed to get across an important point , which I would like to emphasise as an advantage of the solution .
This is that we are coming up with a proposed solution well ahead of time , creating conditions for modernity .
This may also mean an incentive to look for even more technologies , and for that reason I would like to express recognition for both Commissioner Verheugen and the Commission .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to see that this debate has shown broad consensus in many respects : firstly , a broad consensus that hydrogen technology is an interesting potential way of helping to solve our energy problems ; secondly , consensus that hydrogen technology is a potentially interesting option for road traffic ; and thirdly , a very wide consensus that , of course , hydrogen technology in general makes sense only if the overall ecological effect is positive - that is , if hydrogen is made from clean sources of energy .
That is a very important result .
I would also like to inform you that the Commission has placed particular importance on the development of hydrogen technology in the 7th Framework Research Programme .
EUR 800 million have been made available for research into hydrogen technology , and not only for vehicles , in a joint technology initiative .
I want to avoid giving the impression that we are spending EUR 800 million to enable research into hydrogen as a fuel technology .
That is only part of the project ; overall , the project is about creating clear principles in terms of the extent to which hydrogen can actually contribute to drastically reducing our society 's CO2 emissions .
Along with the President of this Parliament , Mr Pöttering , I had the opportunity to drive a hydrogen powered vehicle for a time .
My personal impression was that the technical problems connected with the use of hydrogen in vehicles have basically been solved .
The technology is there .
It can be done .
What is totally lacking - and this has been mentioned several times already - is the infrastructure .
I can imagine that , once this proposal has been accepted and provided encouragement to the industry , we will then have to deal with the question that Mr Bulfon also raised in this debate .
That is the question of whether perhaps those who run large fleets of vehicles used mainly locally , such as parliaments , including this Parliament , national parliaments , governments , and the European Commission , should set a good example as soon as practicable and , through their procurement policies , facilitate the bringing onto the market of vehicles of this type .
At the moment that is still only a pipe dream , but it is something we should think about when the time comes .
Let me thank the rapporteur again for her truly excellent work , as well as all the speakers from the groups and committees , who have shown that we have a common vision here of what the future for vehicles in Europe could look like .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the very interesting speeches .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , the Commission , the representatives of the Council and the staff for their fantastic cooperation , which was the key to achieving this political unity at first reading .
As we have seen , hydrogen is a technology of the future .
Hydrogen can be part of the answer to the challenges posed by climate change and the need to reduce emissions .
It is a clean alternative to fossil fuels and the use of hydrogen as an energy vector - as has been stated , it is indeed an energy vector - is totally sustainable if it is produced from renewable energies or nuclear energy .
This is the direction we have to take in the coming years .
I am fascinated by the idea of having a totally hazard-free hydrogen cycle in which hydrogen is ultimately produced from renewable energies and then vaporised .
It is truly fascinating .
I supported this technology long before I came to the European Parliament , and have also worked voluntarily on it for a long time .
Today we have set things going in the right direction .
We have created the necessary preconditions so that we can eventually have unified type-approval regulations .
We have also shown the way to an international type-approval regulation and set the future direction for research and development .
The technology is already here , as Commissioner Verheugen has rightly said .
Now we must deal with the other questions relating to infrastructure .
The question of filling station infrastructure will be handled by a public-private partnership .
Perhaps then we will find that it will not be long before hydrogen powered vehicles are on our streets , and not just as prototypes .
Thank you once again for the good cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( SK ) Reserves of raw materials for the production of traditional hydrocarbon fuels are constantly declining and therefore the subject of research and development of new alternative drive systems in the motor vehicle industry is most urgent .
The EU Seventh Framework Programme allocated EUR 800 million for research into hydrogen technology .
On the basis of research , hydrogen appears to be the ideal alternative to traditional fossil fuels .
The use of hydrogen as a future fuel in road vehicles offers a solution which is exceptionally favourable for the environment . It causes zero emissions of carbon compounds and greenhouse gases .
The first prototype cars have already been successfully tested in the European Economic Area .
In order for the internal market to be able to operate and also to provide a high degree of safety for the population and environmental protection , there is a need to lay down European-wide rules for the design of hydrogen powered motor vehicles .
Unified approval rules throughout the EU are the minimum prerequisite for placing hydrogen powered vehicles on the market .
The successful introduction of new technologies also depends on the timely construction of an appropriate network of hydrogen filling stations .
I believe that today 's debate will improve the confidence of European consumers in the use of new technologies in the motor vehicle industry and increase the share of such vehicles on the European market .
I am convinced that only a technically well-prepared EU will be able to achieve success in competition with the USA , Japan and Korea where there has been considerable activity in this field .
In view of this , I consider this initiative to be very positive .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

Statement by the President
On behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to send a message of solidarity to the victims of hurricane Gustav in the Caribbean .
Nearly 100 people lost their lives in the Dominican Republic , Haiti , Jamaica , the Cayman Islands and Cuba , and thousands of others are now homeless .
Once again , the citizens of these developing countries with which we maintain close links through the Cotonou Agreement - the ACP countries group - are suffering the ravages of a new natural disaster in these regions .
The European Union is closely monitoring the situation in the affected countries and is sending humanitarian aid .
The European Parliament will , of course , be closely monitoring the supply of humanitarian assistance to countries in the region , particularly through the work of its Committee on Development and the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Devoting more attention to youth empowerment in EU policies - Emergency cooperation in recovering missing children ( written declarations ) : see Minutes
1 .
Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures (
2 .
Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures ( amendment of Directives 76 / 768 / EEC , 88 / 378 / EEC , 1999 / 13 / EC , 2000 / 53 / EC , 2002 / 96 / EC and 2004 / 42 / EC ) (
3 .
Classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures ( amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 648 / 2004 ) (
4 .
Type-approval of hydrogen powered motor vehicles (
5 .
Situation in Georgia ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 19 :
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , when we drafted the resolution , we used the previous text , the wording of which does not entirely convey that the European Council has met in the meantime .
I would therefore suggest to you that the second part of the text should read : ' and therefore welcomes the decision of the European Council to deploy ' .
Our text currently says that we call on the Council to do so , but it has already done it .
Therefore , we ought to adjust the wording accordingly .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the vote on the resolution :
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , my group had a vigorous debate about this compromise resolution yesterday .
On some essential points , it deviates from the text that we as the Socialist Group in the European Parliament originally contributed .
By this I do not mean in any way to call the negotiations into question or to minimise negotiators ' success in achieving a compromise resolution with the other groups , but there is one element that we cannot get through , but which plays a key role in our resolution .
Even though this element , which I will name in a minute , is no longer included in the text , our group has decided to vote in favour of the compromise resolution because we believe that it is important that the European Parliament sends a unified signal .
However , I want to make it clear here that we would very much have liked to see President Saakashvili 's aggressive attitude restrained and also , at the start of the conflict , a firm hold put on a totally inappropriate ...
( Protests from the right and applause from the left )
We would have liked to have seen what happened at the start included in this resolution , if only to make it plain that the very people who are protesting so loudly here now are the same people who want to intensify the conflicts rather than reduce them .
( Applause from the left and protests from the right )
You surely understand that at this point in the voting I have no intention of re-opening a debate .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament thought it was worth explaining its final vote with that remark , and I think everyone understood what that was about .
There is no need to re-open a debate .
We will therefore move on to the vote on the joint motion for a resolution .
6 .
European contract law ( vote )
7 .
Special Report from the European Ombudsman following the draft recommendation to the European Commission in complaint 3453 / 2005 / GG (
8 .
Equality between women and men - 2008 (
Before the vote on Amendment 5 :
Mr President , on the voting list of my group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we proposed to vote in favour of Amendment 5 if the authors of the amendment accepted that it was an addition .
In the conversations we have had with them they have not taken on this proposal ; we therefore wanted the paragraph to remain as it originally appeared in the report and will vote against Amendment 5 if it is not agreed that it is an addition .
( The GUE / NGL Group , author of the amendment , agreed )
9 .
Cloning of animals for food supply ( vote )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the votes : see Minutes )
Formal sitting - Costa Rica
Bienvenido al Parlamento Europeo , Presidente Arias !
President of the Republic of Costa Rica , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to extend a very warm welcome to you , President Arias .
Your visit is a milestone in relations between the European Parliament , the European Union , Costa Rica and Latin America .
Dr Óscar Arias , you have been President of Costa Rica already , from 1986 to 1990 , and in 2006 you were re-elected for a four-year term .
You are best known as a winner of the Nobel Peace Prize , which was awarded to you in 1987 to acknowledge the enormous efforts you have made in the quest for paths to peace in Central America .
President Arias 's efforts in his role as an international broker came to fruition in the Esquipulas Peace Agreement , which was signed by the presidents of all Central American countries on 7 August 1987 .
The European Union supported these efforts wholeheartedly .
The President of Costa Rica is therefore a role model for people throughout the world .
He once said it was vital to have values , principles and ideals and to fight for them .
President Arias , you have been committed to this for many years and the citizens of Costa Rica honoured the results of that work by re-electing you two years ago .
In my speech at the 5th EU-Latin America and Caribbean ( LAC ) summit meeting in Lima , Peru , which took place in May this year , I emphasised the foundational significance of regional integration for the 21st century .
As Jean Monnet , one of the founding fathers of the European Union , expressed it so succinctly , it is a case of ' building union among people , not cooperation between states ' .
President Aria , you too have subscribed to this ideal and worked actively to achieve it .
From the point of view of the European Parliament , it is desirable to conclude an association agreement between Central America and the European Union in the near future - and I said so in Lima as well - and I would like to add , as we discussed in detail in our meeting just now : whenever war breaks out somewhere , vast amounts of money are made available in dollars or euros or whichever currency , but when support is required to establish peaceful relations , then countries argue about far smaller amounts of money .
We must give peace a chance !
( Applause )
That is our message today to the other European institutions .
President Aria , let me say , in conclusion , that we believe that you and your country will continue to play a crucial role in bringing these negotiations to a successful conclusion .
On behalf of all the Members of the European Parliament , I would like to welcome you again .
I hope that your visit will give us the opportunity to strengthen the bonds of friendship between Europe , Costa Rica and Latin America .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to add something a little ' off the record ' : it is wonderful that the President of Costa Rica is here ; and it is a very nice coincidence - by way of exception , I am allowed to mention somebody 's age today - that the Member of the European Commission responsible for external policy , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , is celebrating her 60th birthday today .
That is another happy occasion , and good reason to wish her many happy returns of the day .
( Applause )
President Arias , on behalf of the European Parliament , I would like to thank you most sincerely for this brilliant , distinguished speech .
Your words expressed that you and your country represent democracy and freedom ; you work against violence , against terror , against dictatorship .
When you say that Costa Rica is a small country , then I would like to point out that the population of a country or its geographical area are not the most important things .
What is important is the spirit of a country and its president .
Anyone who has heard your speech knows that President Arias and Costa Rica stand for freedom and democracy .
That makes Costa Rica a big country in the world .
( Applause )
You are a man of peace ; that is why you were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1987 .
However , you did not retire after that ; 21 years have passed , and now you are advocating peace between people and peace with nature .
The European Parliament stands alongside you in upholding these principles .
I would also like to give a warm welcome to the ministers of your government who are accompanying you - the Minister of Foreign Relations , Stagno Ugarte , and the Minister of Foreign Trade , Ruiz Gutiérrez , who are also here in the Chamber , together with many citizens of Costa Rica , who live here in Brussels and in Belgium .
Be proud of your country !
Not in a nationalistic sense , because then countries that have dictatorships and are ruled by violence could also be proud of themselves , but be proud of your country , of Costa Rica , because you champion the right values : democracy , freedom and peace .
Thank you very much once again .
Muchas gracias , President Arias !
( Applause )
1 .
How marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men (
Voting time ( continuation )
We will continue with voting time .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote

( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution and would especially like to thank Mr Brok for his efforts to achieve a broad consensus on it .
I believe that , vital though it is to dialogue with Russia , we must ensure that we do not become totally or predominantly dependent on Russia in terms of energy policy , because that seriously diminishes our potential to hold discussions .
It should not be forgotten that Georgia 's military response relates back to a long history of provocation from the separatist forces , which has recently become very intense , and that Russia used this self-defence measure as grounds for the invasion .
Nevertheless , we should make it our utmost priority to achieve a peaceful solution to this conflict and I wish all those involved speedy success , so that Crimea , Latvia , Lithuania and Kazakhstan do not also go the way of South Ossetia .
( LT ) European politicians are now breaking a long silence and are describing Russia 's actions in Georgia as disproportionate .
No , this is a case of the rights of Russians in other countries being protected by means of military aggression .
Some EU countries that blocked the prospects of Georgia and Ukraine for joining NATO have enabled Russia to pursue its aggressive policy of annexing territories .
Most EU countries are dependent on energy imports from Russia ; they are afraid of the gas tap being turned off .
This allows Russia to start dictating its conditions to the whole of the EU in a truly disproportionate way .
I voted in favour of the resolution , although I feel that the position of both the Commission and Parliament with regard to future relations with Russia has not been defined clearly enough .
( SK ) I believe that we should terminate the visa liberalisation agreement , withdraw the Russian ' peacemaking ' units and replace them with international ones and , thirdly , break off discussions on partnership and cooperation with Russia .
I also think that Europe should adopt a unified and clear stance on the situation in Georgia and not turn a blind eye to Russia 's crude interference with the sovereignty and integrity of a neighbouring state .
Moscow broke international agreements when , at the beginning of August , its troops crossed the border into Georgia , a border which it had itself recognised in the past .
Russian troops not only entered the territory of South Ossetia , but advanced further into the country itself .
I utterly condemn Russia 's recognition of the declaration of independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
We must not forget that , while some celebrate independence , Georgia is mourning the innocent people who lost their lives and homes when the Russian troops invaded .
I am convinced that Europe must bring pressure to bear and , as part of the international community , push for the territorial integrity of Georgia .
The Slovak Republic adhered to the principle of territorial integrity in the case of Kosovo and still does not recognise its separation from Serbia .
In the same spirit , I do not recognise the independence of the Georgian regions and South Ossetia .
Mr President , as one of the authors of the motion for a resolution on the situation in Georgia , I voted in favour of Amendment 1 , inviting the International Olympic Committee to seriously consider whether its decision to grant the 2014 Winter Olympic Games to Sochi is still valid in the light of recent events in the near vicinity of the future Olympic venues .
It would be very irresponsible if the IOC endangered the lives of the Olympic athletes by holding the games in such an unpredictable region .
I need not remind you that , on 5 September 1972 , 11 Olympic athletes were massacred in Munich .
I was there as a doctor for the Soviet Olympic team , and I remember the impact of those tragic events on the Olympic spirit .
Such events should never reoccur .

( DE ) Mr President , I have a lot of respect for Mr Schulz , but his statement today was unacceptable .
Early this morning , President Medvedev described the democratically elected President of Georgia , President Saakashvili , as a ' political corpse ' .
Even from a democratic perspective , that would be outrageous , but when you consider that Mr Medvedev represents a regime that had the predecessor to his predecessor , Zviad Gamsakhurdia , murdered , had the President of Chechnya murdered and has now had an Ingushetian civil rights activist murdered , then it almost amounts to a physical threat .
This is not about whether or not we like Mr Saakashvili ; it is a case of an obligation to support the elected representative of the Georgian people , who have become the victim of an imperialistic act and on whom an attempt at strangulation is being made .
Therefore , I believe it is vital that , following our resolution , which I welcome , we go a step further and station European peacekeeping troops in Georgia .
We do not need a mandate from the United Nations or the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , as Georgia is a sovereign nation and has asked us for a European presence .
We must also ensure that this country can survive and continue in peace , because having Russian troops as peacekeepers , as the UN and the OSCE have organised , is giving the arsonist the role of fire chief .
( PL ) Mr President , this resolution on Georgia is important , and I voted in favour of it , although I feel that the European Union , which was faced with an important test as a result of events in Georgia , failed to pass that test .
The main reason it failed , in my view , is because some very important German interests are involved here , particularly the interests of the German left wing and Chancellor Schröder .
Mr Schulz expressed them here today in no uncertain terms .
The European Union must understand that the Baltic pipeline may be the cause of what effectively amounts to the blackmail of Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , Poland and also Belarus .
This pipeline must be got rid of , and the European Union , despite its declarations , must finally take a stance on a unified energy policy that has no place for the Baltic pipeline under any circumstances , even though this goes against certain German interests .
The Germans must come to terms with the fact that they are either forging a united European Union and their declarations are genuine , or they are acting hypocritically and putting their own interests ahead of those of the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution , but with some heartache .
The war between Russia and Georgia has highlighted differences in dealing with crises .
Georgia has various unsolved problems , but Russia is behaving in the long-established tradition of semi-Asiatic dictators , with skulduggery , provocation and warlike brutality .
This is a danger not only for Ukraine , but also for us .
Our strengths are human rights , democracy , the rule of law and the freedom we have all fought hard together to achieve - freedom from dependency and bondage .
These values urgently require that we defend them through a common foreign and security policy .
Mr President , the British Conservative delegation supported the motion for a resolution on Georgia , which was a balanced one overall .
However , we have objections to paragraph 19 , which calls for a military ESDP mission in Georgia - although we would see nothing controversial in an EU civilian observer presence .
Similarly , paragraph 30 , which claims that the Lisbon Treaty would help the EU 's position with regard to managing this crisis , is , in our view , unfounded .
We support a more robust common external energy security policy under the CFSP with regard to Russian oil and gas imports , but we do not see what difference the Lisbon Treaty would have made to managing this crisis .
This is not about EU global weakness in foreign affairs , but about Russian bullying and revanchism in the South Caucasus .
( CS ) I abstained , because the answer to the question ' is it true that the Georgians attacked a sleeping city with rocket launchers ? ' is ' yes ' .
( FR ) Mr President , we go along with the question Mr Lehne would like to ask the Commission .
In fact , we think that the problems of contract law in Europe should respond to two key needs , which go hand in hand .
The first is the need for clarity and simplicity , the second is for security .
We are pleased that the rapporteur has taken account of the remarkable work done by the ' Société de legislation comparée ' , and we hope this work will be done with reference to our common heritage , Roman law .
The rules of contractual autonomy , the rules on validity , defects of consent and publicity have been fixed in our civilisation since ancient times .
It is to those we need to refer ; to this common legal heritage of our civilisation .
We also hope that , for transactions to be secure , the unification of rules on conflict of laws should precede the unification of the substantive rules .
Contracts entered into between people in different places , and particularly the difficult issue of the tentative offer , or pollicitation , and acceptance , the procedures , timings and proof can all be unified without necessarily having to unify the substantive rules of our different legislations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago on a small island near Sardinia , without violence and in the interests of environmental conservation , Sardinian separatists declared a new republic with the poetic , Polynesian-sounding name of the ' Republic of Maluventu ' .
I would like to point out that the President has already received the map inspired by the UN map and the sacrosanct principle of the self-determination of peoples .
Europe has always stood side by side with anyone fighting for freedom by peaceful and democratic means .
Long live the battle of the Sardinian people for self-determination !
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the García Pérez report in spite of my conviction that men and women are of course equal and must of course receive equal pay for equal work .
We still forget far too often that gender equality is one of the definite achievements of today 's Europe , of the European world , of the Western world , and that this principle is by no means established in some other parts of the world .
We should never forget this .
That is only one aspect of this report , however .
The report is also brimming with a great many other points with which I fundamentally disagree .
One example is its support for the endless electoral quotas for women , as though women were helpless creatures unable to obtain posts themselves based on their own abilities .
Another is the constant support for abortion : I ask myself what this is doing in this report .
It was for all these reasons and many others that I voted against the García Pérez report .
Mr President , for some bizarre reason I broke the trend of a lifetime in this Parliament today by not voting against a report by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - I abstained .
In the past , I have constantly voted against these reports because they are normally full of complete rubbish .
But , as a married father with two girls , I try to read every word of these reports and guess what they actually mean .
I have some concerns about the committee this stuff comes from - I do not really think we need a Women 's Committee in this place when we have a Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
There are some phrases in this report - the ' feminisation of poverty ' , for example - which mean absolutely nothing but sound great to the PC brigade that resides out there .
I do wonder what this committee would feel about , say , those who break the glass ceiling : for example , a mother of five , whose youngest child suffers from Down 's syndrome , whose eldest daughter might be five months pregnant - as in the potential Vice-President of the United States , Sarah Palin ?
I think that committee would not like the fact that she has broken through the glass ceiling .
But I abstained on this report .
( PL ) Mr President , although I am a supporter of equal rights , I voted against the resolution on equality between women and men .
This resolution incorporated some crypto-abortionist points and thus violates the principle of subsidiarity in this sphere .
The fact that Amendment 2 - an amendment that removes these points - was rejected in the vote made it necessary to reject the entire resolution .
It is a shame that the European Parliament can so frivolously violate the basic principles according to which the European Union functions .
( CS ) Mr President , I voted against the ban on cloning .
A ban on cloning is an attack on the freedom of scientific research and on the freedom of enterprise .
Restricting these freedoms will not do the European Union any good , but will lead to a further drain of scientists to the United States of America and other countries around the world where there are no such bans .
A ban on trade in such products will then lead to further trade disputes within the World Trade Organization .
We do not want such developments .
The health and other risks of cloning must be properly assessed in accordance with the applicable processes and procedures and the results must be communicated to the public .
The European Food Safety Authority carried out a scientific consultation on this subject in the first half of this year and the results of the consultation do not provide any reasons to ban cloning .
Mr President , I voted against the resolution on banning cloned animals in our food chain , due to the lack of scientific rigour underpinning our approach in Parliament .
Whether it is a legislative vote , a resolution on a parliamentary question , or an own-initiative report , decisions taken by the European Parliament and plenary votes are seriously devalued if they do not stand up to peer-reviewed scientific scrutiny .
The credibility and integrity of our work , therefore , is legitimately opened to question .
Mr President , I voted against the Svensson report , and I am grateful for the opportunity to say why .
My reasons are as follows .
First , no consumer knows everything , nor does any legislator . That is why advertising is a vital part of commerce and trade .
Second , each advertisement ( unfortunately or fortunately ) must be obtrusive , attractive , striking and eye-catching .
This is the result of the fact that there are always at least a few producers selling the same product , and each of them wants to sell just its own product .
Third , Ms Svensson 's attempt is attentive to these principles and tries to improve market forces with artificial legislating steps , which will harm and distort natural market forces stemming from the supply and demand relationship .
That is why I voted against .
( NL ) Mr President , if I had to summarise my reasons for voting against the Svensson report , I could say quite simply that , in my opinion , this report is complete nonsense .
It is the umpteenth report in which this House - which is after all officially deemed to defend the freedom of European citizens - has called for restriction of freedom and for censorship .
Indeed , several provisions of the Svensson report , such as paragraph 14 on censorship , are straight out of Fahrenheit 451 , a book portraying a world in which books are banned and critical thought suppressed .
I am very critical of this European Parliament in any case , but it does have to take care not to make itself a hopeless laughing stock and turn into a kind of clone of the Supreme Soviet .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Svensson .
Her report is one of the most patronising , interventionist , politically correct texts of this whole parliamentary term .
She really does seem to be convinced that advertising and marketing are a big conspiracy to contribute , right from the first years of a child 's socialisation , towards the gender discrimination which reinforces the perpetuation of lifelong inequalities between women and men .
I am not making this up : the majority of that sentence was taken verbatim from Recital M of the text .
The report of course advocates more legislation and the establishment of bodies specifically concerned with monitoring compliance with all these new rules .
I would say ' jobs for the boys ' , if that phrase were not so terribly ' gender insensitive ' .
Paragraph 14 of the text takes the biscuit , advocating the elimination of what it calls ' messages conveying gender stereotypes ' from textbooks , toys , video games , the Internet and advertising .
Censorship , in other words .
I do not know whether the term ' textbooks ' is also aimed at literature but , if that is the case , we can start straight away by burning works by Shakespeare in the street .
Mr President , I reverted to type for this report , and voted against .
I would like to detail some of the reasons why .
I have a huge amount of respect for the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson , who has done a lot of work in this area and is one of the strongest female role models that this Parliament could put forward .
However , certain points in the report - some of which were voted down - were almost beyond belief .
There were the calls for the gender thought police in paragraph 9 .
There was the challenge to traditional gender roles in paragraph 13 and , in paragraph 14 , something approaching a hatred of new images on the internet .
Male and female forms have always been used in advertising .
The male forms tend to look better than mine and the female forms tend to look better , say , than some Members of this House .
That is advertising for you .
Even the European Commission - if you look at its website , or any of the publicity it drapes upon its buildings - uses images of men and women who are slightly better-looking than the average .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote in favour of the report because its aim is global harmonisation of the classification , labelling and packaging of chemicals .
This can contribute to safer handling of chemicals , which improves the environment and health .
However , we would have liked to see the labelling of chemicals in category five .
These chemicals are often found in the home and are a major cause of poisoning in children .
The opening at international level of the debate on chemical substances and the part they play in our lives dates back to 1980 , first within the International Labour Organization and then within the United Nations , which adopted the GHS ( Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals ) in December 2002 , with a revision in 2005 .
These decisions have had an impact at Community level with the adoption of several documents .
At this point in time , what we are dealing with is merely the proposal for a regulation on classification and labelling of substances and mixtures whereby the European Union aims to implement the international criteria agreed by the United Nations Economic and Social Council for the classification and labelling of hazardous substances and mixtures , also known as the Globally Harmonised System ( GHS ) .
Using this system , the aim is to focus on protecting human health and the environment without hindering the movement of substances and mixtures , setting out classification and information criteria , including requirements for labelling and safety data sheets .
This relates to upholding safety in the transport of hazardous goods and health and safety prevention for consumers , workers and the environment .
We therefore voted in favour of these reports .
in writing . - ( RO ) Chemicals are produced and marketed globally and their risk is the same all over the world .
Substances considered dangerous in one country may have a different regime in another country .
There should be no different description of the same product in various countries .
In addition to the need for information , the main goal of GHS ( Globally Harmonised System ) is consumer protection .
The new legislation in the field of classification , labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures shall offer increased protection to human health and the environment .
I believe compromises have been reached , which contain good solutions for consumer health .
The professional users of chemicals and worldwide consumers can benefit from global harmonisation .
Following the enforcement of this report , the protection of people using these dangerous substances shall increase and enterprises shall be more efficient , reducing the number of accidents .
The use of these dangerous substances shall be safer and shall provide users with correct , complete and accurate information , ensuring better consumer protection .
in writing . - The Sartori reports deal with important matters of relevance to all our citizens .
Chemicals are manufactured and traded on a global basis and their hazards remain the same wherever they are used ; accordingly it is appropriate that the classification and labelling of hazardous substances be suitably harmonised .
The package agreed today represents a sensible compromise reached between the political groups and the institutions and I was therefore able to support it .
The report legalises the production of hydrogen powered vehicles .
This is one of the rare documents that takes a deliberate approach to the problem of alternative fuel for vehicles .
It is particularly praiseworthy in so far as this is an entirely innovative technology that is totally harmless to the environment , as the combustion gases are water .
I have no doubt that the document is inspired by the manufacturer of the vehicle used by Hans-Gert Pöttering , but I deliberately voted in favour of it .
The June Movement is evaluating fuel cells that use hydrogen as an energy carrier based on renewable energy such as solar , wind and wave power as a system for transport because it is a clean fuel , i.e. there is no particle pollution and at the same time the fuel can be produced using renewable energy .
However , overall , hydrogen powered vehicles have a very low energy efficiency of 20 % from source to wheel .
This is far outperformed by electric vehicles running on computer-controlled lithium batteries , which have an energy efficiency level of 80-90 % . At the same time , millions of batteries could solve the storage problem for renewable energy .
Therefore , we would like to work towards the Commission taking steps towards promoting this alternative .
in writing . - This report allows for the bridging of the internal market gap for hydrogen vehicles , having in mind the imperatives of consumer protection .
It is urgent to include hydrogen vehicles in the EU type approval framework , thus fostering the research and development of this environmentally friendly technology throughout the whole of the internal market .
Moreover , technical specifications have been established to ensure the reliability and safety of hydrogen components and systems , as well as the clear identification of hydrogen powered vehicles through labelling , which would be important should an emergency arise .
in writing . - I voted in favour on the Weisgerber report .
The potential of hydrogen as a clean form of power has long been recognised , and technologies in this area are constantly being improved .
Nevertheless , hydrogen power can only be truly effective as a clean and green energy if the hydrogen comes from sustainable and , ideally , renewable sources , and this fact has been noted in the final report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Weisgerber 's report on type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles .
Fostering environmentally friendly alternative fuels in the EU is an important step that absolutely must be supported in these times .
Hydrogen powered vehicles lend themselves to this purpose but they must guarantee a high level of safety and environmental protection .
To ensure that this is so , unified conditions for type-approval in the European Union are urgently needed .
Without EU-wide regulations on the classification of hydrogen powered vehicles there is a risk that the one-off permits issued by the Member States will distort competition and that enterprises will find that investing in hydrogen vehicles no longer pays off .
A unified type-approval system offers citizens the protection of an EU-wide directive and promotes an increase in the number of environmentally safe vehicles , which is very important .
in writing . - I welcome Anja Weisgerber 's report on type-approval of hydrogen-powered motor vehicles .
The report is a positive step in helping to stimulate the industry to intensify research and development efforts .
Encouraging the entrance of hydrogen-powered vehicles into the internal market will contribute considerably to achieving Europe 's climate change targets .
I voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) There is no doubt that hydrogen power is a technology with future potential , but it has by no means reached maturity .
Not only are acquisition costs still too high to be financed , but the manufacture and storage of hydrogen is expensive .
Furthermore , even if the cars themselves do not produce any harmful emissions , it is still not clear how the hydrogen is to be produced in a way that uses as little energy as possible and does not generate CO2 .
In conclusion , we also do not yet know whether battery- or fuel-cell-powered vehicles will become the norm , but it is important in any case that we support alternative technologies in order to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels .
Accordingly , I voted in favour of the Weisgerber report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as this legislation will pave the way for full-scale production of these cars and provide European drivers with real alternatives in the near future .
This new law will help boost the development of these vehicles while ensuring they are reliable and safe , and measures included in this report will ensure that the maximum environmental benefits from hydrogen-powered vehicles can be achieved .
in writing . - ( RO ) Building car engines based on hydrogen represents a guarantee for the development of ecological means of transport in the future and the protection of public health .
In order to obtain environmental benefits related to the use of vehicles based on hydrogen , the latter should be produced sustainably , improving noise and air quality in advance .
This regulation will make sure that hydrogen-based systems are as safe as the conventional propulsion technologies , contributing to the stimulation of industry for building such type of vehicles .
It is necessary to create an adequate framework in order to accelerate the placing on the market of vehicles with innovating propulsion technologies , so that the transportation industry would contribute significantly to a cleaner and safer future .
Taking into consideration the global problems caused by climate change and the lack of energy sources , the hydrogen vehicles should be promoted at international level , especially in the countries under development , as well as in the USA , in order to guarantee a better environmental protection against global warming .
For this reason , I voted in favour of this proposal for regulation , which represents a first step toward a cleaner Europe .
in writing . - Given the current and future problems affecting motor vehicle engines run on petroleum , it is clear that developments of alternatives are vital .
The approval of specifics relating to this are a solid step forward .
The relationship between aggregate consumption of oil through motor car use and that of increasing respiratory diseases , as well as concomitant rises in pollution , means that ' next-generation ' vehicle design has to reflect this .
Clearly , the aspect of hydrogen generation through the use of electricity raises wider considerations , including how to locate the energy for the generation of the original electricity .
However , this report helps to move the debate and the industry behind the car of the future and in the right direction .
Hydrogen is universally acknowledged as the environmentally ' cleanest ' and most acceptable fuel , as its combustion in air or oxygen produces only water .
Despite the significant problems associated with storing hydrogen and putting it into a fuel tank , the ceaseless work being carried out by research centres all over the world indicates that this is the fuel of the future .
As a fuel , hydrogen will provide us with an environmentally safe renewable energy source .
The introduction of EU type-approval criteria for hydrogen powered vehicles is essential to the proper functioning of a single market and to ensuring a high level of safety and protection of the natural environment .
I am voting in favour of this resolution in the hope that it will bring a swift and peaceful end to this tragic crisis .
I think that two aspects need to be confirmed : on the one hand , the principle of the inviolability of the territorial integrity of the various states is unassailable , and on the other , the need should be underlined for absolute respect for the rights of the minorities concerned .
Evidently , following the events in Kosovo , the voice of the international community is undoubtedly weaker and far less credible , but diplomatic efforts must be stepped up to bring about a credible and concrete solution .
However , while the world 's governments are busy , we need to act urgently to tackle the growing humanitarian crisis linked with the presence of an increasing number of refugees .
The European Union must set up a task force to relieve the suffering of hundreds of thousands of people who are in need .
I am in touch with the international liaison at UNICEF , who has confirmed the severity of the situation .
I hope that the European Commission will play its part , as it has done in other situations .
The MEPs of the New Democracy ( ND ) party have decided to abstain from the final vote on the resolution on the situation in Georgia .
This decision was taken because the final draft resolution , which was put to the vote , was worded in such a way that the sense of equilibrium present in the previous draft resolutions was removed .
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this joint resolution because it is important that the Union send a strong message to Russia 's leadership .
Nevertheless , it fails to adequately criticise and apportion blame to the Georgian leadership 's role in triggering the crisis .
As far as I am concerned , under the current leadership , Georgia is definitely not on track to join NATO in the foreseeable future .
My second point is that this crisis reinforces and strengthens the requirement for a European common foreign and security policy .
The sooner this element of the Lisbon Treaty is implemented , the better .
in writing . - ( SV ) The situation in Georgia and the position taken regarding it are foreign policy issues .
The opinion of the June List is that neither the European Parliament nor any other EU institution should issue a statement on such matters because foreign policy is to be pursued at national level , not by the European Union .
Hardly surprisingly , the European Parliament is making the most of the opportunity to issue propaganda in favour of a stronger common foreign and security policy and , even worse , the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
Here today we can already see that different Member States have different opinions on the question of Georgia .
Thus it is not desirable for the EU to speak with a single voice because that voice will have to speak counter to the opinions of many Member States .
The numerous references to NATO are also very problematic as there are countries which are members of the EU but not members of NATO .
The situation in Georgia is very serious , especially in view of all the civilian victims of the conflict .
However , the EU should not pursue a foreign policy and therefore we have voted no to this resolution .
The resolution approved by the majority in Parliament , which we voted against , is part and parcel of the anti-Russian campaign of those using this course of action to try to cover up their own deep responsibility for the worsening international situation and to provide a pretext for dangerous new steps in the escalating confrontation .
Among other aspects , the resolution hides the fact that at the root of the current international situation and the situation in the Caucasus is the new arms race and the militarisation of international relations championed by the USA and NATO ( with its offensive strategic concept and its enlargement to Russia 's borders ) , the stationing of new US bases and missiles in Europe and the growing militarisation of this continent , the aggression against and dismembering of Yugoslavia and the recognition of the independence of the Serbian province of Kosovo outside international law , the attacks on and occupation of Afghanistan and Iraq , that is to say , imperialism ( and inter-capitalist contradictions ) .
Some of those who are now calling for international law , territorial integrity , sovereignty and the independence of States to be respected are the very same people who championed and supported the aggression against Yugoslavia or Iraq .
What hypocrisy !
The road to peace and safeguarding the future of humanity lies in respecting the principles laid down in Article 7 ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of the Portuguese Constitution .
in writing . - I am satisfied that my own group 's amendment was successful .
We have asked that the Russian and Georgian authorities provide information as to the location of cluster bombs dropped during hostilities , so as to hasten de-mining activities .
Parliament has condemned the use of force and believes that conflicts in the Caucasus cannot be solved by violence ; the speedy clear-up of mines will prevent future casualties of civilians .
I voted in favour of Amendments 2 and 5 , as in my opinion Russia is making a claim to restore the territorial boundaries of the former Soviet Union by employing various means .
By its actions in Georgia , Russia has once again demonstrated its readiness to invade and occupy the territory of a sovereign state under the pretence of defending the rights of its citizens .
To my mind , in its resolution the EU must clearly show the gratuitousness of Russia 's expansionist plans , especially regarding the Baltic countries .
In voting against clause 2 of paragraph 27 I would like to say that the EU cannot and has no right to decide whether Georgia is still in the process of joining NATO .
We are only able to state the fact that on 3 March 2008 NATO confirmed the possibility of Georgia joining this organisation ; however , it is up to the sovereign state of Georgia to make the decision .
Ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the resolution on the situation in Georgia .
I did so not because this is an ideal resolution ; there is no doubt in my mind that our resolution could be better .
I wavered on whether to support the draft resolution .
My doubts were stirred up by Mr Schulz just before the vote .
He expressed his regret that the resolution failed to criticise the Georgian President .
This remarkable statement convinced me that the resolution could have been a lot worse and could have been wrecked by the pro-Russian lobby in the European Parliament .
In what he said , Mr Schulz underestimated Parliament 's unity over the crisis in the Caucasus .
It is now clear that it would have been better if the European Parliament had held an extraordinary session earlier on the subject of Georgia .
It is a shame that we did not present our position during a Council sitting .
It is a shame that we did not put forward our prescriptions and our views before the leaders of the Member States got together .
in writing . - Mr President , by taking an unequivocal position against Russia and engaging Europe in the resolution of the conflict , the European Council and a majority in Parliament are launching a process as dangerous as the one which plunged the continent into the First World War .
This process is the result of the ill-prepared enlargements to the East , which bring us closer to the conflict zones of the Balkans and the Caucasus .
What then will the consequences of Turkey 's membership be , which borders Iraq and Iran ?
Furthermore , by recognising the independence of the Serbian province of Kosovo , our governments have opened a Pandora 's box , challenging the territorial integrity not only of Georgia , but of most of the European countries , both East and West .
If , as the Socialists , Liberals , PPE and Verts would like , Georgia became a member of NATO and joined a European Union governed by the Treaty of Lisbon , our nations would enter into conflict with Russia .
The Europe of Brussels signifies war .
More than ever , faced with a more powerful China and the Islamist threat , it is time to build another Europe , the Europe of sovereign states , united with Russia through the bonds of civilisation constituted by our Greek and Christian heritage .
in writing . - I welcome the swift action taken by the French presidency in working towards a solution to the conflict between Georgia and Russia .
While criticism could be aimed at Tbilisi 's military engagement in South Ossetia , the retaliatory action taken by Moscow is both disproportionate and a clear violation of Georgia 's territorial integrity .
I would call on the European Parliament to send a clear message to the Russian executive that its actions are unacceptable .
I therefore voted in favour of the resolution .
There is every reason to provide humanitarian aid to the people of Georgia and also to condemn military intervention in the region not in dispute and the use of cluster bombs by Russia .
The aspects of this resolution I reject are its taking sides with Georgia and its attempt to punish and isolate Russia and surround it by NATO for recognising the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
A great many of today 's European countries were created by in effect breaking away from another country , issuing a unilateral declaration of independence and ultimately gaining recognition from other countries .
Most European countries came into being after 1830 , particularly in waves after 1918 and 1991 .
Kosovo has been the most recent example .
There is absolutely no reason to declare Kosovo 's genesis exceptional , or to pretend this will be the last time a new country is created .
It is never the last time .
As long as there are regions where the majority of inhabitants consider the ruling government useless or even threatening , perceiving it as foreign domination , new countries will continue to form .
Let us acknowledge that the inhabitants of Abkhazia and South Ossetia do not wish to be subordinate to Georgia .
in writing . - ( DE ) Russia is important to the EU not only as a supplier of energy but also as a counterbalance to America 's drive for world domination .
For these reasons , but also to avoid jeopardising its credibility , it is important for the EU to play a neutral role as a mediator between Georgia and Russia .
There are very large Russian populations in many states of the former Soviet Union , such as Ukraine .
That makes it easy to understand why the Kremlin feels it has a particular responsibility to these Russian people groups .
The EU could help to negotiate a solution that would be acceptable to all parties and , for example , speak up for generous ethnic minority rights for Russians in the post-Soviet era , which would fit in with the European Union 's oft-quoted human rights goals .
With this in mind , then , I favour the position worked out at the special summit and am against the ' vassals ' attitude towards the United States in this report , which is why I voted against it .
The joint resolution upholds EU policy , which is exploiting the crisis in the Caucasus .
This is an attempt to step up the EU 's intervention and presence in this key region .
Masquerading as a peacemaker , it is proposing a series of measures to facilitate its consolidation and intervention in the Caucasus .
The resolution is provocative because it does not condemn the brutal attack by the Euro-NATO government of Georgia and the murder of thousands of civilians .
On the contrary , it offers every possible support to Georgia 's policy and its accession to NATO .
The condemnation of the breakaway move by South Ossetia and Abkhazia is laughable hypocrisy , to say the least , in the light of the dismemberment of Yugoslavia and the recent EU decision on Kosovo .
Amid the web of conflict and rivalry between the EU , the United States and Russia , the European Parliament 's resolution is almost identical to the US policy because it takes a one-sided stance against Russia in order to gain a better negotiating position for a share of Eurasia 's markets and wealth-generating resources .
The aggravation of the conflict and rivalry by the imperialists and Russia 's attempt to enhance its position in the imperialist pyramid create new dangers for the peoples of the Caucasus and the wider area .
The people 's answer can and must be to join in the anti-imperialist struggle .
I have voted , as did all the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left as one , against the resolution on the situation in the Caucasus , because it views the crisis through the distorting lens of pro-Bush policy and expediency .
The worst and most provocative aspect of the resolution is the fact that it avoids the slightest criticism of the opportunistic course of action taken by Georgian Prime Minister Saakashvili , who sparked off the crisis so as not to displease his American protectors .
The position taken by the majority in the European Parliament directly opposes that held by the same political forces six months ago on the Kosovo issue .
Stability in the Caucasus region cannot be achieved through a policy of playing second fiddle to the United States , which turns a blind eye to the true state of affairs and itself pursues a policy of double standards .
in writing . - I have voted in favour of Amendment 2 because I consider it inadmissible that borders could be changed under the pretext of ' care ' for the minorities in neighbouring countries .
I also voted for mentioning that Georgia was promised NATO membership at the Bucharest Summit and that she is on right track for the following reasons :
a .
It is true : Georgia was assured that she would become a NATO member and that is officially inscribed in the Final Communiqué of the Bucharest NATO summit ,
b .
At least one important European leader has said - in the context of the recent war with Russia - that Georgia 's vocation for NATO would be fulfilled ,
c .
The EU is bound to guarantee Georgia 's security , independence and territorial integrity by virtue of the Partnership Agreement concluded by the EU with Georgia within the European Neighbourhood Policy and since it cannot do it - because it is not structured for that - it means that the only institution which can do so is NATO , of which the majority of the EU countries are also members .
in writing . - ( FR ) Though not perfect , the resolution adopted by the European Parliament deserves to be supported in that it confirms the unity demonstrated by Europe on the resolution of the situation in Georgia .
This complex crisis proves how urgent it is for the EU to develop a proper regional strategy towards the Caucasus and Russia .
Consequently , the EU would be well advised to put forward the idea of holding an international conference like the Helsinki Conference , which gave birth to the OSCE in 1975 .
For the time being , it is necessary to stop the justified report concerning the negotiations on strengthening the partnership between the EU and Russia from failing to mention the need to construct a balanced dialogue with the country encompassing all issues of common interest , including democratic values and the energy dimension .
In this regard , it is a pity that the European Parliament is not making a clearer call for a review of our energy strategy which , in addition to the announced diversification of our sources of supply , should also provide for the development of renewable energies and of energy saving .
I abstained from voting on the European Parliament resolution on the events in South Ossetia and Abkhazia since the Parliament took a one-sided , unbalanced position towards Kosovo 's unilateral declaration of independence from a normalised , democratised Serbia .
Parliament did not consider it appropriate to take a similar resolution on Kosovo in the name of the same principles of respect for international law and integrity of national borders that it is invoking today to denounce recognition of the independence of Ossetia and Abkhazia by Moscow .
We all know why : we did not want to criticise the countries of the West - which were quick to recognise the unilateral and illegal declaration of independence by Kosovo - for the things for which we are today quite rightly criticising Russia .
Although the Georgian government 's military initiatives , like those of Russia , should be firmly condemned and should make way for a diplomatic settlement and international mediation , the European Union cannot allow itself to apply double standards to the many ' frozen conflicts ' of the aftermath of the Cold War .
Nothing would be worse for the security of our continent than for the European Union to confuse alliances and allegiance to the ' crime-inducing ' politics of the Bush government in this part of the world , as it has in other parts .
in writing . - While the resolution expresses many views that I can support - in particular , the approach to the final status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , and the call for Russian troops to be withdrawn from Georgia proper - it also contains many unhelpful elements .
The EU could play a useful role in providing civil observers and monitors and in humanitarian assistance .
However , it should not seek to exploit the Georgia crisis for its own ends by calling for a strengthening of EU defence and security policy , by putting monitors under an ESDP rubric , or by endorsing the rejected Treaty of Lisbon .
Furthermore , it was disappointing that the phrase ' Georgia is still on track eventually to join the ( NATO ) Alliance ' was removed in the vote .
I therefore abstained on this resolution .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party welcomes this resolution , which shows strong and clear unity between EU Member States in the Council and the European Parliament on this vital issue .
We mourn the tragic loss of life in this conflict and condemn the violent actions of both sides .
We support moves towards supporting a lasting peace , the provision of humanitarian aid to victims and reconstruction efforts .
We voted to abstain on the second part of Paragraph 27 , as we are clear that this is a resolution aimed at resolving the situation in Georgia .
To discuss the future membership of an external organisation such as NATO would only distract from this important focus .
We wholeheartedly support the resolution 's call to ensure a lasting resolution to the conflict on the basis of the EU-brokered six-point agreement , and we call on Russia to act decisively to meet the agreed conditions of this ceasefire plan , thus allowing for the resumption of negotiations on the EU-Russia Partnership Agreement .
in writing . - ( CS ) I abstained from voting on the European Parliament 's resolution on the situation in Georgia , not because I would be casting doubt on the legitimacy of the Georgian stance but , on the contrary , because I would have been approving the improper and aggressive steps taken by Russia .
As has often been the case recently , some Eurofederalist Members have once more misused the conflict in Georgia and the associated resolution to call for the early ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
It was this improper behaviour that caused me to abstain .
in writing . - The Extraordinary European Council of September 1 demonstrated and affirmed the unity of the EU , which represents progress compared to 2003 , when the situation in Iraq created questions regarding EU unity .
Europe must continue to express its solidarity and determination concerning Russian compliance with international laws and standards .
The resolution that we voted for today emphasises that the partnership between Europe and Russia must be based on mutual respect for the fundamental rules of European cooperation .
Russia continues to violate certain conditions of the cease-fire agreements , behaviour that must be met with unified political and economic pressure to encourage Russia to completely withdraw all troops from Georgian territory and reduce their military presence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
It is critical that immediate action is taken to ensure the continued delivery of assistance to displaced victims of this conflict .
These troubling events perpetrated by Russia should be met with unified European resolve .
In order to protect against future challenges of this nature , Europe must find alternative energy sources and strengthen the European Security and Defence Policy as set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution from the Legal Affairs committee .
The Common Frame of Reference will be an important legal development , and we as yet do not know what form it will take .
It is vital that this Parliament and stakeholders in all countries and legal systems are fully informed of all future developments .
in writing . - Despite the complex title this report concerns a complaint in 2001 of maladministration by the Commission in relation to the German Government 's failure to properly implement the Working Time Directive .
The case was referred to the European Parliament by way of a special report from the European Ombudsman .
Referring a special report to the European Parliament is the last substantive step the Ombudsman may take in seeking a satisfactory response on behalf of a citizen .
My report , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , endorses the Ombudsman 's conclusion that the failure of the Commission to deal with the petitioner 's complaint for almost eight years constitutes an instance of maladministration .
The report does not address the content of the Working Time Directive itself and therefore an amendment which sought to raise the content of the Directive was opposed as irrelevant to this report .
The report on the Commission 's refusal to examine a German doctor 's complaint regarding violation of labour legislation on working hours by the German State highlights the EU 's class-ridden nature .
The Commission reacts with lightning speed when the interests of capital are at stake ; it forces Member States to comply with Community law , but when workers complain of violation of their rights , the Commission disregards their complaints .
The Commission 's provocative position is a natural consequence of the EU 's anti-popular policy , which promotes a return to mediaeval employment conditions for the working class in order to safeguard the profitability of the European monopolies .
In this context , the Council of Employment Ministers last July adopted an amendment to the EU Working Time Directive .
This anti-labour travesty divides the concept of working time into active and inactive time - the latter is not considered to be paid working time - and gives employers the right to employ their workers for up to 13 hours a day , 65 hours a week , while paying them nothing whatsoever in overtime .
The rights of the working class and employees are not secured by complaining to the Commission , but by rallying and intensifying the class struggle against capital and the EU to overturn this policy .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List considers that working hours should be regulated at national level .
This report should therefore not be dealt with in the European Parliament , even if it formally addresses the Commission 's treatment of a case of infringement .
The principle of subsidiarity , which is praised on every conceivable ceremonial occasion , is fundamental here .
When the majority of the European Parliament gets into the details , it is exactly the opposite ; nothing can in fact be left to the Member States .
The Working Time Directive is in itself a clear infringement of the principle of subsidiarity .
Countries have different business structures .
Some have heavy processing industries , others have light industry , others again have a great deal of tourism and seasonal industries , and the public sector is structured in different ways .
It is therefore entirely inappropriate to attempt to regulate the working hours of the whole of the EU , nor is there any reason to do so .
Those who argue in favour of this say that we will otherwise have problems with social dumping in the EU .
This is an extremely severe accusation against the countries which we have accepted as members of the EU , which all fulfil the Copenhagen criteria and which are all states governed by law with a free right to unionise .
This report is yet another attempt by the EU to interfere in the working hours issue which is the responsibility of the Member States .
We have voted no , with reference to the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - I was able to support the De Rossa report and hope that the Commission fully takes on board the Ombudsman 's recommendations in relation to the rule of law and the principle of good administration .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are fully supportive of the principle of equality of opportunity between women and men .
We agree with some aspects of this report such as : the need to make greater progress on dealing with the pay gap between women and men ; the promotion of entrepreneurship among women ; the importance of policies at national level that seeks to promote an improving work-life balance .
As our Shadow Minister for Women has said : " A Conservative approach to gender equality will be based upon a belief in equality of opportunity and equitable legal , commercial , social and political treatment " .
However , we are concerned by certain aspects of the report such as : the call for new legal bases in EU law and the request for a decision on the " full communitarisation of policies " .
Also , we cannot support the creation of a costly " European Institute for Gender Equality " as set out in the report ; such matters must be for individual Member States to pursue .
For these reasons , we have decided to abstain on this report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution based on the report by my Spanish fellow Member Mrs García Pérez on equality between men and women .
More than ever we need to attend to the double dimension of the subject : on the one hand , ensuring equality in all policy areas ( gender mainstreaming ) and , on the other hand , introducing targeted measures to curb discrimination against women , including awareness-raising campaigns , the exchange of best practice , dialogue with citizens and public-private partnership initiatives .
All subjects are important : unequal pay , participation in decision-making , particularly public decisions , the reconciliation of private and professional life , and violence against women .
Gender equality is an important cause , for which much has already been done , but it must receive the full attention of the humanist political forces for progress and must be debated everywhere , including in intercultural dialogue .
in writing . - ( FR ) There are sometimes fortunate , perhaps even amusing , coincidences .
Indeed , we are taking the opportunity given to us by this annual report on equality between men and women , coming at the same time as the French Presidency of the European Union , to highlight a marginal but entertaining point which is at worst a lack of tact and at best a perfect application of the principle of equality between women and men , which means not discriminating between them .
A few days ago , on the occasion of the start of Mr Sarkozy 's Presidency , which received such a lot of media attention , MEPs were given gifts .
In the free document wallet , notably there was a tie .
Of the 785 MEPs , nearly a third are women .
Were they not entitled to a small personalised gift too , or are we supposed to conclude from this that women also have to wear ties ?
It still seems to be the case that , when big debates are taking place on the role and position of women in political life , boorish behaviour very often still gets the better of courteousness .
We cannot vote in favour of the Report on Equality between women and men - 2008 , because it is trying to persuade women that settling for flexible labour relations and the reduction and commercialisation of whatever social benefits remain for the working-class family is a necessary evil , so that women will adapt to the EU policy of reconciliation of family obligations and professional engagements .
The valid findings on the pay gap between men and women are not being addressed , let alone eliminated ; instead , there are mere exhortations or the instituting of an International Equal Pay Day .
The measures proposed to combat gender stereotypes and for equal representation in decision-making , elimination of every kind of gender-based violence , etc. are a move in the right direction but will remain wishful thinking as long as the root cause responsible for these conditions and maintaining them remains , namely the capitalist system , which generates and aggravates discrimination and inequality .
True equality requires a struggle for a change in the balance of power .
Such a policy favours the workers and abolition of the EU strategy .
There should also be a fight against the profiteering of capital and the unaccountability of employers .
No measure will be effective unless the popular movement in each country is strengthened and targets are set for substantial change , right up to the level where power is exercised .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs García Pérez on ' Equality between women and men - 2008 ' as I consider that reducing the disparities between women and men is fundamental to establishing a fairer society as well as being a determining factor for the European Union 's economic growth , prosperity and competitiveness .
I should like to reiterate the rapporteur 's proposal , which seeks to strengthen European gender equality legislation .
Despite the actions that have been carried out in this area , there has not been significant progress at European level , in particular with regard to the pay gap between women and men , the participation of women in decision making , combating violence against women , access to education and lifelong learning or even in reconciling professional , family and personal life .
However , I regret that Amendment 1 has been approved , thereby removing the important reference to the need for the Commission and the Council to create a clear legal basis for combating all forms of violence against women .
This report underlines important aspects concerning the types of discrimination that persist in society , focusing especially on the area of work , pay , poverty , pensions and reforms .
It also broaches the issues of violence against and trafficking of women , the issues of education and training , lack of social facilities and access to services for the care of children and dependants and promoting women 's sexual and reproductive health .
However , there are still some contradictions , as is the case with the actions proposed in the field of employment , where a proposal we put forward was rejected despite another having been approved that safeguards important aspects for women .
I am referring to the following proposal that is now part of the EP 's final resolution : ' ... calls upon the Member States to take effective action designed to enforce the rules on welfare and employment and to make jobs which respect the rights of employees available in the various activity sectors , thereby ensuring that workers ( in particular women ) earn decent wages and are entitled to health and safety at work , to social protection and to trade-union freedom , as a contribution to eliminating discrimination between men and women at work ' .
Hence our vote in favour , although we regret that other positive proposals were rejected .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List strongly distances itself from all forms of discrimination .
The EU is a union of values , and the Member States must treat all groups in society in a fair and equal manner .
However , the report contains a proposal from which we strongly distance ourselves , namely that the European Parliament is to call on the Commission and Council to take a decision on the full communitarisation of policies on immigration and asylum .
These issues must be taken care of by the respective Member State .
In general the report contains many views as to how equality is to be achieved .
The measures proposed include labour market policy measures , information campaigns , dialogue with citizens , quotas , closing the pay gap , measures to combat the segregation of work in the education sector , and improvements to maternity facilities for self-employed women .
The report also welcomes the establishment of the European Institute for Gender Equality and calls on the Community institutions and the Member States to introduce an International Equal Pay Day .
Equality between men and women must be a goal for all Member States .
The political measures used to achieve these goals must , however , be determined at national level .
The international coordination which is desirable should take place at global level , preferably within the UN .
We have therefore chosen to vote no to this report .
in writing . - In general , I am very supportive of most of what is in this report .
However , I have a problem with Paragraph 9 .
I believe that the text of Paragraph 9 should be qualified by stating the need to respect national legislative processes when considering the issue of abortion .
Ireland has a protocol to the Treaty of Maastricht on this issue and furthermore the area of abortion is not an EU competence .
It is up to each Member State to make its own legislation in this area and Parliament must therefore respect the principle of subsidiarity .
Unfortunately , the text is not clear on this matter .
in writing . - The García Perez report deals with many important issues relating to gender equality , social justice and fundamental rights .
One issue which is of increasing concern across Europe is that of human trafficking , which involves victims from both within and outside the EU .
Combating serious organised crime of this nature requires a cross-border and multi-agency approach , and it is clear that the EU has a key role to play in this area .
in writing . - While progress has been made on the issue of gender equality in Europe , we are far from full parity .
The report highlights various areas that require the Commission 's attention , such as job quality and the need for better instruments to tackle violence against women .
I would also support the call for Member States to urgently ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings .
I voted in support of Iratxe García Pérez 's report ' Equality between women and men - 2008 ' .
in writing . - I welcome the report on Equality between women and men - 2008 , and support much of its contents .
However , I abstained in the final vote because amendment 2 was rejected .
In my view , the wording of that amendment was better than the original paragraph .
in writing . - I voted for this report which aims to tackle gender inequality .
It is clear that women do not have the same opportunities as men to progress in their career .
Working mothers will never be able to balance family and professional life without stronger parental rights for both men and women .
This is why I fully support the calls for increasing the duration of parental leave , and in particular increasing the incentives for fathers to take parental leave , and flexible working conditions .
It is only with these kinds of rights that we will be able to tackle gender inequality .
Women will never gain true equality until men take their fair share of responsibility for childcare and running the home , just as my fantastic husband does .
He cooks , he shops , but he 's not so good at making the bed !
in writing . - ( RO ) As a Shadow-Rapporteur from the PSE group in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I voted for this report because I consider it very important as regards the proposals for ensuring equal treatment of women and men with regard to the labour market .
In this context , I would like to emphasize the importance of item 42 in the report , which requests the Commission and the Member States to establish a set of feasible , comparable and available quality and quantity indicators , as well as gender statistics , to be used for monitoring the enforcement of Lisbon Strategy for economic growth and employment .
Taking into account that one of the decisive factors for increasing employment is the reconciliation of professional and family life , I would like to also mention item 34 , which requests the Commission to unify and disperse best practices regarding the balance between the professional and private life .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament must think that its Members are suffering from Alzheimer 's disease !
Every year , at about the same time , two different reports appear : one on human rights in the EU and the other on equality between men and women .
Though the content of the first can vary slightly from one year to the next , quite clearly the same is not true of the second .
To believe this , all you need to do is read the previous ones : the Kauppi report in 2007 or the Estrela report in 2006 on equality between men and women .
They list the same challenges to be met , report the existence of the same inequalities and make the same recommendations .
Do we conclude that there has been no change ?
No , because progress has been made with employment and with the participation of women in decision-making at local , national and European level .
It is just that we Eurocrats , spurred on by the women 's lobbies - and I am thinking particularly of the powerful European Women 's Lobby - are not satisfied with the progress ; they want and are advocating even greater equality , even greater similarity between women and men , to the point of absurdity .
Do we have to go along with this forced equality obtained through compulsory , discriminatory and minority-focused quotas ?
I do not believe so .
The battle of the sexes does not have to take place .
in writing . - ( SV ) Mrs García Pérez 's report on equality between women and men - 2008 was essentially good .
It included a great deal which is important , not least the opportunity for women ( and men ! ) to combine work with family life and the importance of generous parental allowances .
I would have been able to live with a certain amount of hot air and repetition .
What was more difficult was paragraph 4 , which seeks to create a clear legal basis at EU level for combating ' all forms of violence against women ' .
There is nothing wrong with this ambition and , had it concerned human trafficking , which crosses borders , there would not have been any problem .
However , here the aim is ' the full communitarisation of policies ' in an area which is primarily a national matter , and that is more worrying .
The reason why I finally abstained , however , was the second sentence of paragraph 6 , which encourages the use of quotas .
This is something which I would rather not see at national level , and absolutely not introduced as a diktat from Brussels .
in writing . - I and my British Conservative colleagues are fully supportive of the principle of equality of opportunity between women and men .
We support the fundamental principle as outlined in paragraph 1 of the report : ' Emphasises the importance of giving women and men the same opportunities to develop as individuals regardless of gender ' .
However , we believe that this report is overly-prescriptive and heavy-handed in its approach and conclusions .
We do not believe the EU should have greater powers in this area .
Such matters are for individual Member States to decide upon .
We reject the approach as outlined in Recital I which states : ' whereas gender stereotyping in advertising thus echoes the unequal distribution of gender power ' .
Such statements do not advance a healthy debate on equality .
Likewise , we cannot support the thinking behind , inter alia , recitals F and G. The calls for ' zero tolerance ' mentioned in the report are too vague and could lead to bad legislation if followed through .
For these reasons , we have decided to vote against this report .
I voted in favour of Mrs Svensson 's report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men , as I agree with the need to develop a ' Code of Conduct ' for advertising that is applicable in all Member States and that guarantees respect for the principle of equality between men and women and combats the use of gender stereotypes .
I believe that advertising and marketing communications are dangerous vehicles of gender stereotyping and give rise to restrictions on freedom , both for women and men , in their various dimensions and roles throughout their lives , having a negative impact on their role in society .
This report by Swedish MEP , Mrs Svensson , of our Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , has enabled us to take a broadly positive stance on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men .
As the rapporteur mentions , the very purpose of advertising is to influence each and every one of us - women and men alike .
Indeed , the choices we make throughout our lives are influenced by a whole range of factors , including the social class to which we belong , our gender , the images and concepts of gender and gender roles that are ever present around us through education , the media and advertising .
For this reason , it is important to continue to combat the gender stereotypes that persist in our societies , despite various Community programmes to promote gender equality .
As mentioned in the report , the school system has a fundamental role to play in developing children 's critical faculties with regard to images and the media in general , in order to prevent the disastrous effects of the recurrence of gender stereotypes in marketing and advertising .
Yet positive actions to promote best practice in advertising are also needed , examples of which are put forward in the EP resolution that has now been approved .
in writing . - ( RO ) I decided that abstention is the position that expresses in the best way the heterogeneous content of the report .
More clearly , we are discussing a real problem which has been answered , in my opinion , under inadequate terms .
It is not enough to state that " gender stereotypes must be eliminated ” .
I do not believe that it is a question of " providing rewards to mass-media and publicity experts for compliance with gender equality ” , as certain articles in the report advise ( art . 9 , 27 ) , but we should rather draft precise Community regulations and programmes that would make such rewards useless .
Since the various forms of publicity marking the daily life are realities with deep and immediate social-cultural impact , this activity needs a unified and coherent legislative framework .
For this reason , a descriptive set of references to such a current and important matter ( as the Britt-Svensson report ) has not managed to plead with convincing arguments and determine a favourable vote and has not answered in a clear and applied manner to the solutions considered .
in writing . - I believe that advertising is a powerful tool shaping identity , values , beliefs and attitudes and has an undeniable impact on public behaviour .
On the other hand , uncontrollable advertising can have adverse affects on the self-esteem of women - in the case of sexual services advertisements in newspapers - and particularly teenagers and those susceptible to eating disorders .
We must ensure the protection of our children from damaging influences and , in this regard , the role of schools and education must not be underestimated .
I also support the proposal that the Commission and the Member States should develop a ' Code of Conduct ' for advertising based on the principle of equality between men and women .
in writing . - ( FI ) I voted against Mrs Svensson 's report in line with the view of our group .
This I did because , although the report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men contained a lot of good ideas that I wholeheartedly support , including teaching children to use their critical faculties when it comes to the media and teaching people to question sex stereotypes , I thought it went too far in general .
The proposals to establish a Code of Conduct at EU level and a monitoring body to which people can complain about sex stereotyping in advertising and marketing represent just the sort of patronising policy that engenders hostility towards the EU .
Marketing and advertising are an important part of communications , and if manufacturers ' products are to compete on the market , advertising must obviously use means that catch people 's attention .
I think that establishing rules for marketing and advertising is something that should be done at national level , however , and criticism of the media and healthy questioning of sex stereotypes begins with education and upbringing .
in writing . - ( FR ) I am delighted by the adoption of this report , which highlights the role played by marketing and advertising in the emergence and perpetuation of gender stereotypes and proposes a number of avenues for combating these .
The development of awareness actions seems to me , for example , to be a worthwhile measure , particularly with regard to children , who constitute a particularly vulnerable group .
Exposure from a very young age to gender stereotyping in the media makes a major contribution to the perpetuation of lifelong inequalities between women and men , hence the importance of developing children 's critical faculties with regard to images and the media in general .
I also agree with the notion that marketing and advertising have a major responsibility for the increase in the number of people suffering from eating disorders and should consequently be more careful about the choice of female role models .
However , it is a pity that the proposal aimed at explicitly integrating the fight against gender stereotypes into existing or future codes of practice , giving those working in the sectors concerned responsibility for ensuring the commitments are adhered to , was not upheld by a majority .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of Mrs Svensson 's report on advertising , which continues to be discriminatory .
Despite the measures that have been taken against it , gender stereotyping remains a major issue in society .
Advertisements , in particular , tend to perpetuate tired old stereotypes of men and women .
Children and young people , especially , identify with characters in advertisements and absorb the clichés they present .
This should be prevented , so that the younger generation can deal more practically with the issue of gender equality .
In my opinion , specific training programmes on gender equality would be a good place to start and , above all , something must be done about the ubiquitous stereotyping in textbooks .
In summary , it can be said that advertising confronts all citizens in their daily life and it must therefore present good role models .
The report paves the way towards achieving the goal that has been set .
in writing . - ( FR ) In Parliament we have the bad habit of producing own-initiative reports on trivial matters , and on matters that should really be dealt with by subsidiarity .
In other words , the EU should avoid meddling in matters that come under the sovereignty of the Member States and that are better settled at national level .
In the state it was voted for by a majority of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , the report is unacceptable .
I should point out that of course we are concerned about the gender stereotypes conveyed by some advertising .
Of course we are against the advertising of sexual services , which reinforce stereotypes of women as objects .
Of course we want to protect children against adverts that incite violence and sexism , among other things .
Of course we are aware of the importance of codes of ethics and codes of conduct , but it is not up to the Commission to impose these on the Member States .
Advertising should respect the values dear to us , but it must be able to exist and to play its role in a market economy without being accused of all evils , which is the tenor of this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) The motion for a resolution contains many different ideas and wishes .
However , we would like to emphasise that the European Parliament cannot solve any problems in this area , nor is legislation at EU level the right way to go .
Finally , we think that it is through opinion-forming and debate in the Member States that we can succeed in eradicating advertising for sexual services from the daily newspapers .
Threats of boycotts by consumers can force newspapers to refuse such ads and force hotels to become porn-free .
However , this necessitates opinion being built up from below . Not through measures at EU level .
After a certain amount of heart-searching , we have voted in favour of the report in its entirety . However , we would like to emphasise that we have done so because we consider that many of the values and demands it contains are essential , but our opinions differ regarding the means to achieve them .
in writing . - I welcome Eva-Britt Svensson 's report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men .
The global character of modern advertising demands a concerted European effort to encourage advertisers to move away from gender stereotyping .
Self-regulatory practices in the UK are already quite rigorous , and I would hope that other Member States would be open to embracing similar measures .
I therefore voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted this report because it renders very well the moment of the intervention required to reduce the negative influence of marketing and publicity on equality between men and women , namely : the first years of a child 's socialisation .
The formation of stereotypes and prejudices at an early age decisively contributes to gender discrimination , with a direct effect on accentuating inequalities between women and men throughout their entire life .
The information explosion can hardly be prevented among children .
A study recently conducted at the beginning of this year , in Romania , shows that the biggest consumers of advertising are children of 6 years old .
I welcome the idea of establishing a specific department for matters related to gender equality within the national mass-media monitoring bodies of Member States , but it is extremely necessary that they have a double role : regular and systematic monitoring of gender images in the mass-media , as well as the coercive monitoring of their information media .
In the absence of coerciveness , our initiatives shall prove useless .
I voted in favour of a good report on a crucial issue : advertising and marketing , which have a great deal of power in terms of having a decisive influence on sexist stereotypes .
All of the European institutions should establish mechanisms to ensure that these instruments are used in a positive way to promote the equal treatment of men and women and to convey an image of women that is in line with reality .
It is worth making special mention of the commitment made by all the public authorities to eradicate violence against women and on the role that advertising and marketing should play in this process .
It should be recognised that many professionals are working towards this , but this report highlights the fact that there is still a great deal to be done ; we therefore need to establish mechanisms that ensure that these conditions are complied with and that the resources are available to provide an effective response to complaints .
The new European Institute for Gender Equality should have the resources to closely monitor images and language and to eradicate violent images and those that subtly allude to women as objects that can be controlled and owned , and that are therefore susceptible to attack .
in writing . - ( SV ) Mrs Svensson 's report created quite a major headache before the vote .
In its original format , the report was full of sweeping generalisations and - in my view - exaggerations .
It veered wildly between media and advertising , codes of behaviour and proposed legislation , self-regulation and new agencies .
The report which remained after all the voting , however , was completely different .
The worst exaggerations had gone , leaving a quite reasonably expressed problem , that advertising sometimes , but not always , involves caricatures and gender stereotypes .
I do not think it is the slightest bit problematic to express concern over the impression children and young girls are given , especially from images of extremely thin women .
The report was not entirely free of socialist undertones , but the problem is a real one , not an ideological one .
Therefore in the end I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting against this own-initiative report , because it interferes too much with freedom of opinion and smacks of imperious censorship .
All matters of legitimacy and ethics in relation to advertising are already regulated at national level .
The EU has no place trying to control the diversity of freedom of opinion and freedom in advertising .
Fortunately , this is only an own-initiative report .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted for the adoption of this resolution .
It is the result of cooperation within the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and also the result of compromises to give the report wider support .
The objective of this report was to use the law to govern all aspects of life , even though it has certain centralised features .
On the other hand , however , I am sure that , if Members of the European Parliament are able to intervene to promote and support the common good , then we have a moral duty to do so .
We are obliged to ask for a ban on sexist images , which degrade women 's dignity .
Asking for the young to be guided and directed in relation to the media is also a part of this strategy .
The report also refers to the protection of children , on whom advertising with violent and sexual undertones has a serious impact and creates unrealistic illusions .
In all events , we need to be vigilant .
No European directive can change the nature of men and women .
Before we can demand the elimination of gender stereotypes , we need to have sociologists and psychologists undertake a thorough analysis as to how this will affect future generations .
Analyses by independent experts often go unpublished , since they contradict political views .
The laws of nature cannot be changed by a parliamentary resolution .
On the contrary , if Parliament wishes to gain respect , it should take more account of the laws of nature .
The report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between women and men is nowhere near being a good one , but opens up several problems , which Parliament would prefer to avoid .
in writing . - ( CS ) I voted against the report and against the majority of the tabled amendments which are intended , in a planned and unified way , using six comprehensive priority areas , to achieve equality between women and men in advertising and deal with the way in which advertising supports and reinforces certain types of discriminatory stereotype , which have a negative effect on equality between women and men .
I voted against because this report is a serious threat to and , what is more , a dangerous interference in an area in which pronounced individual and different cultures prevail in the various Member States .
What is considered embarrassing or unacceptable in one country may be seen as funny or amusing in another .
Indeed , an attempt to impose Europe-wide regulation of the presentation of the two genders in advertising would create some kind of homogenised sterile stereotype .
This report makes comprehensive proposals for actions going far beyond the competence of the EU .
Member States have self-regulating bodies like the Advertising Council , through which the national advertising industries gradually create and adjust acceptable models for advertising activities .
Advertising , in view of its specific national characteristics , is a suitable area for self-regulation , far more sensitively reflecting national cultural traditions , customs and models .
These should never be replaced by unified and homogenised outside regulation which might fundamentally damage advertising as a quite legitimate and essential sector of national economies .
This resolution follows an important debate on the cloning of animals for food supply and its possible implications for genetic diversity within livestock populations , food safety , animal health and welfare and the environment .
It is clear that there are still many doubts at this juncture and a dearth of studies with clear and precise conclusions on its implications , thereby posing a serious threat to the image of agricultural production in the countries of the European Union .
That is why the European Parliament , following a proposal by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , decided to call on the European Commission to submit proposals prohibiting the cloning of animals for food supply purposes , the farming of cloned animals or their offspring , the placing on the market of meat or dairy products derived from cloned animals or their offspring and the importing of cloned animals or their offspring , and meat or dairy products derived from cloned animals or their offspring .
The proposal appears sound to us at this stage and takes the precautionary principle into account , and we therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - ( RO ) My vote " in favour ” is based on the following doctrinaire and practical grounds .
First of all , any type of cloning , either human or animal , infringes the Christian principle and doctrine upon which the doctrine of the European People 's Party is based .
From the ethical point of view , there are still controversial matters to be debated and entirely clarified .
As regards the practical aspects , we cannot exactly quantify the effects of cloning yet .
Moreover , there is also the issue of the incapacity to control access to and follow-up these products of animal origin once they enter the commercial system .
For this reason , I believe that the best decision , at this moment , is to ban animal cloning for food supply .
in writing . - Given the scientific uncertainty and ethical questions involved , I fully support calls for the Commission to bring forward proposals seeking to prohibit the cloning of animals for food supplies .
in writing . - The cloning of animals for food supply , I feel , carries with it various risks both to human health and animal welfare .
I am not convinced that embracing this type of technology for consumption purposes is beneficial to European citizens .
I therefore voted in favour of calling for a ban on the cloning of animals for food supply .
in writing . - I welcome the debate on animal cloning .
I abstained in the final vote on the resolution on cloning of animals for food supply because I have some concerns about an outright ban as proposed in this resolution .
To date concerns have been raised about the animal welfare implications of cloning and they need to be addressed .
Food safety issues do not appear to arise .
However , what we need is more accurate and scientific information and advice before taking a decision to ban .
That is why I await with interest the Commission 's proposals in this area , taking into account the recommendations of EFSA ( European Food Safety Authority ) and EGE ( European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technology ) .
in writing . - ( DE ) Only 12 years ago , a new technology , which is apparently associated with high death rates and considerable suffering , stunned the world with the cloning of Dolly the sheep .
The commercial sector is already rubbing its hands , dreaming of ' healthy ' cloned pork enriched with Omega 3 fatty acids .
They claim that this cruelty to animals also benefits the pigs , which are supposedly healthier thanks to cloning .
Of course , the breeders benefit too , because their financial losses are reduced .
The whole thing is disturbingly like the many and varied temptations to genetic technology , by which multitudes of farmers have been brought to ruin , because the seed was not re-useable and they could not afford any more .
It is also reminiscent of the sudden , unnatural death of entire herds after the animals had eaten genetically modified feedstuffs .
The long-term consequences of radioactive radiation and genetic technology have not yet been ascertained in sufficient detail , and it is impossible to estimate the effects of cloning , let alone cross-breeds .
What would happen if a cloned animal is fed genetic feedstuff ? What effects would that have on humans ?
Frankenstein is lurking at the door !
That is why I am voting ' no ' this time .
in writing . - Cloning animals for food is a topical issue at the moment .
Broadly speaking , I am not against cloning in terms of scientific research and animal breeding development .
However , in terms of animal welfare and food safety , I am totally opposed to cloned animals entering the food chain .
Research and past experience have proven that cloned animals are more prone to disease and have a reduced life expectancy .
Although I do not wish to stand in the way of science , it is clear that we are not yet fully aware of the all the consequences and implications of cloning , both in terms of animal welfare and human consumption .
It is for this reason that clear criteria and controls should be implemented to ensure that cloned animals are prevented from entering the food chain .
While I realise that this is a sensitive topic , I believe that we should err on the side of caution .
Product quality , animal welfare and environmental concerns should remain our priority in terms of food production .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of the resolution tabled by Mr Parish on the cloning of animals for food supply .
I agree with the reasons for the proposal and the concerns it raises .
It is true that in the past , the more ' revolutionary ' innovations have been regarded with suspicion and have generated benefits only in the medium and long term ; it is also true that the aim of this resolution could fall into this category .
Nevertheless , we need to take into serious consideration the dangers arising from animal cloning for food supply : food safety , the welfare of cloned animals and the genetic and zootechnical diversity of these animals .
These aspects are clearly interrelated .
I therefore applaud this initiative and remain confident that measures will be adopted to protect both human health , by maintaining the high quality of the food that we eat , as well as animal welfare .
in writing . - ( SK ) I voted for this resolution .
Consumers in EU Member States must be protected against the negative effects on their health which may potentially be caused by products cloned for food purposes .
It is the principle of foresight which must be applied appropriately .
Parliament emphasises the many advantages of high-quality agriculture which I support .
Despite this , I am surprised by a sad fact : Parliament voted against the cloning of animals , but supports human cloning for research purposes involving experiments on human embryonic stem cells .
The Seventh Framework Programme for Research is already financing such projects for the cloning of human beings .
We are destroying human life simply for research purposes .
These experiments are also financed from taxpayers ' money , even in States where the legislation considers cloning to be a crime .
It seems that European legislators are more concerned about the cloning of animals for food supply than protecting man against scientific research .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Evaluation of EU sanctions as part of the EU 's actions and policies in the area of human rights ( debate )
The next item is the report by Hélène Flautre , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the evaluation of EU sanctions as part of the EU 's actions and policies in the area of human rights .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Russian Foreign Affairs Minister Mr Lavrov accused Mr Kouchner of having a ' sick imagination ' when he talked about sanctions against Russia .
It was on this ' imagination ' that I was asked to work during this report .
I would like to thank the Commission and the Council , which proved perfectly available and helpful .
What is today 's debate on sanctions in fact about ?
It is essentially about two things : the first is a critique of the use of sanctions to punish dirty rotten scoundrels on the international scene , namely anyone who tries to block my strategic interests : politicised sanctions with double standards .
The second critique considers the fact that sanctions are not effective , essentially because they have perverse effects , people always get round them , and they should therefore not be used .
The purpose of this report is not to call for more sanctions , or for harsher sanctions , or for sanctions to be abandoned .
It is essential for us to find out what conditions make sanctions effective and the aim of this report is actually to examine them from all angles .
Effective in relation to what ?
In relation to what we are trying to achieve .
As regards violations of human rights or international or humanitarian law , what we must aim for is a change in the behaviour of those being targeted .
That is the key point .
Sanctions are neither a punishment nor the application of a kind of European criminal code for international use .
Sanctions are , politically , a tricky tool to handle and are very demanding to implement , and they seek to achieve a change in practices and behaviour .
Very reluctant to go for all-out sanctions , the EU is currently maintaining 31 sanctions regimes against third countries or entities , mostly arms embargoes and targeted sanctions designed to have maximum impact on the entities whose behaviour they intend to influence , while limiting as far as possible any harmful humanitarian effects .
On the face of it , this is something positive but I cannot tell you any more at this stage .
The EU continues to act without ever having carried out any overall impact assessments .
We therefore remain rather powerless to evaluate the ability of our sanctions to solve crises and promote human rights .
The aim of this report is therefore to speak up for a more transparent , more consistent and therefore more credible European sanctions policy .
The first essential job is to undertake an evaluation exercise .
The second is to adopt a stringent method , through prior studies of specific situations where sanctions are required to decide the best response to bring about a change .
Over the last few days , you have been through the measures at the EU 's disposal to influence the Russian authorities , for example .
The positive conclusion we can draw is that the stated objective is clear and can be evaluated practically .
That is , compliance with the six points of the agreement .
It has to be this way in all circumstances .
It is essential to include clear benchmarks , which should , until the end - and that sometimes means for a long time - remain necessary and sufficient conditions to be met for the sanctions to be lifted .
These benchmarks therefore need to be realistic and objectively measurable .
Although the arms embargo imposed on China after Tiananmen is perfectly legitimate , we should not be surprised if it is not having any positive effects since the European Union did not make the lifting of the embargo dependent on any particular demands .
All too often , the sanctions policy is vague and flexible , swayed by the political contingencies of the most influential Member States or the commercial or geopolitical importance of the targeted entity .
That is why , to give the EU 's policy credibility , I am proposing the creation of a network of independent experts responsible for helping the Commission with the difficult job it does , under incredible circumstances since it has almost no resources to do this .
Make no mistake . I am not talking about taking away the Council 's prerogatives of political impetus or the Commission 's right of proposal ; I am simply talking about offering the guarantee of an informed decision .
However , that is not all .
Sanctions are an instrument .
They are one instrument of many - I am referring back to the first two reports by the Subcommittee on Human Rights - a comprehensive and integrated policy needs to be developed ; there can be no effective sanctions without a human rights strategy for the country in question .
Sanctions must be discussed at all levels and the monitoring mechanisms , for example the ' human rights ' clause , must be used to the full .
All sanctions against a country must be accompanied by visible , and therefore political , but also concrete support for human rights defenders in the country .
That is also one of the report 's key points .
To finish , this report also considers that any voluntary and irreversible damage to the environment generates human rights violations and it therefore asks for its inclusion among the reasons for applying sanctions .
It recalls that EU sanctions are not just against third countries but also against physical and legal entities such as mercenaries or indeed multinationals , which defy international law by operating almost with impunity .
In short , this report tries to respond to the current nature of world crises .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Flautre , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to express our gratitude for the job done by the parliamentary committees , and in particular by Mrs Flautre as chairman of the Subcommittee on Human Rights .
It is an important job , primarily because the relationship between the use of restrictive measures and human rights is a prominent issue , which attracted the attention of the various players on the international scene again recently - as you mentioned , Mrs Flautre .
I feel it is worth mentioning that , within the framework of the common foreign and security policy , one of the aims of restrictive measures remains the foundation of democracy and the rule of law , as well as respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Yet it is right to question , as we are doing and as you have done in your report , the possible impact of such measures on the fundamental rights of those individuals who are subject to them .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has drafted a concept paper on restrictive measures , entitled ' Basic principles on the use of restrictive measures ' , which mentions the attention paid to , I quote ' full respect of human rights and the rule of law [ ... ] in full conformity with our obligations under international law ' .
Obviously this commitment remains at the heart of our priorities .
It should not be forgotten that the use of restrictive measures is not limited to human rights policy .
It is one of many tools available to the foreign and security policy and there are other objectives , apart from defence and human rights , which concern peacekeeping , strengthening international security , protecting fundamental interests and reinforcing the security of the EU , or simply promoting international cooperation .
Sanctions should therefore - as you pointed out - be part of an integrated , comprehensive approach to a country , which in parallel should include political dialogue , incentives , conditionality and other foreign policy instruments and , from that point of view , I am delighted that the report converges with the Council 's idea that all its instruments , including restrictive measures , should be deployed flexibly .
You will understand that it is not easy to make a comparative analysis by looking at the different sanctions regimes and using the human rights situation in each country as the only benchmark . It is important not to take a regime of restrictive measures out of context , or when implementing these measures , to believe that everything will fall into place automatically .
When applying restrictive measures as part of the fight against terrorism , the measures are primarily aimed at preventing acts of terrorism , particularly anything that could contribute to the financing of these acts .
The lists are well known ; they are published , as are the measures they lead to .
One of the conditions for the continuation of this system rests on two pillars : the first is that these measures need to be credible , which means that great care must be taken with updating these lists so that they reflect reality .
The second is respect for the rule of law , and consequently for a number of fundamental principles : the transparency of procedures , the possibility of taking legal action and the right to defence .
In this debate , - I am sorry to go on , but this is particularly topical - we naturally have to take note of the Court of Justice judgment given this morning which , from 3 December , cancels the effects of a Community regulation freezing funds in application of a Security Council resolution , against two plaintiffs because they could not find out why they had been included on terrorist lists .
What we find is that the Court is not preventing the Council from taking new measures to freeze funds provided that those concerned can access information about why they have been targeted by these measures , either at the time the measure is taken or as soon as possible after the decision has been made .
We also note that the Court of Justice judgment specifies that the primacy of United Nations Security Council resolutions is not challenged and that it is therefore on this basis that the regulations will be modified before 3 December , having first informed Parliament .
The report by Mrs Flautre deals more specifically with the mechanism for evaluating sanctions , asking the Council for an evaluation or an impact assessment of the EU 's sanctions policy .
I want to point out that the Council is prepared to do this , and particularly to ensure that experiences are exchanged and national best practices for the application of restrictive measures are developed .
Experience acquired in the design and implementation of measures in different contexts continually feeds into each political debate we have in the Council , and the Council also conducts in-depth discussions on the pertinence , nature and anticipated effectiveness of sanctions , relying on reports by European Union heads of mission and on observations sent in by the Member States .
On the nature of sanctions , we are therefore pleased that our views converge with those of the report and particularly that the preference is for targeted sanctions over generalised sanctions .
We have noted that the report invites the Council and Commission to take a varied approach - which could be summed up as a carrot and stick approach - which indeed we believe is the approach that should be taken .
We also agree with the report 's analysis of the importance of international cooperation , which is what underpins credibility .
We give particular priority to action taken within a United Nations framework .
In the Council , we ensure that , based on United Nations resolutions and measures decided in the Security Council , there is alignment with the countries closest to the European Union .
We also ensure that the issue of sanctions is raised in political dialogue meetings and the consultations on human rights which we hold with a number of target countries .
Finally , in this draft report , the European Parliament expresses the wish to be involved in all the stages of the process leading to the design , implementation and review of restrictive measures .
The Council is fully aware of this and is delighted by the keen interest shown by the European Parliament in EU sanctions policy .
That is why the Council is particularly keen to ensure Parliament is kept regularly informed of events affecting this domain .
To finish , I would like to applaud the European Parliament 's commitment in this area and encourage it to make the most of the parliamentary contacts it has with third countries to improve understanding of the European Union 's sanctions regime and explore the possibilities of coordinated action to promote human rights .
It is for these reasons that I am so pleased with the report Mrs Flautre has just presented to us .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-office of the Council , Mrs Flautre , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission was interested to read the report on the application of sanctions and on the evaluation of sanctions in the area of human rights .
Sanctions are one of the European Union 's most effective instruments for promoting respect for human rights in third countries , and they have been applied for this purpose notably in Belarus , China , Myanmar , Uzbekistan , the former Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe , to mention only a few of the more important examples .
The Commission is pleased that this debate is being held on the implementation and evaluation of this important instrument for the common foreign and security policy .
As the President said - while fully aware that the policy has a number of objectives - any decision to apply sanctions under the CFSP must be taken after evaluating and weighing up a number of objective interests .
That is why an evaluation of the consistency of the sanctions policy must be conducted , not only to look at third countries ' human rights records but also to take account of the other objectives and criteria of the CFSP .
The systematic , unilateral and , you could say automatic application of sanctions against any country whose politicians do not fully respect human rights does not seem desirable .
The European Union has to take account of the impact on relations with countries that are the target of sanctions , since sanctions are economic as much as political .
Nevertheless , we need not only to take account of the impact on our diplomatic relations but also to evaluate the impact on the international activities of our economic operators .
Generally speaking , sanctions must be targeted and affect only the leaders of the countries concerned , sparing populations already suffering as a result of failure to respect human rights .
Furthermore , when sanctions are agreed , we also need to decide the benchmarks that will be used to lift them - the ' exit strategy ' - while retaining a small amount of flexibility for cases where the third countries concerned fulfil most of the benchmarks but not all .
I am also keen to point out that the purpose of sanctions is not to replace judicial proceedings against those responsible for human rights violations .
These crimes fall within the competence of the courts , including the International Criminal Court .
However , sanctions do aim to achieve policy changes within a third country , for example to promote respect for human rights in the legal system of the country concerned .
They therefore pursue an objective of change and may be lifted when the policies of the country concerned change .
For example , the European Union applied sanctions on the former Yugoslavia in support of the International Criminal Court .
We believe it is important to promote respect for human rights in third countries and we keep a constant watch on what is applied in third countries .
In each case , it would be necessary to identify from among all the possible instruments , those that will naturally be most effective .
An in-depth analysis of the application of sanctions to promote policies that respect human rights consequently seems to us a worthwhile policy and I would therefore like to thank you , Mrs Flautre , for having taken the initiative .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development on this report , I would like to state that the European Union should use this remarkable tool of external policy with wisdom and prudence .
No matter what the circumstances or the type of sanctions applied , there is always the potential of negative side effects that could generate regrettable situations .
I strongly believe that sanctions should apply only when diplomatic persuasion has failed , and , in order to be efficient , the EU must always have a comprehensive assessment of the situation , a coherent strategy and an accurate evaluation of the results .
To uphold credibility and avoid the accusation of double standards , the EU has to be able to justify the adoption or non-adoption of sanctions based primarily on human rights grounds and arguments of effectiveness .
I think it is crucial that , by imposing sanctions , the European Union reveals its strengths and not its weaknesses .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of my group on the Flautre report to confirm here what has already been voiced by the committee : on the whole we welcome the text , particularly after a few modifications and , dare I say it , improvements resulting from our amendments , which were accepted by Mrs Flautre .
We would like to thank her for being so open-minded .
This report adds interesting new elements and brings a new approach to the subject ( i.e. the environment as sufficient grounds for adopting restrictive measures ) .
My group wanted to underline the importance of establishing clear conditions , achievable objectives and adequate reference parameters when the sanctions are applied .
To make them more effective , I have also tried to emphasise that these should be as targeted as possible - Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said so herself a minute ago .
These sanctions do not involve civilians , for example , they do not entail indiscriminate measures that would result in the isolation of the population .
One paragraph of the report states that UN sanctions are preferable to European Union sanctions .
On this point , clarification is probably needed to show that this priority does not prevent the European Union from adopting its own sanctions for particular situations where these measures would be more direct and easier to apply in terms of time , specificity and geographical proximity , according to the principle of subsidiarity .
With the cross-party compromise amendment , it is now established that in the fight against terrorism , the secret services , custodians of the infamous blacklists that we discussed here in Parliament a short while ago , must be able to act with the necessary discretion for the system to function properly .
Furthermore , they are called secret services precisely because they must be able to operate in secret - although not with impunity , and not in violation of international laws .
Evidently , the European Union must carry out a political assessment of the sanctions . The actions that we take must have a significant impact , without which the procedures for sanctions must themselves be reviewed .
However , the report proposes that networks of independent experts should be set up to assess these sanctions , as Mrs Flautre described in her speech .
Our group would prefer the Council to take the proper decisions itself , since it is more competent and has more authority than external experts when it comes to a system which is not controlled by governments .
It is in this spirit that we are proposing to vote against the new amendment that is to be tabled tomorrow in the Chamber by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
While on the whole we welcome the work carried out , my group , Madam President , will be voting in favour of the Flautre report .
We offer the rapporteur our congratulations .
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mrs Flautre and congratulate her on her excellent work .
However , I must at the same time express my disappointment and that of our group that the report was significantly altered during the voting on amendments in the relevant committee .
Sanctions are a further means at our disposal for protecting human rights around the world .
The crucial thing , however , is that these sanctions themselves should not constitute a violation of human rights : in trying to resolve an injustice , we should not respond with an even greater injustice .
We must also give attention to better-targeted economic measures that respect humanitarian international law .
For this reason , I attach great importance to the provision made in the report for a mechanism allowing judicial review during the enforcement of sanctions , and also the rapporteur 's idea of creating a network of experts who will make proposals to the Council regarding the most appropriate restrictive measures .
Former practices , such as embargoes on medicines and other essentials , affect the population indiscriminately , especially children .
They can only be condemned as unacceptable .
Similarly , the decisions of the competent judicial institutions must be enforced .
The Council and the Commission must ultimately review the procedure for inclusion on the EU terrorism blacklist , so that the fundamental rights of blacklisted individuals or organisations are respected and the EU 's credibility as a champion of human rights around the world is protected .
It is particularly important that we guarantee the effectiveness of sanctions and arrive at a shared understanding of this issue within the Union , and also that we secure cooperation with other international organisations such as the African Union and ASEAN , which are often closer to the problem areas .
However , in addition to adopting and enforcing sanctions , there must be specific provisions concerning the lifting of sanctions .
There is a need for ongoing monitoring and set terms , so that the aim of the sanctions can be better understood and can be ended when the aim is achieved .
Such an approach enhances the effectiveness of sanctions and gives our policy credibility .
Lastly , I should like to point out that I originally felt there should be no reference to specific countries .
However , since the choice has been made to mention some countries in the text , I think it is essential that we should not forget Palestine .
Here there is a telling inconsistency in European policy .
It supports the spread of democracy in the world , but has chosen to impose EU sanctions against the Palestinian Government , which came into being through demonstrably free and democratic elections .
Sanctions are not a means of changing the world , but they can be an important tool for compelling countries that violate international law and human rights to change their policy .
It is sufficient that sanctions are targeted , justified and subject to constant review and assessment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work she has done .
I believe that the proposal to identify more homogenous criteria for the sanctions policy comes at the right time .
I would particularly like to emphasise a specific element contained in paragraph 6 of the report concerning environmental crime and damage , where it is proposed that this type of voluntary act should also be subject to sanctions .
I believe that this proposal should be given serious consideration .
For the rest , evidently the limitation of the sanctions policy is often its inconsistency , but it is especially linked with the limitations of the EU common foreign and security policy : the stronger and more coherent that policy is , and the more it can be said to exist , the stronger and more coherent a set of sanctions will be .
Our problem , in the European Union , is that we are often too timid .
It is sometimes so difficult to find the necessary cross-party consensus between Member States to lift sanctions that we find ourselves unable and powerless to act .
Allow me to take this opportunity , before the French Presidency , of reminding everyone how in a regime such as Myanmar , it is clear that to exclude energy from the list of sanctions would make those sanctions much less effective .
There is also the question of human rights and democracy , which should be made a priority of international policy and therefore also a priority of sanction policies .
This is not the case , because of the issue raised in paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Flautre report , namely the cooperation agreements containing clauses and rules that impose respect for human rights .
These are binding clauses for the European Union , and yet these clauses are systematically ignored .
Therefore , before we come to sanctions , we must first identify the mechanisms to enforce these clauses .
We are in talks again with Vietnam and other Asian countries .
We must identify mechanisms - even gradual mechanisms - to avoid sanctions - I have almost finished , Mr President - but we can only do this if we respect the legality of the clauses and written agreements that the EU has signed .
Mr President , it is no accident that the term ' sanctions ' stands undefined in international law .
This is an instrument of pressure that is difficult to capture precisely .
Consequently the rapporteur 's ambitious proposals to harmonise the principles of use of sanctions are even harder to achieve .
They could also be counter-productive .
Sanctions are an indispensable instrument of EU foreign policy .
In view of the EU 's broad competences in trade and border control , they are of considerable importance for implementing objectives in the spheres of both security and the defence of human rights .
This is why sanctions are part of our foreign policy instrument palette , and this is why we do not shirk from applying them in a fairly free and , at times , inappropriate way .
Instead of subjecting sanctions to some kind of rigid set of rules , we should , in the name of the efficacy of our impact on world politics , leave their application to sagacious political evaluation .
With this general reservation , our political group supports the report .
Mr President , the double standards and the lack of specific evaluation and monitoring tools that tend to characterise the European Union 's foreign policy in terms of sanctions are now one of the most serious threats to European credibility .
On numerous occasions these sanctions or restrictive measures , as they are also called , are based more on particular likes and dislikes than on a clear , coherent and convincing strategy , the objective of which should be not only to ensure the security of the European Union , as established in the objectives of the CFSP , but also to improve the situation of human rights , fundamental freedoms , the rule of law and good governance in the world , as laid down in Article 11 of the Treaty on European Union .
This requires that evaluations and studies of the impact of the sanctions system be undertaken immediately in order to equip us with a policy that is both legitimate and effective in terms of sanction systems .
This , in short , is the objective of the Flautre report .
The basis of the report , as it emerged from the work of the Human Rights Subcommittee , is reasonably good , and it has some elements that I believe are essential .
For example , it insists on the fact that the Council , by adopting the above-mentioned Basic Principles on the Use of Restrictive Measures , has committed itself to doing so as part of a comprehensive approach , which should have room for tools such as human rights and democracy clauses , the system of generalised preferences and development aid .
It also reiterates the request that the Council of the European Union should immediately adopt a common position on controlling arms exports that will make the current Code of Conduct in this area legally binding , as we have repeatedly approved in this House in the past .
However , some aspects that I consider to be key were left out of the report and I hope that they can be incorporated in the debate and the vote in plenary tomorrow .
Firstly , with regard to the blacklists , in the context of the fight against terrorism they need to be reviewed so that human rights and fundamental legal guarantees are respected for those that are on them .
Secondly , as has also already been said , I am in favour of the Commission setting up a network of independent experts responsible for proposing the most appropriate restrictive measures to the Council based on the situation , producing regular reports on the development of the situation on the basis of the criteria and objectives established , and , if appropriate , proposing improvements in the application of sanctions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Flautre on her excellent work .
However , this was misrepresented , at least in part , by the Committee on Foreign Affairs during the vote , which caused the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to abstain , while only the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe approved the substantially amended text , precisely because the adoption of a series of amendments tabled by them altered its political balance .
I also recall that my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , voted against this in committee .
As a group , we recognise that the 13 amendments tabled , even if adopted , cannot alter the political tone of the report . Therefore , although we will be voting in favour of the majority of the amendments , our final vote remains critical .
In our opinion , the problem is that international relations must be founded on dialogue and mutual respect , even if there is a difference of opinion .
Sanctions such as these must be the last resort available to Member States and international organisations , yet the report hails them as the principal instrument of EU foreign policy .
We also believe that priority should be given to so-called positive incentive measures .
A country must be rewarded if it undertakes to promote and respect human rights by signing specific economic , trade and financial agreements .
Instead , however , the report places the emphasis on negative measures , which strangely enough are always against the usual suspects , such as Cuba .
These examples show how flawed the sanctions policy is .
In short , we need more cooperation and less unilateral punishment .
Not even the European Union has a monopoly on rights , as demonstrated by the insufferable way in which we treat migrants and Roma .
Perhaps we should sanction ourselves !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the rapporteur considers it important that the European sanctions policy be assessed in the first instance , and be reassessed in the second instance ( see paragraph 11 ) .
European action in the form of sanctions can indeed have positive value if it brings a real improvement in the human rights situation in the relevant partner country .
Therefore , thorough assessment is indeed important in order to examine the effectiveness of the sanctions policy .
The Council and the Commission must enter into a serious debate on the use of the sanctions policy , however .
After all , as Mrs Flautre has already rightly noted , it is difficult to impose effective sanctions in the absence of a clear framework .
I ask myself whether unanimous sanctions are even possible in view of the various Member States of the Union - the case of Cuba , and also of Zimbabwe , spring to mind here .
In view of the possibility , also advocated by Mrs Flautre , of reassessing the sanctions policy , it is doubtful whether the sanctions policy is indeed such an appropriate instrument .
In short , in order to improve the security and human rights situation in the Union 's partner countries , it is important that we give some thought to the correct instrument .
For example , could serious violations of freedom of religion in China and India prompt the European Union to take genuine formal action ?
Currently , rethinking European action in this kind of case is more appropriate than hasty reassessment of the sanctions policy .
Apart from that , I hope to support the Flautre report provided that a number of amendments are not adopted .
( NL ) Mr President , allow me to start with some words of criticism .
I think that it is rather cynical to make repeated reference , in a report on human rights , to the need to apply a number of provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As we all know , the Treaty was rejected in a democratic referendum in Ireland , and the reason it was rejected only in Ireland is that no other country has granted citizens the human right to give their democratic opinion on this Treaty .
Besides , Lisbon was merely a carbon copy of a European constitution that had already been crushed in referendums in France and the Netherlands .
Let us therefore begin by respecting the human rights of our own voters and no longer systematically referring to a treaty that has been voted down and is legally dead .
A second criticism is that this report is chock-full of good intentions , but the reality is rather different .
We have just seen the end of the Olympic Games in China , where all our European democrats joined in standing side by side with a communist regime in a repeat performance of Nazi Germany in 1936 .
In these circumstances , it may be advisable for us to observe a couple of months ' ashamed silence - although I do admit that the report in its present form can be described as remarkably balanced by the standards of this House , and rightly criticises a large number of matters such as the situation in Cuba and Zimbabwe .
However , it lacks a serious warning regarding worldwide Islamisation , which poses a threat to all the freedoms forming the very basis of our society .
Finally , a further objection regarding a matter close to my heart .
In our own European countries , particularly my home country , Belgium , we are increasingly seeing muzzling laws that restrict freedom of expression and even introduce prison sentences for opinions constituting an offence , particularly in matters of immigration and Islamisation .
I consider this a particularly worrying development and think that , in this regard , we must fight tooth and nail - including in this House , when we discuss human rights - to defend freedom of expression in our own EU Member States , too .
These have been three critical remarks on a report that , for the rest , is certainly not the worst we have seen here , and which we shall support provided no unacceptable amendments are adopted tomorrow .
( LT ) It is obvious that opinions on the political impact of sanctions vary greatly .
There are cases where sanctions on a ruling regime cause suffering to innocent people , indirectly encouraging a shadow economy and black market .
In some cases the danger of human rights violations can occur owing to the inclusion of people 's names on blacklists .
The credibility of sanctions is further compromised by the fact that they are imposed using double standards , depending on the strategic importance of the EU partner .
The most recent example is the EU 's failure to impose any sanctions on Russia , even though Russia had violated rules of international law by invading the territory of a sovereign country - Georgia - under the pretence of defending its citizens .
However , sanctions still remain one of the weapons in the EU arsenal .
In my opinion , sanctions are and should remain an integral part of the common foreign and security policy , or , to be more exact , a means of supporting human rights and democracy .
Understandably , the EU is trying to use the ' carrot and stick ' method and avoid having to impose sanctions .
However , they should be imposed if necessary , and it is very important that sanctions play a wider , more consistent role in the strategy for protecting human rights .
The rapporteur , Mrs Flautre , has mentioned the China arms embargo imposed in the wake of the Tiananmen Square Massacre .
There are suggestions to lift the embargo ; however , ladies and gentlemen , so far we have received no explanation for the Tiananmen Square Massacre , which shook the free world , nor any apology for it .
Why , then , should this sanction be lifted ?
I would like to point out that , with regard to the imposition of sanctions , the European Union should cooperate more closely with other countries and international organisations and coordinate its policy and actions with a view to making the sanctions more effective .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , sanctions form an integral part of the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy in upholding the observance of human rights and preserving democracy and sovereignty .
Although the European Union has been using many and varied sanctions for almost 20 years , no evaluation or study of the impacts of the EU sanctions policy has ever been undertaken .
I therefore welcome Hélène Flautre 's report as an important contribution in this field .
I also welcome its many conclusions .
I too am of the view that it is essential to strengthen the European Union 's expertise and analytical capabilities in the evaluation of sanctions .
Ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and the creation of a European Foreign Service would provide a good opportunity for this .
Sanctions , if used , should form part of a global concept for foreign policy , in other words , they should not be used in isolation , just on their own , without regard to the other instruments of foreign policy and without cooperation with the other players in the international system .
Sanctions should also be accompanied by positive measures and stimuli to support human rights and to support civil society and democracy .
Finally , sanctions should not be linked to humanitarian aid .
Sanctions should be directed against actual people , for example with a view to restricting their movements or confiscating their assets , and not against the victims of their malicious behaviour .
( PL ) Mr President , sanctions are an important tool in foreign policy .
They undoubtedly led to the fall of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa .
In fact I am a beneficiary of sanctions myself , in so far as in 1983 , as a result of an amnesty enforced by sanctions , I was released from jail , although sadly not for long .
They do , however , very often fail , as can be seen from the examples of Zimbabwe and Cuba .
Economic sanctions are often used to justify difficulties that are primarily the result of incompetent dictatorial government .
There is , however , one type of sanction that does not give rise to such propaganda opportunities .
This is a ban on entry into the European Union .
It cannot , however , embrace only representatives of the highest authorities , as is the case with Belarus , for example ; it must also take in individuals from the middle level of the apparatus of repression and violation of human rights .
Then ordinary people will see that the measures taken are not targeted at them , but at the apparatus of dictatorial power .
( LV ) I would like to commend the attempts by Mrs Flautre to strengthen the European Union 's capability and increase its authority .
I have no doubt that sanctions need to be applied flexibly , but at the same time the rapporteur also points to the inadmissibility of double standards .
Lack of consistency threatens the credibility of Europe 's sanctions and policies .
The European Union compromises itself if it introduces a sanctions regime and then breaches it itself , as is the case regarding Robert Mugabe .
The European Union not infrequently treats non-EU countries differently .
That has its consequences .
The EU 's acquiescent stance on the Georgia issue gave rise in Russia to a real explosion of enthusiasm .
In their opinion , military aggression is the best instrument for protecting human rights .
Certainly , throughout the world differing values hold sway .
The CFSP 's toothlessness is proof of the fact that the EU is led by business interests .
When we assess it in practical terms , this must be the case .
Unfortunately , it increases the sense of impunity on the part of certain major powers , and their awareness that they can violate international rights .
Today 's double standards will give rise to even more problems in the future .
( NL ) Mr President , sanctions were a suitable instrument to gradually put an end to the worst forms of colonial rule and to apartheid in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia .
In the past , it was always the opponents of change who rejected sanctions and above all called attention to the negative side effects .
On the other hand , the representatives of the poor and oppressed in those countries pointed out that they accepted the disadvantages of the boycott as the price that had to be paid for their liberation .
The sustained economic boycott of the hideous regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq has taught us that such boycotts can also sometimes result in the inhabitants of the relevant country becoming isolated and afraid of the outside world and supporting their government .
A boycott certainly does not help to push the wishes of the outside world through against domestic public opinion , but it is and remains an appropriate means of supporting suppressed public opinion and the fight for improvement in a country .
If we make a sharp distinction along these lines , sanctions remain a useful instrument to bring about more equality and democracy .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
I feel that the evaluation of Union measures and sanctions that form part of Union policies is extremely important in the area of human rights , especially at such a tense time , which currently means the Georgian crisis , and was preceded by the question of Tibet or even Zimbabwe .
I would therefore like to congratulate Mrs Flautre on her report .
This policy of sanctions is based on well-defined principles of human rights and international law , which are fortified by numerous UN and Union documents .
The problems occur not at the level of principles but at the level of their application in practice , where we are experiencing a lack of consistency , effectiveness and balance .
Systematic enforcement of human rights criteria is essential in preserving the credibility of the Union .
I find consistency to be wanting , since it is often a victim of daily political interests .
Unified action is just as crucial .
There is no point in us having common standards if there are major deviations between the different Member States in their practical application .
For example , whilst the EU defended the protection of human rights in the case of Tibet , the Union has a Member State that expels Tibetan refugees .
In the interests of political effectiveness , we must construct a policy of sanctions that is transparent , unified and has well-defined aims .
In addition to unified action , rapid or even immediate reaction is also important .
We can see that the diplomatic wrangling makes a joke not only of our policy of sanctions but also of the whole Union .
However , all of this will achieve its sole objective if it is accompanied by positive measures that support the relevant civil society . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) I hope this report will play an important role in strengthening the European policy on applying Community sanctions .
I believe it is essential to have more cohesion between Member States in the future , both during the decision-making process as regards sanctions and in relation to their correct application .
If we want the European Union to be a strong and respected presence on the international stage and its actions , including as regards sanctions , to have the biggest possible impact , it is essential to demonstrate great solidarity and avoid using different units of measurements .
It is essential that sanctions affect as little as possible the population of countries whose political regions are subject to sanctions .
Let 's not make those peoples suffer twice , as long as they are already victims of oppressive regimes or corrupt governments .
I am glad that Madam Commissioner has also emphasized this aspect .
Last but not least , I would like to bring up the matter of the opportunity of sanctions .
At the beginning of this week , we were facing a specific case : the Georgian crisis and the position of the 27 Member States toward Russia .
The results of Monday 's Summit are subject to heated debates , precisely due to the discrepancy between the firm and almost vehement tone of the attitude expressed and the reticence to resort to sanctions .
I consider that , as long as things can still be remedied and dialogue can prevent the deterioration of the situation , sanctions should remain the last measure to resort to .
( ES ) Mr President , the thoughts raised in this report on the issue of sanctions are very welcome .
It is obvious that the issue needs some serious thought : too many times sanctions have proven to be entirely futile and , in many cases , entirely unfair ; too many times they have harmed the weakest in society .
Why do fishermen in Mauritania have to pay for the fact that , suddenly , there has been a coup in their country ?
Where is the sense in that ?
The sanctions should therefore be reviewed and analysed : both the concept itself and its application .
Moreover , when they are imposed too frequently , and incoherently , as the European Union does , they lose credibility and so does the European Union .
It is one thing to take into account our own interests and quite another for this to be the barometer for whether or not to impose sanctions .
It is essential that we have specific monitoring of the effectiveness of these measures ; it is essential that we promote intelligent sanction methods , so that they affect those responsible for human rights violations directly and personally .
We are learning from what the United States have done in North Korea and the freezing of bank accounts in Macao .
We are studying this example , which received very little publicity but was much more effective than holding numerous press conferences against a particular government .
I therefore support this report , but there is still work to be done by the Commission and the Council in order to genuinely monitor what is being done , why it is being done and how it is being done .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur and assure her that we will be supporting her report .
The European Union is right to have at its disposal a tough set of political and economic instruments which can be used against regimes around the world which violate the human rights of their people .
But the European Union must be very careful when it comes to imposing political and economic sanctions .
The EU is the largest contributor to overseas development aid , but it must act with wisdom and prudence when it comes to sanctions .
The effect of sanctions in Zimbabwe , Sudan and Burma , to name but three countries , has been very detrimental to ordinary people in those countries .
So we must try and make sure that it does not affect the poorest and most oppressed in these countries but attacks and gets after the people who are leading these countries .
Some people have mentioned Cuba .
I cannot understand why we have sanctions against Cuba .
Cuba should be returned to normal trading : in 10 years ' time Cuba would be a radically different country if we did that instead having of these ridiculous sanctions on the place .
We must be careful , as I said , when imposing sanctions , and when imposing economic and political sanctions they must be targeted at those who are in charge .
Let us target their financial affairs abroad or their travel situation .
Sanctions can be useful but they are limited , especially if they are only being used by European Union countries .
UN sanctions are far stronger and can be far more effective .
I support this report but I do think that sanctions are limited .
They can be effective , but we must also use prudence and wisdom when we implement them .
( EL ) Mr President , under the pretext of human rights , the report under discussion proposes the most effective use of the unacceptable and inhuman weapon of sanctions and embargoes to impose the EU 's policies by extortion and pressure on countries , peoples and governments that stand up to capitalist barbarity .
The cleverly targeted sanctions being proposed , in combination with the financing of non-governmental organisations as EU mercenaries , constitute the most shameless open intervention in countries ' internal affairs .
This violates even the basic principles of what remains of international law .
The report in practice adopts the embargo policy applied by the United States against Cuba under the Helms-Burton Act , which , among other things , obliges even third-country companies trading with the United States to abide by the sanctions it imposes .
This law and embargo have been condemned repeatedly by the overwhelming majority of UN members at General Assemblies .
It amounts to the export of national law , which is an abuse and denial of the international principles and Charter of the United Nations .
Appealing to the UN and referring to human rights is a fig leaf covering up the EU 's aggressive imperialist policy .
It is incredibly hypocritical .
We ask you : why do you not take any measures against Russia ?
We should not agree to that , of course .
Why do you not take measures against China ?
We should not agree , of course , to your taking such measures .
The explanation is that you have economic interests there .
Those who introduced the human rights clause in the Agnoletto report have a great deal to answer for , because they gave the EU an alibi and pretext for its criminal policies against the people .
Those who are competent among us and responsible enough to solve their own problems are , we believe , the people themselves .
They do not need self-appointed protectors , least of all the EU .
( PL ) Mr President , the use of sanctions should become a real and effective part of EU foreign policy in the sphere of human rights .
The conclusions incorporated into Mrs Flautre 's report are well-intentioned .
The policy of double standards used up to now needs to be changed .
It makes sense to expand the application of the clause relating to human rights and democracy to cover all commercial agreements concluded by the EU with third countries .
It is important to apply political and economic sanctions at the same time , with the former intended to hit hardest at sectors that constitute a strategic source of income for governments .
When we apply sanctions , we should also support civil society and non-governmental organisations in the country in question .
I have the impression , though , that passing resolutions is not enough of a solution .
Examples where individual Member States have been guided by their own specific interests and have violated EU solidarity provide the best evidence of this .
Without genuine political will on the part of the EU Member States , resolutions will remain on paper only .
The position of the EU authorities with regard to Russia 's actions in Georgia will be a measure of whether EU foreign policy passes the test .
It is no longer enough simply to announce relevant principles and demands ; it is high time they started to be applied .
That is precisely what this report is about , and I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Flautre for that .
( ET ) In my view , one of the most important topics in this report is benchmarking .
When we impose sanctions we also need to establish the benchmarks on how , when and under what conditions those sanctions are to be lifted .
Without such benchmarks sanctions themselves are pointless .
Take Andijan as an example .
For the first time the sanctions regime incorporated a policy mechanism of positive measures , which means that there was a six-month period before sanctions were applied and Uzbekistan had the choice of whether to comply with our criteria and the time in which to do so .
It is good that the positive mechanism was applied , but it too should be benchmarked : until there are very positive developments in the Andijan massacre the sanctions will not be lifted .
This brings me to the next important point raised in the report . Namely , the establishment of an independent group of experts on sanctions , who would assess the types of sanctions and when they should be imposed .
Consideration must also be given to the symbolic significance of sanctions , something which I experienced in Uzbekistan .
It is difficult to quantify .
Despite the fact that the effect in practice there was not great , for example the visa system ( the officials , mostly those against whom it had been imposed , had left ) and the arms embargo ( arms were not supplied there ) , they had great symbolic value .
That was the view expressed by everyone , from the taxi driver to the minister .
Mr President , the European Union 's foreign policy has been a pioneer of a positive conditionality model - the ' method of the carrot ' -implementing it successfully in relations with its candidate countries .
Unfortunately , rewarding progress in the field of human rights in developing countries has not always proven to be the most effective measure to encourage them to move forward , as new players have emerged in the international arena practising political dumping .
China 's policy in Africa , for example , does not hold any reference to human rights or democracy .
But instead of backing down on the fundamental values of the EU , we should not be afraid of applying the ' method of the stick ' where necessary to show that , when certain basic requirements are not met , there will also be dire consequences that third parties are wisely advised to avoid .
( PL ) Mr President , the use of double standards in the sphere of violation of human rights is a disaster for the EU .
For a long time now , and also recently in the context of Russia 's aggression against Georgia , we have been dealing with a situation in which a special lightweight tariff has been used for countries that , despite being dictatorial or semi-dictatorial , are rich or large , and for countries that are violating human rights but are less important from a European aspect , or for American business .
We should not give up the instrument of sanctions against countries that violate human and citizens ' rights and show contempt for European standards in that area .
This instrument should not , however , be devalued - we should use it flexibly .
In this context we should not reject the threat of the possible use of sanctions against Russia for the war in the Caucasus .
To conclude , I am very glad that we wish to recognise the conscious infliction of damage to the environment as a violation of human rights .
Colleagues from Finland , Sweden and the Baltic States are talking in this context of the potential dramatic environmental consequences of the investment in the Nord Stream gas pipeline on the bed of the Baltic Sea .
( PT ) Mr President , Europe needs a major change to take rights seriously .
Smart and effective sanctions need to be linked to a structural and systemic response .
Europe needs more unity .
The myth of borders still makes its presence felt at the table when we are making decisions .
Also seated around it are post-colonial nostalgias and current interests .
Yet human rights require European authority and more intensive and extensive inclusion .
A new Europe is not a Europe where each one decides what they want and how they want it .
A new Europe is a single body and in human rights has not merely an end , but the very instrument for its geopolitics .
The path is simple : a strong European political centre , a European Parliament with the power to decide , shared responsibility in the diplomatic dealings of the Member States in defending human rights , with the European Commission steering this task , more political and less bureaucratic European Commission delegations in third countries , pressure on the World Trade Organization to research the democratic dignity of its members , promotion of organisational structures identical to those of the Union , intensive dialogue with the African Union and the Union of South American Nations and other regional groupings , pressure on reform of the United Nations with the European Union playing a key role , creation of an internal strategy against dependence , centred on a single energy policy and a consistent defence policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need a policy revolution in this area of human rights .
( DE ) Mr President , the current debate on possible sanctions against Russia in reaction to the conflict in the Caucasus once again shows how irresponsibly sanctions are sometimes handled .
It is questionable whether they are legitimate as an all-purpose , non-differentiating instrument and unclear when and how their effectiveness is in fact guaranteed .
It is particularly important to evaluate the effectiveness of EU sanctions correctly .
They should not be deceptive ; on the contrary , they must be tailored .
Repressive regimes are often responsible .
What evaluation criteria are applied remains a central question , despite all efforts .
When do sanctions actually lead to a change in behaviour ?
Instead of ad hoc sanctions being imposed , I would like an EU strategy resulting in a coherent and sustainable sanctions policy .
There would have to be a consensus here on their optimum conditions of use , however .
An effective sanctions strategy is still lacking up to now .
This report , however , is a step in the right direction .
The European Parliament is currently the most important agent for promoting human rights .
EU sanctions ought not to be an aggressive political instrument , but should be there in the people 's interest .
Sanctions that punish the civil population are counterproductive and miss the actual point .
( RO ) Sanctions represent one of the instruments the Union can use to implement its human rights policy .
Nevertheless , as the Rapporteur also noticed , the absence of a study regarding the impact of the sanctions policy provided by the European Union makes the assessment of this policy 's effects and effectiveness on the ground difficult and , consequently , indicates a lack of transparency , coherence and even legitimacy of Community sanctions .
As long as the European Union does not speak with only one voice in its common security policy , it is very difficult for us to impose efficient and systematic Community sanctions .
It is regrettable that the Union and the Member States have not used the sanctions systematically ; this is why I consider , Mr. President , that the creation of a coherent strategy for the sanctions policy is required , in order to respect human rights , a strategy that would take into account the agreements and clauses already signed , avoiding the double standard and thus contributing to the increase in the Union 's credibility .
I congratulate Mrs. Flautre for this report .
( PL ) Mr President , in international law there is a Latin principle that goes like this : ' par in parem non habet imperium ' .
This means that a state cannot judge another state or impose sanctions on it , but that is in the past , that is history .
International society , guided by common sense and rationalism , has completed an enormous about-turn .
The primitive sanctions that states used to use against each other according to the retaliation principle , following the Biblical principle , drawn from the Old Testament , of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' , has been replaced by the excellent mechanism of collective , organised sanctions whereby procedures decide on who may use this mechanism , when and how .
I am glad that the European Union is working out an ever more refined mechanism for applying sanctions , which includes differentiation to take account of the situation and the level of blame .
There are two things I should like to emphasise .
I am in favour of wise and intelligent sanctions that are sensibly applied , but I am against what are called preventive sanctions .
In my view , preventive sanctions are an abuse .
Secondly , I would like to appeal for us to give greater attention to society , to our citizens , by informing them that sanctions are not a primitive punishment , but a natural , healthy reaction to a serious violation of the law , and that they serve to defend democracy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to pick up on a subject that several Members have addressed .
Sanctions should not be wrongly targeted .
In particular they should not harm the poorest of the poor .
Here we have something that has been developing for quite some time , but we have to continue along this path .
In the past we have seen again and again that corrupt regimes contemptuous of human rights very often have the attendant symptoms of very large amounts of public money being converted as a rule into private capital and then put on hold somewhere in fabulous accounts until the respective member of the regime is able to retrieve and enjoy this money .
This involves us similarly seeking and finding worldwide cooperation , such as in the approach we have created at the International Criminal Court .
The European Union can play an important role here in ensuring that the fruits of this policy do not arrive where we do not want them to arrive .
( HU ) Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Flautre on her excellent , balanced report .
I can see three cases where the European Union is applying double standards .
On the one hand , there are double standards when we weigh up two small countries , of which one opposes us and is hostile and the other declares itself to be pro-Western and pro-Europe .
We see double standards between small countries and the bigger powers , Russia and China , because that is when economic interests come into play .
And there is a third double standard , which raises the question of our credibility and whether the European Union has the right to criticise third countries with regard to human rights and minority rights when there are some countries in the Union where several hundreds of thousands of people do not have nationality , like two of the Baltic States , or when there is a leading power in the European Union whose constitution still rejects the recognition of regional languages . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to join those who have drawn attention to double standards and inconsistency , and I would like to draw Mrs Flautre 's attention to point 22 of the report , concerning the substantiation of the country reports and the legality of sanctions or of a sanctions policy .
In September 2004 , this House made a decision to send a fact-finding mission to Vojvodina , the northern part of Serbia , which is not only a human rights matter but also a solidarity matter since there are very many Hungarians , and also Romanians and Germans , living there who ended up there through the storms of history .
We examined the grave human rights situation there .
And this decision said that the Subcommittee on Human Rights would investigate it .
This has not happened , even after three and a half years .
I would therefore ask that the subcommittee investigate this grave situation in accordance with the decision , because it is only then that Parliament will be able to draw the attention of the Council and the Commission to the actual situation and to assume a role in the sanctions policy .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by responding to Mrs Flautre , also to Mr Romeva I Rueda and to those who spoke of the need to have an appraisal , to have an evaluation and impact assessments .
This does indeed seem very important to me , and the Council shares Parliament 's concern to be able to take these sanctions decisions , and to update them , on the basis of the best possible information . The existing measures are regularly re-evaluated on the basis of impact assessments and the Council bases its decisions as often as possible on reports from the heads of mission in the country , who are best placed to judge their effectiveness .
The Council has also considerably developed its consultations with local and international non-governmental organisations , and today Parliament has shown that it has a very important role to play in this evaluation .
What is also true , however , is that sanctions are an instrument that must remain political in nature .
We do need to have a strategy from the point of view of methodology , but we cannot fence ourselves in , nor can we give the process an automatic nature - I just want to say that as clearly and responsibly as possible here - therefore there will always be differences in our assessment .
To answer Mrs Koppa as well , whose speech was very sophisticated , sanctions remain a political instrument .
They are not the only instrument for promoting human rights .
There are two other instruments which stigmatise the countries they are targeting less , but which are also a tool for promoting human rights , and these are the conditionalities provided for in the enlargement policy of the Stabilisation and Association Process with the Balkans and the Neighbourhood Policy , and mandatory human rights clauses in all the agreements that the European Union enters into with third countries or groups of countries , the violation of which can lead to the suspension of these agreements .
I would like to reassure Mrs Koppa that there is no embargo on pharmaceutical products , but a system of control where these products have dual uses and are therefore subject to the non-proliferation regime .
The Council shares the view of many that sanctions should remain targeted and should not affect civilian populations .
Mr Cappato and Mr Gawronski also raised an important issue , and several speakers came back to the question of environmental damage .
At the moment , damage to the environment does not feature among the objectives of the common foreign and security policy , so it is true that from that point of view , it is not taken into account and we should be thinking about whether to include damage to the environment where it constitutes a threat either to international security or to the rights of people , to human rights .
That is a discussion we need to start .
I would also like to say to Mr Cappato that in the cases mentioned , energy sanctions have already been used by the European Union and this has been in a variety of circumstances .
I just wanted to go over a few cases that several of you mentioned : recent events , obviously .
Concerning the war between Russia and Georgia , I would say very clearly here that sanctions cannot achieve their aim if the consequence is to break off all contact with the country concerned , in this case Russia .
Finally , we also need to think about whether imposing sanctions in this case would be in Georgia 's interest .
I would ask you all to think about that .
I will also come back to what has been said about the benchmarking process .
It was mentioned by Mrs Saks .
It is a very important issue , particularly as regards Uzbekistan ; it is true , having been there for a conference on Central Asia and the European Union 's presence in Central Asia .
When I was there I also met Mrs Tadjibaeva , a political prisoner , who has now been released ; we hope that her health will improve and she can be given the proper care , but I was also able to see that a good benchmarking policy meant that progress could be achieved and that there was commitment from the authorities to meeting more fully the criteria defined by the European Union . As it happens , we will be returning to the country in October .
As regards Cuba and those who mentioned it , I would like to remind you that the sanctions against Cuba were lifted in June 2008 , which is not stopping us from keeping up rigorous monitoring of human rights developments in the country .
Those were the clarifications I wished to make at the end of this extremely detailed and rich debate , which demonstrates the necessity of Parliament 's involvement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this was a very useful discussion which highlighted a number of very important issues that we have to reflect upon when we opt for sanctions , because sanctions are just one of our foreign policy tools .
We always have to apply them , after careful overall reflection , in conjunction with all other tools , including development work or political and economic reform in third countries .
With all these tools we want to achieve one thing : upholding and promoting human rights .
Mrs Flautre 's report clearly shows that we need to refine this instrument further and make sure that our system of sanctions is in itself fully in line with international law , and does not violate fundamental human rights we all subscribe to .
I believe that our courts - as indeed the European Court of Justice has done today - contribute substantially to developing our sanctions system while at the same time safeguarding fundamental principles like the rule of law and due process .
Again , we should promote human rights and save the wider population , not punish them , either economically or otherwise .
This is very important .
I shall repeat , therefore , that we must target sanctions at those responsible for human rights violations and - as Mr Rack said - opt for instance for freezing accounts and visa bans so as to deprive those leaders or those responsible for human rights violations of any positive possibilities .
A number of speakers , indeed Mrs Flautre herself , have also asked for a proper evaluation of EU sanctions and have suggested the development of a certain methodology .
I think Jean-Pierre Jouyet has already briefly referred to the work done in this respect in the Council , which I would like to support , and in particular I think we should improve somewhat on the ex ante evaluation before imposing sanctions .
Here I could also offer again the services of our delegations because they are sur place and they have a very good knowledge of what is going on ; contributions by civil society and human rights organisations are certainly very useful there .
With regard to coherence I would like to say that sanctions are an important tool , but they must be complemented with a proactive approach in our development work : support for human rights institutions , political reform , promoting of civil society .
Burma / Myanmar is a good example of that .
Sanctions are there while , at the same time , keeping open the possibility of working with NGOs and human rights organisations .
I think this is one important way forward .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am pleased that this discussion has been held and about what each of you , and the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commission , have contributed .
I believe that through this discussion , something resembling a common philosophy is emerging .
I have heard many calls for a more consistent policy , a more credible policy , which avoids double standards , and it seems to me that these are the issues we need to keep working on .
I learned a lot in writing this report , through discussions with various people .
I truly believe there is still a lot of work to do , and that the basis of this future work shall and must be a comprehensive and exhaustive evaluation of the current sanctions policy because , when the question is asked - and we see it today with Russia - things immediately get very heated , and the media are instantly on the lookout .
We therefore need a very solid philosophy and we really have to be in step and in agreement about our procedures and policy .
I think that to do this - I am coming back to the question of the network of experts - it is not a matter of using technical expertise to replace sensitive political decisions , but of ensuring that the sensitive political decisions are based as far as possible on objective information .
When you engage in a sanctions policy , you have to see it through and to respect what many of you have called ' completely objective benchmarks ' , which let you measure the real effectiveness of the sanctions .
I believe we are making really concrete progress .
There are still a few points to be clarified - you will all have realised this from several of the speeches - and these were the reason for my abstention in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I think , ladies and gentlemen , that we cannot sell ourselves short on requirements for full respect for human rights and international law in drawing up blacklists , in putting people 's names on these lists or taking them off .
The Court of Justice judgment you have just talked about , Mr Jouyet , fully encourages us to pursue this .
Ladies and gentlemen , I invite you to adopt , not a perfect report , but a very honourable report of which we can be proud , and which will be a good working tool .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 4 September 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in written form . - ( BG ) Mr. Pöttering , Ms Flautre , most of you have been in opposition at one moment or another of your political career .
You are familiar with this experience - the incumbent pretend that you do not exist while you denounce them for their thefts and [ shady ] deals .
In Bulgaria , however , heirs to terrorists and outright fascists are currently in power .
These are the parties that constitute the three-party coalition in Bulgaria : godless individuals who bombed churches to make an impression on the Comintern , such as the Bulgarian Socialist Party ( BSP ) is ; a party compiled around the heir of Boris III who involved Bulgaria in World War II and did not miss kissing with Hitler - these are the thieves from the Simeon II National Movement ( SNM ) - and , finally , the anti-constitutional Muslim party of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms ( MRF ) which consists of terrorists who blew up railway carriages for mothers with children just about twenty years ago .
On 30 July 2008 these incumbents beat up my colleague Dimitar Stoyanov .
A medical examination established 34 injuries sustained from the thugs in police uniforms .
Against the backdrop of the EU effective policy for the application of sanctions in cases of gross violation of human rights , about which you speak in your report , I insist that this Parliament and each of its Members voice an opinion in respect to this shameful for all of us incident , and severely condemn the governing mafia in my country .
in writing . - The criminal justice system serves to punish , deter and to rehabilitate the offender .
In the same way sanctions broadly serve the same purposes .
Our criminal justice systems may punish , but how successful they are in deterring and rehabilitating is open to question .
Likewise , sanctions often have limited impact on deterring and rehabilitating nations which break international law and violate human rights .
Research based on the effectiveness of over 100 instances of economic sanctions since World War I has shown that they are most likely to be effective if : the change we demand is modest ; large powerful nations or groups of nations act against a weaker nation ; the target nation is truly dependent on trade with those imposing the sanctions ; sanctions are imposed quickly and damage to the imposer of sanctions is limited .
When the EU does impose sanctions they should be precise and well targeted .
Measures to consider include : freezing of financial assets , ban on transactions , investment restrictions ; trade restrictions on particular goods ; travel restrictions ; diplomatic constraints and cultural and sports restrictions .
It is vital that the EU reviews its sanctions policy , not only with the aim of achieving the desired changes in offending nations , but also to ensure its own credibility .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament , playing at being the UN , is claiming to establish the reign of human rights throughout the world .
It would do better to keep its own house in order .
In France , Belgium , Germany , Austria , thousands of citizens , including academics , public lawyers and elected representatives chosen by their fellow countrymen , are tried , sentenced , ruined , removed from employment , imprisoned and accused of racism for criticising immigration , accused of xenophobia for defending legitimate national preference , accused of revisionism for criticising the ' official ' but changing truths of contemporary history , accused of homophobia for expressing a legitimate preference for natural families , which are the only ones capable of passing on life .
This political and judicial persecution even extends to lawyers .
In Germany , Sylvia Stolz was arrested for defending her client 's views in court .
In France , the Council of the Paris Bar Association , by rejecting the honorary membership of retired lawyer Eric Delcroix instead of taking his defence , brought dishonour on itself .
Judges like Estoup in Versailles , Schir in Lyon and Cotte in Paris are vying to get these arbitrary laws extensively applied out of disregard for any principles that protect freedom .
Most of all , however , some of those responsible for this freedom-killing legislation sit in this Parliament .
It is at them that our indignation should be directed first of all .
in writing . - The European Union is based on values , such as democracy and respect for human rights .
Protecting and speaking up for these is the core of any policy made in the European Union .
Human rights have been mainstreamed into the EU 's foreign policy .
Nevertheless , all too often the EU is not speaking with one voice and lacks the ability to react fast and efficiently on massive violations of human rights .
Sanctions are part of the human rights policy , yet they are not applied equally .
The EU should not turn a blind eye and make exceptions for big countries , such as Russia and China , which is in fact trading human rights for economic benefits .
Economic relations with third countries have to be carefully considered in cases of continuing human rights violations , which have to be met with sanctions and the freezing of further negotiations .
Therefore , I strongly call upon the Commission and the Council to react with determination , unity and strength .
Furthermore , I call on the EU to apply the human rights policy equally and to set sanctions on every country where massive human rights violations are proven .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Flautre , for a balanced and worthy report , whose insistence on the re-evaluation of EU sanctions and research as part of the EU 's wider human rights policy is only right and proper .
As long as we lack information based on large-scale research , the debate on the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of sanctions will remain a fruitless task .
Sanctions can be of significance in human rights policy in two complementary ways .
On the one hand , they are a moral message from the European community of values and , as such , a valuable signal .
On the other hand , they can have a tangible impact on the development of the target state .
Both these aspects have definitely been important in cases where actual lasting results have been achieved , for example in the dismantling of South Africa 's apartheid policy .
It is probably obvious , however , that sanctions alone cannot achieve results like this .
For a country 's human rights and political situation actually to change permanently , the coordination and comprehensive use of the instruments of human rights policy are required .
Parliament has stressed before how important it is to have a more effective assembly for human rights policy .
In order to avoid human catastrophes , we should look into the possibility of more focused sanctions , which target , in particular , a country 's leaders and groups who violate human rights .
We should be wary , in particular , of the sort of crippling measures that destroy chances for small and medium-sized enterprises to grow .
My own question here is what criteria should be used to impose sanctions .
It is regrettable that all too often , behind the evaluation of sanctions , one can discern a concern over how appropriate they might be , which is based on the Union 's commercial interests .
The Millennium Development - Goal 5 : maternal health ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the Millennium Development Goal 5 : maternal health .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , like the European Parliament , the Council attaches great importance to achieving all the Millennium Development Goals throughout the world by 2015 and particularly the one that aims to reduce the maternal mortality rate by three quarters between 1990 and 2015 .
In this respect , the European Union recalls that lasting progress in this area requires respect for and promotion of the rights of women and girls by guaranteeing them access to health services , notably as regards sexual health and by protecting them from the AIDS virus .
The three EU institutions have made clear their collective desire to improve maternal health in the developing countries , particularly through the signature on 20 December 2005 of the European Consensus on Development , which puts maternal health among the priorities for the EU 's development policy .
We now have the necessary financial instruments to implement this goal , particularly within the framework of the partnership between the European Union and Africa on the Millennium Goals .
As you know , regarding health , there are still considerable challenges to be met .
They were mentioned in the United Nations annual report .
500 000 women still die each year from complications in pregnancy or childbirth that cannot be treated .
These deaths cannot be avoided at this stage if we do not make any progress .
The probability of a woman dying of these maternal causes is 1 in 16 in sub-Saharan Africa compared with 1 in 3 800 in developed countries .
Therefore , in view of the scale of these challenges , in view of this totally unacceptable situation , the Council has taken the decision to accelerate and strengthen its action .
In June , it adopted an Agenda for Action .
The Agenda states that the EU will urgently support the attainment of the target set in 2005 regarding universal access to reproductive health and well as 2010 milestones to save - as you know - 4 million more children 's lives each year , 2 million of which in Africa , and to have 35 million more births attended by skilled health personnel each year , 13 million of which in Africa .
If we want to reduce maternal mortality by three quarters by 2015 , it means that 21 million more births will have to be attended by skilled health personnel each year by 2010 .
The EU will provide support to reach the target of 50 million more women in Africa having modern contraceptives by 2010 , and more generally to have access to family planning .
The Agenda , which was implemented by the Council , also states that the EU will contribute to helping to bridge the financing gap to achieve these targets by 2010 .
I can tell you that the financing gap is today estimated at more than EUR 13 billion by the World Health Organisation .
If - and the Commissioner will tell us if this is the case - the European Commission believes that , to bridge the financing gap , we need to increase EU support by EUR 8 billion by 2010 , of which EUR 6 billion would be destined for Africa , it is essential that both partner countries and donors are stakeholders in dealing with the challenges facing us .
In this context , the Presidency is therefore convinced that reinforcing the health systems of the developing countries remains a key priority of the Millennium Development Goals .
Several concrete actions are planned , which I will list : the Presidency and the Commission are preparing a joint paper on covering health risks ; development ministers are going to meet during the informal meeting , which will take place on 29 and 30 September , regarding the conclusions of the November Council meeting and the forthcoming presidencies for universal access to healthcare ; and finally , the Council will examine the Commission report on the EU programme for action to tackle the critical shortage of health workers in developing countries - and I have made a note of how crucial this task is .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you can be sure that the Council will continue to act and do everything it can for the European Union to continue driving improvements in maternal health in developing countries , particularly Africa .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the right to health is probably the basic right with the most inequalities in the world today .
Those in greatest need , at greatest risk of ill health and premature death , have the worst access to health care - often zero access .
This poses enormous challenges to the European Union and to the world community as a whole .
The European Union is very committed to the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , including MDG 5 on maternal health , which is the subject we are discussing today .
We are aware of the fact that scaling up sexual and reproductive health and health funding in general requires a far more coherent and multi-sectoral approach , also involving other MDGs .
Health results cannot be achieved without adequate investment in the systems that deliver better health .
Health policy needs to be embedded in broader social and economic development planning .
Countries need long-term predictable aid from external donors .
Donors need to see a clear link between financing and results , and mechanisms to hold all partners accountable for their performance against international agreements are badly needed .
Poor people - women , men and children - living in developing countries encounter a wide range of interrelated sexual and reproductive health problems .
These include HIV / AIDS , sexually transmitted diseases , unplanned or unwanted pregnancy , complications encountered in pregnancy and childbirth , genital mutilation or cutting , infertility , sexual abuse , unsafe abortion and cancer of the cervix , among others .
Together , these conditions are responsible for much suffering and many premature deaths .
Exacerbated by poverty and the secondary position of women in society they are basically due to the lack of access to appropriate health services , lack of information and inadequate availability of skilled professionals and supplies of reproductive health commodities .
Therefore , improving maternal health and reducing maternal mortality have been key concerns of the European Commission 's work in health and development .
However , despite our efforts and the MDG targets , MDG 5 is possibly the goal which is most off-track globally - especially , as has already been said , in Africa .
This is very serious , all the more so because most maternal deaths occur at home , far removed from the health services , and often go unrecorded .
So the actual maternal mortality figure might even be much higher than the half million a year that we are aware of according to the statistics .
From a political point of view , there is another issue which causes concern .
This is the increasing tendency not to prioritise sexual and reproductive health and rights policies in programmes because of sensitivities to abortion .
By doing so , we are forgetting about the unequal position of women in many of our partner countries who have no say about the number of children they want or are forced to have sexual relations , sometimes even with a partner who is likely to be HIV-infected .
Let us not forget about the many victims of rape , the young girls and women who , on top of their injuries and trauma , often get rejected by their relatives and communities .
Under the 10th European Development Fund and the Commission budget , we are therefore programming direct support to health in 31 developing countries .
Many of these countries have very high maternal mortality rates and very weak health systems .
In this regard , budget support linked to health outcomes becomes another important instrument to address maternal mortality .
To make this aid more predictable , the Commission is introducing in a number of partner countries a new financing modality called ' MDG contracting ' , under which budget support will be made over a longer term , linked with agreed outcomes which contribute towards the achievement of the MDGs .
This will allow governments to support recurrent costs of health systems , such as the salaries of health workers .
This is critical to increase access to basic healthcare , including safe deliveries and progress towards MDG 5 .
However , we know that what is being done in support of maternal health at the moment is not sufficient and that more efforts are needed to change the present situation .
This is why on 24 June 2008 the Council of the European Union adopted the EU Agenda for Action on MDGs , whereby the Commission and the Member States commit themselves to increase their support to health by the additional EUR 8 billion which has been mentioned , and EUR 6 billion in Africa , by 2010 .
Regarding MDG 5 , the Agenda for Action on MDGs mentioned two important targets by 2010 : firstly , 21 million more births attended by skilled health workers and , secondly , 50 million more women to have access to modern contraceptives in Africa .
We the Commission - but also the Member States - will now have to make it happen together .
We have made the commitment and we are determined to improve the situation of women in poor countries giving birth , which I think is the most natural thing in the world .
I am glad that , as the Commissioner for External Relations today , in place of Louis Michel , I can say that , because , as a woman , I feel very much in solidarity .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , Millennium Development Goal 5 is a very important objective , touching as it does not only on the quality of life , but on life itself , its initiation and continuation .
The importance of Millennium Development Goal 5 is all the greater in as much as its successful implementation does not cost very much in monetary terms .
There are programmes and projects that are already being put into effect around the world that have significantly reduced perinatal mortality , and their cost has not been particularly high .
Despite this , in some regions the achievement dynamics of Goal 5 have been poor or very poor .
Moreover , in some regions , particularly sub-Saharan Africa , there has been no improvement since 2000 .
This is a very worrying phenomenon , as it means that implementation of Millennium Development Goal 5 on a global scale is seriously threatened .
Unfortunately in some developed countries we still see a tendency to ideologise the problem and concentrate on one really quite controversial issue , namely that of reproductive rights .
This has already been mentioned today .
However , one of the most important causes of death among mothers is hazardously performed abortions .
However you look at it , it is logical that limiting the number of abortions would bring about a fall in mortality among mothers .
Surely , then , it would be easier to limit the number of abortions than to increase the number of what might be called ' safe ' abortions .
It is therefore difficult to agree with the assertion that reproductive health should be a priority in development policy .
It is important , but surely the priority should continue to be the fight against poverty ( I agree with the Commissioner ) , improving the position of women and keeping the promises made by developed countries .
This choice of priorities is very important , because a poor choice of priorities could lead to actions that might be unfavourable .
For example , we include the example of exchanging experience and best practice in resolutions as standard , but if the objective is inappropriate , an exchange of experience and best practice could be ineffective or downright undesirable .
It is also worth remembering that imposing our norms and standards on other countries and societies is morally ambivalent .
In matters of ethics , countries that benefit from our aid should take their own decisions on what is good and acceptable .
We should not , for example , say that abortion is a good solution .
That would be inconsistent and it would be unjustified interference : inconsistent , because we ourselves wish to increase the birth rate in Europe , while promoting its restriction in other countries ; unjustified interference , because no-one has authorised us to influence decisions on ethical matters in other states .
In my opinion , therefore , we should concentrate on what is not controversial , especially as there are very many things that are not controversial and on which we are all agreed : education , strengthening the position of women , protecting motherhood , good nutrition , access to skilled medical assistance and obstetric care .
These are areas on which we can jointly concentrate , and thus facilitate the achievement of Millennium Goal 5 .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner - to whom I would like to wish a happy birthday today - I am not going to refer to the text I was planning to read to you here on behalf of my group because I believe we are in the midst of a particularly important discussion .
By noting the failure to meet this Millennium goal , the fifth goal , which is very important because it concerns women and their suffering during pregnancy , we have to abandon the extremely hypocritical attitude and analysis we make in Europe when we know , see and can testify to the situation in Africa , on the ground , in villages , in countryside and in the bush .
I was rather annoyed by what our fellow Member Mr Kaczmarek has just said , and that is why I am not going to read my paper .
We cannot claim that abortion is a miraculous remedy for all the problems of women who have to give birth .
Absolutely not .
We have to devote the necessary means to ensuring that these women can have everything they need : an education , proper family planning , contraception and , where necessary , voluntary termination of pregnancy under proper conditions - but we are not going all-out for that .
It is extremely difficult to say things clearly in Parliament because there are some people who , in the name of morality and sometimes in the name of conservatism , keep stopping us from taking proper measures , effective measures , for the benefit of women in the countries concerned .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have worked on the joint motion for a resolution on maternal mortality , taking account of the fact that Goal 5 , ' Reduce by three-quarters , between 1990 and 2015 , the maternal mortality ratio ' , is far from being achieved and requires a strong initiative , a strong and concrete initiative by the international community , which a Europe of rights and values can only interpret and guarantee .
We acknowledge the reassurances given by Mr Jouyet and Mrs Ferrero , but we need to move swiftly from words to actions .
After all , maternal mortality , together with infant mortality , is the most important indicator of the level of human development , and it is unacceptable , as we have already said , that today more than half a million women still die each year during childbirth .
As we all know , the majority of these women live in sub-Saharan Africa , where there is one death every minute . As we have said , the same risk for women living in the developed world is one in 3 700 .
These figures appear even more dramatic if we look at the encouraging progress made during the same period by some middle-income countries in Eastern Asia , South East Asia , North America , Latin America and North Africa , which prove that this awful situation can be overcome .
In our opinion , therefore , this resolution is well-timed , articulate and comprehensive , and identifies strategies that can address this outright global health emergency , in recognition of the fact that access to an adequate level of healthcare is a fundamental human right .
To conclude , I hope that the valuable compromise reached between the groups on such an agonising issue can garner the widest consensus in Parliament and that the adoption of the joint resolution will bring forth concrete action from all of our institutions and nations , as well as adequate investment in infrastructure and transport , medical equipment , training for equipment operators , education , safety and policies for the emancipation of women , so that this crucial goal for civilisation can be reached by 2015 .
Mr President , mortality during the perinatal period continues to be a very disturbing phenomenon , and one that is not justified by the state of medical knowledge .
Improving the state of health of pregnant women is an even more serious problem at a time of demographic collapse .
It is worth remembering what a serious mutilation an abortion is for a woman .
We cannot have the dilemma : if you agree to the killing of your child , you will have a chance of survival .
A 75 % reduction in perinatal mortality by 2015 , relative to 1990 , requires a general improvement in women 's state of health and an increase in the money spent on health care and education aimed at prevention .
The situation is at its worst in southern and sub-Saharan Africa , and also in Asia .
Each year half a million women there pay for their desire to have offspring with their lives .
In the case of women infected with HIV and malaria , besides the danger to the mother 's health , there is also the danger that the children will be infected .
It should be emphasised that one important negative factor here is poverty , and financial means should be addressed to solving this problem .
This situation very specifically indicates the value of solidarity between people .
Recognising women 's health - the health of mothers-to-be - as a priority and the mobilisation of international forces in order to improve health care for pregnant women is a serious challenge .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I have now been a parliamentarian for nine years and , in that time , have had two children .
They are now aged two and almost eight .
Pregnancies are always full of suspense , of course - you always wonder whether the child will be born perfectly healthy - but I can honestly say that in neither of those pregnancies did I ever wonder whether I myself would survive .
What a tremendous luxury that is !
The figures have already been cited .
In Europe , fewer than 1 in 3 800 women die from pregnancy-related causes , but the figure is very much higher in some African countries : 1 in 16 .
The figure of 1 in 7 has been mentioned for Niger .
One reason for this is unsafe abortions .
I do wish these were not a reality , but this would require changes such as the provision of contraception or restraint on the part of men .
Further reasons are a lack of medical assistance or delays in providing such assistance , and too many pregnancies one after another and at too young an age .
The wide discrepancies between the situation in Europe and in a great many of these other countries show that investment pays off .
It is self-evident : investment in health care reduces maternal mortality .
Yet very little is happening in this regard .
In 1987 approximately half a million women a year died in pregnancy or childbirth and this figure was unchanged in 2008 - this is most disappointing .
I make no secret of my cynicism .
My feeling is that much more attention is paid to combating AIDS because this claims the lives of men , too .
However , I am encouraged by what Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and also the President-in-Office had to say , and wish to thank the Commissioner most warmly for her speech .
There is a clear link between maternal mortality and self-determination .
According to recent research , approximately 200 million women in developing countries would very much like to bear fewer children , but half of these have no access to contraceptives and sexual information .
This results in 52 million unwanted pregnancies a year , and this is something we must be concerned about .
According to Kofi Annan , the fight against hunger and poverty is doomed to failure from the outset if the international community does not succeed in strengthening women 's rights .
We , the European Union , are in a unique position to strengthen the call for equal rights for women worldwide .
We do want this , but are actually shirking our real responsibility .
Therefore , I should like to put the case for a European Envoy for Women 's Rights .
The majority of this House has already welcomed this , and I would also ask for the Commissioner 's support .
This will be a top diplomat who can raise her voice on behalf of the EU or mediate in cases of violence towards women , who will submit proposals to the Council of Ministers and the European Commission and who will be accountable to the European Parliament .
It is a driving force that we need , someone who ensures that all our proposals take account of women 's rights , as this is so crucial .
Mr President , I have already presented this proposal to a representative of the French Presidency .
He said that he considered it interesting .
I should like to ask the President-in-Office what he is going to do about this .
I have the proposal here , including in French and German . I shall hand it over to him , and I sincerely hope that this Envoy for Women 's Rights will be introduced , as we really need this driving force to effect real change .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , the current statistics show that , overall , MDG 5 is way off track and maternal mortality is even on the increase in Africa and South Asia .
Every year 536 000 women die as a result of pregnancy and childbirth .
Of those deaths 99 % occur in developing countries .
In Africa one in 16 women dies during pregnancy or childbirth .
In industrialised countries there is considerably less likelihood of this happening .
The most frequent causes of death are haemorrhaging , infections and illegal abortions .
Approximately 68 000 women die every year as a result of unsafe abortions and millions of women incur life-long injuries or other damage to their health .
In fact , 97 % of all unsafe abortions are carried out in developing countries .
Every minute a woman dies somewhere in the world as a result of pregnancy or childbirth .
We have a moral obligation and an opportunity to prevent this .
In developing countries , particularly in rural areas , women urgently need universal access to general health care , medical assistance and advice on pregnancy and childbirth .
I am also calling for family planning , including access to effective contraceptives and safe abortions .
The improvement in reproductive health and the abolition of any kind of discrimination against women are key and extremely important preconditions for achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the UN 's statement on the Millennium Development Goals really deserves every support from us rich Europeans .
It is both a tragedy and a scandal that so many people in this world live in extreme poverty , that so many women die in pregnancy and childbirth , that so many newborn babies die at birth , that so many people have no access to safe contraception and that so many people are infected with HIV / AIDS and do not have access to antiretroviral drugs .
The reason for this horrific situation is not a lack of resources , technology or medical knowledge .
We know how these issues can be solved .
This is clearly shown by the fact that many countries solved them a long time ago .
What this is about is getting poor countries to change their social institutions in order really to make development possible in these areas .
Progress has been made in several poor countries , for example in Egypt and Bangladesh .
The member states of the UN have undertaken to work towards these goals after careful analysis and in-depth political debates .
But these are global issues and belong at UN level .
So why are they turning up here in the EU ?
Global issues should be addressed at global level , in the UN , where all the EU countries are members .
The EU must deal with those issues which are common to its Member States , i.e. cross-border issues within Europe .
The thing the EU can and should do to reduce poverty and thereby maternal mortality is to abolish its agricultural policy as soon as possible .
( SK ) I worked for three years as an obstetrician in Africa , so this problem means quite a lot to me .
Also , during my time at the Council of Europe , I was a rapporteur for a report on maternity in which it was found that , in the developing countries and also in Europe , women were often not given basic protection during pregnancy .
There are many conventions and declarations , whether from the UN or the ILO , relating to the legal protection of women and their health which are not observed and often not ratified .
As regards basic care in developing countries , the entire health care system is very weak .
Only 10 % of the population of Africa has access to health care services .
Maternal mortality is therefore very high .
In Africa , there is a lack of qualified professionals and doctors , and AIDS is still a cause of maternal death .
Despite the protests of the world 's public , female circumcision is still practised .
In Asia , the problem of maternity comes up against religious and caste obstacles .
Comprehensive investment support is required here to boost health care and in particular mother and child care , but we know that child mortality too is very high .
Instead of big targets , we propose caution and monitoring of the resources we provide .
If European funding is to serve a purpose , the targets must be clear , understandable and concentrated on a small number of objectives , but they will only be successful if we monitor them well .
Mr President , there has been no advancement on Millennium Development Goal ( MDG ) 5 on improving maternal health since 2000 , particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia , and before 2000 progress was practically non-existent .
In September 2000 , world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration , committing their countries to reducing extreme poverty by 2015 through the objectives of the MDGs .
The figures for maternal health , which is one of the eight MDGs , are the same now as they were 20 years ago .
More than half a million women die in pregnancy or childbirth every year , which is one death every minute .
Of those deaths , 99 % are in developing countries .
In parts of Africa , the maternal mortality rate is as high as one in sixteen .
In the least developed countries , only 28 in 100 women giving birth are attended by trained personnel .
The objective of MDG 5 is to reduce the ratio of women dying in childbirth by three quarters between 1990 and 2015 .
I call on the Council and Commission , ahead of the United Nations High-Level meeting on the MDGs in New York this September , to prioritise action to meet the MDG targets and to fulfil MDG 5 in particular .
I will be travelling to the UN in New York at the end of this month as part of the delegation from the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , and intend to underline the importance of EU Member States renewing their commitments to achieving the MDGs by 2015 .
Now that we are at the half-way mark regarding MDGs , it is critical that EU Member States continue to progress to 0.7 % GNI by 2015 .
Given the fact that there has been a drop in EU aid figures from 0.41 % of GNI in 2006 to 0.38 % in 2007 - a decrease of EUR 1.5 million - I urge EU Member States to refrain from reneging on funding commitments .
Those not currently on track must increase their efforts .
I call on the presidency of the Council to take the lead and set an example by ensuring that adequate predictable funding is available , and also to scale up their efforts , so that lives can be saved .
Mr President , may I at the outset thank the Commissioner very much indeed for her strong and audacious statement , which was very much appreciated .
May I also say to Mr Kaczmarek that he should be aware that 19 % of maternal deaths are caused by unsafe abortions .
Surely this is something that has to be seriously addressed , and there should be no pretence that it can be dealt with in any other way .
As we focus on sexual reproductive health rights , we hear from the other side that they have problems with the vocabulary used in this resolution .
Apparently they do not even like the word ' rights ' to be used ; they do not like the word ' services ' to be used .
These semantics would not go down very well , I fear , with the thousands upon thousands of grieving motherless children in the developing world , or with those children whose mothers have died in agony because there was no anaesthetic , or with a mother bleeding to death because there is no thread for stitches , or a mother dying because there is not the three cents to buy the magnesium sulphate that would save her from death through haemorrhaging .
Tell them that the vocabulary used in this resolution matters .
Try telling them that it all costs too much .
Those lives are precious and no woman should die giving life .
We also have to take into account that some people say the reality is that women have low status and low value , and therefore that we cannot change things .
That is absolute nonsense .
We have to change things .
We have to deal with the kind of misogyny that leads to this suffering and grief .
We also demand change from the presidency .
We demand action from the presidency on the commitments it has made on the MDGs .
We liked the fine words from the presidency of the European Union , but we need to see more action .
Meeting MDG 5 means building health systems and ensuring that we address financially the fact that 40 % of women globally give birth without any skilled assistance .
We look to the presidency to take the lead .
For instance , in France between 2006 and 2007 , aid to Africa actually declined .
France is off track in its commitments , and we need to know that the presidency is going to reflect on the call to action and make the kind of commitments that are needed before 2010 .
Will the presidency state whether those budgetary commitments will be made ?
Will it deliver on that promise ?
We know that there is a need to fight maternal mortality .
We know how much it costs .
We know too , sadly , what it costs not to do it .
Mr President , the condemnation of the use of contraceptives and the prevention of legal abortion has been one of the most malicious crimes committed against humanity , as some contraceptives also provide protection against sexually-transmitted diseases such as HIV .
They also improve maternal health when combined with sufficient sex education .
Legal abortion prevents unwanted children from being condemned to poverty , hunger and disease .
By denying women the freedom of choice , we are receding from the fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goals .
In order to improve maternal health in developing countries , the European Union must condemn the US global gag rule , as well as the ban on the use of contraceptives advocated by some churches .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are absolutely duty-bound to act so that women can realise their maternal function in optimum health conditions .
This much is clear . Therefore , the hope expressed in this sense by the motion for a resolution that we have been discussing deserves our support .
However , I cannot hide the discomfort I feel when I hear the inappropriate use in international circles of the expression ' reproductive health services ' : we want reproductive health services , but we cannot allow this to include elective abortion , turning the tragic suppression of human beings at the very beginning of their existence into a social service .
Whatever views each of us has on the legalisation of abortion , I believe that in a document on maternal health , we must not forget that maternity concerns two people , and not just one .
I therefore welcome the fact that the compromise resolution includes a reference to both the Declaration of and Convention on the Rights of the Child , which use the term ' child ' even for unborn children and call for special services for both the mother and child .
I believe that it is only right that in documents designed to ensure the safety of motherhood , there should be references not only to these instruments but to other pro-life instruments .
It should be about welfare , economic , social and psychological support and education on respect for life .
Conversely , where this is limited and where the emphasis is placed only on the use of contraception , including abortion , we will not achieve the desired results .
There are countries in Europe , such as France and the UK , where there is no doubt that contraception is much more widespread than in other countries , and yet where according to official reports the number of abortions is steadily rising .
I would just like to ask my fellow Members to give a moment 's consideration to these points .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office , I should like to thank the Commissioner most warmly for her very strong statement .
It is true that maternal mortality illustrates the most distressing inequality between women in the north and south .
It is clear that a number of our fellow Members in this Hemicycle still do not get it .
Mr Casini , every year , 50 million women have unwanted pregnancies because they lack access to contraceptives ; 42 million of these women have an unsafe abortion , 80 000 of whom die .
These are the hard facts .
The vast majority of these women live in sub-Saharan Africa ; thus the West has absolutely no reason to lecture these women .
This is a disgrace , as maternal mortality is entirely preventable if women are just given access to health care and sexual and reproductive health .
According to the World Health Organization , the cost of providing basic health care is EUR 34 per person per year .
This is achievable - if , on top of the pledges of the developing countries themselves , the European Union were to spend 15 % of development aid on health care , including sexual and reproductive health .
That is just where the shoe pinches , however .
There has been a continuing decrease in Member States ' investment in health care over recent years .
The budgets for family planning have almost halved since 1994 .
Even in the European Development Fund scarcely 4 % is spent on health care , compared to 30 % on infrastructure and budget support .
It is clearly time , therefore , that the Council 's words and the Commission 's promises were turned into clear projects , for example to link budget support to clear results with regard to Millennium Development Goal 5 and to saving women 's lives in Africa .
( NL ) Mr President , I shall be frank : I find it hard to give a coherent speech here after hearing what was said by the gentlemen on that side of the House .
This is something that particularly tugs at my heartstrings , including as a woman , as it also concerns me and the other women in this Chamber .
After all , what we are talking about is not a medical problem , nor a financial one ( although I am grateful for assurances concerning increased funding ) ; it is a social problem .
It is a problem concerning society 's attitude towards women ; a society that still regards women throughout the world as second-class citizens .
To be frank , I find it incredible that these two Members can say what they said , knowing that this costs the lives of half a million women each year .
It beggars belief .
There is not one woman who wants an abortion - not one !
If faced with no other choice , however , she must at least be able to have it done safely and legally .
This is a woman 's right .
Incidentally , I am delighted that this has the support of the Council of Europe .
If we fail to recognise this right we are all just weeping crocodile tears here .
I would therefore appeal to everyone in this House to vote in favour of the amendments condemning the United States ' ' global gag rule ' and also the Vatican 's ban on condoms - I shall just come out and say it - as these two things are directly responsible for millions of deaths and must , I believe , be condemned by this House .
Mr President , our policies on maternal health in the developing world are failing .
We know that from today 's debate because no progress has been made in reducing the horror of women who die during and at birth .
In Ireland , if a woman dies in childbirth there is an outcry and a full medical investigation , because the situation is rare .
I am grateful that is the case but it is still shocking .
That one in sixteen die in childbirth in the developing world is a frightening statistic and , while we debate here in our comfort zones , there are pregnant women in Africa in villages who know that their lives are at risk and that they may not live to see their child born or indeed to nurture their other children .
Maternal health is part of overall health , and that includes access to food , and the issue of food security is an important one .
But can I address another issue which has not been raised here yet ?
I thank the Commissioner for her comments on the need to train health-care workers .
A huge number need to be trained but - let us be honest - the developed world is stealing trained workers from Africa to look after us here , both in the US and in the EU , and we need to be honest about this .
We can afford to pay them and they want to come and work , but we are robbing those countries of their own people who have training .
I would like you to perhaps address that in your closing remarks .
There is pain , suffering and death involved in this issue we are debating here .
I have mentioned the children who are left behind .
In India , just before Christmas , as part of the India delegation , we witnessed a very useful project being funded by the EU , where women of the villages - because there are no trained doctors and nurses - are given some training to help with infant mortality .
There has been great success in that very small-scale programme because it is working from the ground up .
Perhaps we need to mirror that type of programme to address maternal deaths , while we know that we do need all of these very trained and skilled workers .
Mr President , I am pleased that this Parliament is holding a debate on MDG 5 because , as I speak , at this very moment a woman is losing a life to give a life somewhere in the world .
Shocking as this is , the progress on this MDG has been negligible , as we have heard , and it is the only MDG with no improvement - and in some regions it has worsened .
Some would argue that this issue has had such little attention because it affects women , and because 99 % of the deaths occur in the developing countries .
This is one of the biggest social inequality issues in the world and I believe that the EU - whilst I recognise the Commissioner 's personal commitment - has been very slow in addressing it .
So I would like to ask the Commission and the Council what they are going to do to ensure there is increased funding to ensure that this budget line is not diminished .
When you are looking at heading 4 , where short-term crises and natural disasters tend to take precedence , we need to ensure that it is prioritised not only internally within the Union but also internationally .
I would ask the Commission and the Member States to look at delivery of these programmes with renewed scrutiny to ensure that the eight programmes are not beset by poor quality of service , corruption and lack of accountability , which is why the programme has not progressed in some countries .
Well-thought-out programmes are what is needed .
As Ms McGuinness pointed out , we saw in India a project , with very little funding , for providing mobile phones and as little as two days ' training for a link person who could recognise the danger signs in pregnancy and post-pregnancy , and this , combined with education , very basic-level personal hygiene and just the need to boil water , meant the difference between living or dying .
So , in this year the UN has called the Year of Action for MDGs , we cannot be complacent for much longer and we must make sure that we take away the tragic divide between the rich and the poor world .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I enjoyed listening to you .
Your diagnosis was correct and you put forward concrete measures .
We need action plans , financial aid and assessment of the results .
So more action and less speechifying !
We also need to make up for lost time , as thousands and thousands of women die in developing countries every year because of lack of information and lack of access to sexual and reproductive health .
The statistics are not merely numbers , they are family tragedies , they are children who are left orphans , they are people who die who could have been saved .
Does thinking about this , knowing that this is happening in the world , not keep us awake at night ?
Sexual and reproductive health must be a priority .
It is regrettable that some seek to bring sexual and reproductive health down to just abortion .
However , it is important that abortion is legal and safe , as well as exceptional , as this is the only way to combat illegal abortion .
All women on all continents have a right to access to sexual and reproductive health .
Without the right to sexual and reproductive health , there is no gender equality .
The Commission and the Council must take the appropriate measures .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the failure of the fifth MDG affects us all , in that it epitomises our failure to move forward with the emancipation of women all over the world .
We agree that it should be made a major political objective because it also lies heavy on our consciences .
However , we should also have the courage to say that thousands of women are also the victims of ignorance , neglect and misinformation .
Neglect because the majority of the 500 000 cases of maternal mortality could be avoided through prevention and basic healthcare .
Distributing impregnated mosquito nets , for example , could prevent fatal cases of malaria for thousands of women .
Ignorance , in that all too often , girls and women are still prevented from gaining a basic education , which would simply enable them to read and understand simple health and hygiene recommendations .
Lastly , misinformation : a certain conservative idea of religion and tradition , which still keeps women in a state of intolerable dependence , marriage when very young , pregnancies in close succession , and taboos over female contraception .
Consequently we are taking action ; networks of parliamentary representatives for the developing population , from Europe and Africa , are working together within the UNFPA .
We are speaking out in favour of health , reproduction and women 's control over their fertility and , in addition to the necessary financial support for this , we have to change attitudes and the position of women .
This is a key political goal for the development of all these countries .
( BG ) I congratulate you on your opinion , Commissioner .
There are many problems to which the problem of mothers ' health belongs .
On the one hand , this is the system of health care , on the other hand are the social systems , related to care for motherhood in general .
The health , mental and physical condition of not only the mothers but the children as well depends on the manner in which these two systems are synchronized .
In the third place , motherhood is indelibly related to the demographic problems of each country and it is generally known that this is a grave problem .
Part of the problems of mothers ' health are related to financing .
The countries should be called upon to set aside sufficient funds , while those that cannot receive aid so that the death rate among new mothers and children could be reduced and the necessary prophylactics could be applied , for every life is a gift , and provisions should be made for a maximum number of health services and social services for women .
The protection of motherhood also depends on the remuneration of the medical staff in maternity wards .
This is a problem which exists in many countries , including in European Union countries , and one that has to be resolved .
( LT ) The European Parliament has begun discussions on the Commission 's incentive to attract highly qualified specialists from third countries to the EU labour market - the so-called Blue Card .
The Member States are asked not to drain skilled workers from the sensitive sectors of developing countries - education and healthcare - although some Member States , including the UK , are not prepared to do this .
Talk about giving with one hand and taking away with the other !
If we drain specialists from the healthcare sector , short-staffed as it is , women 's health , the health of all members of society in general , will be endangered and in an even worse state .
I would like to suggest that we ensure that the legal acts we are adopting do not contradict each other and that our policies are consistent with our principles .
Mr President , I intervene in this debate first of all to thank the Council for its June action plan , but more particularly to welcome the very forthright statement by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner .
It is shocking and scandalous that this Millennium Development Goal is failing and that we have made no progress since 2000 and no progress over the last 20 years .
Millions of women have died and tens of millions of children have been orphaned needlessly .
We know what is causing the deaths and we know how to prevent the deaths .
We have the resources , and indeed the knowledge to prevent them , and yet it is not happening .
Why ?
Why are we failing ?
It seems to me that we are allowing the conscientious objectors to block progress on these issues .
We have to push past the conscientious objectors - those who reduce this issue constantly to the issue of abortion and the provision of condoms .
Why anyone should see a condom as some kind of evil instrument boggles the mind and boggles reason !
I would urge those who are in a position to make decisions , and to pursue decisions , to ignore the conscientious objectors and get on with it .
Mr President , just a little reflection on this issue that has political , psychological , physical and moral aspects and so is very complicated .
When Mrs Kinnock says that this side does not like even the term ' service ' , I would object .
There are so many ' services ' but among them there is one which is very controversial : abortion .
I think the side to my right wants to cover it with some very beautiful semantics , using terms like ' reproductive health ' .
I think you know the position of most of that side of the House , but there are so many other ' services ' that you want to approve , use and support as much as is financially possible , and this will , I hope , diminish the ratio of deaths at those different moments that we discussed today .
So this accusation is not very proper , although we know there are some moral problems related to just one ' service ' .
Mr President , I think the fact that a woman a minute dies giving birth - one of the most natural things in the world , as the Commissioner described - is shocking and scandalous .
Equally , the fact that we are failing to meet this Millennium Development Goal , and failing the most vulnerable women and children in our world , is also shaming .
I would like to ask both the French presidency and the Commission to report back to the House what is decided upon in New York at the end of this month , and that they will personally make it a priority over the next weeks to secure change , not just at Member State level , but at international level , to put this higher on the political agenda .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not going to go over again what the Commissioner said with so much emotion , though I fully share her convictions regarding the scandal facing us .
For this reason , the Council has developed an action programme .
It is late in the day for it to be getting involved , it is true , but this programme is ambitious .
I am not going to go over it again .
The Presidency , where it is concerned , will give priority to the promotion and defence of women 's rights , to be very clear about this .
Our programme includes , in particular , the preparation of guidelines for combating violence against women , which will be used as actions for the European Union in international settings and , at the end of this month , in high level meetings at the United Nations on Africa 's development needs within the framework of the Millennium Development Goals .
We also have the initiative on women and armed conflicts , aimed at taking better account of the specific situation of women in places where the European Union is implementing external security and defence policies , taking the initiative , as the Presidency , of a new resolution in the United Nations General Assembly with the Netherlands on violence against women .
Since I have mentioned our national position , although I am here to represent the Council , I should say that all the Member States are welcome to be associated with this resolution within the United Nations framework .
Finally , in December 2008 there will be a forum for non-governmental organisations on the situation of women .
As regards maternal health and everything you have said , I can only share the commitment and indignation of those who have spoken , particularly as regards the links with the HIV virus , and say that the EU is going to finance the Global Fund to fight AIDS to the tune of EUR 91 million in 2007 , as the leading donor to this fund for that year .
As regards the comments made by Mrs Kinnock who , as a committed European , can surely not be confusing the Council Presidency with a nation state - or else she is not who I think she is - I would like to say that as regards the European Union 's budgetary commitments , the amounts given by France are going to increase in 2008 .
To be precise , the amount allocated to health grew between 2006 and 2008 , from EUR 820 million to EUR 930 million .
I do not think this is the place for us to fight our usual battles .
On a more personal note , having heard your debate , I must say that the Presidency will be looking very carefully at the proposal made by Mrs Buitenweg , which she has submitted to me .
For the Presidency , I would very much like the fight against poverty to go hand in hand with improving the situation of women and respect for women 's rights , everywhere .
I would very much like there to be intervention when women 's health is systematically under threat , and I would like us to have the necessary resources , all the necessary resources , under legal and safe conditions , to bring this scandal to an end ; consequently , we cannot refuse to provide any of these resources , regardless of our convictions .
We need to forge ahead if we are to bring to an end what is truly a scandal as regards the situation of women , particularly in the poorest countries .
Consequently we need to reach agreement , I repeat , regardless of our convictions .
For its part , the Presidency has decided to take action itself , particularly in Africa , using all the resources at its disposal .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we have heard some very important statements .
This is an emotional question on which there are different points of views .
I believe we should go back to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development , held in Cairo , which clearly indicates respect for national legal frameworks .
We in any case reject coercive abortion , forced sterilisation , infanticide and other human rights abuses , which are clearly not in line with that policy .
At the same time , it is also very important to understand that childbirth is not without its complications .
As Mrs Buitenweg said , it is a luxury in our countries , but the luxury is not there in other countries .
The principle of voluntary choice should therefore guide this programme of action , which seeks to provide universal access to a full range of safe and reliable family-planning methods - which , of course , is the priority - and to reproductive health services which are not against the law .
The aim should be to assist individuals and couples in making their own choices and achieving their reproductive goals , giving them the full opportunity to exercise the right to have children by their own choice .
That is what we have to achieve .
In no case will abortion be promoted as a method of family planning .
Governments are committed to dealing with the health impact of unsafe abortions as a public health concern - because they happen and we have heard how many are women are dying from them - and to reducing the recourse to abortion through improved family planning services .
When abortion is not against the law , it should be safe and part of a comprehensive reproductive health service .
That is most important .
On the other hand , it is true that health-care systems should be better , as they are weak , and we are now looking at strengthening those systems by training more health-care personnel and through a system of health insurance , which is an initiative of the French presidency .
It is true that much money has gone , for instance , into combating HIV / AIDS in recent years , but unfortunately ever more women are becoming HIV / AIDS-infected in Africa : one out of four girls aged between 16 and 24 are now HIV positive .
That is awful .
The Commission is aware of this , and is encouraging initiatives through the Global Fund to be more geared to women and to be more gender sensitive .
Finally , on the question of migration , this could go in the wrong direction .
This so-called ' brain drain ' is one of the issues that will have to be tackled when addressing migration as a whole .
It has both positive and negative sides and we have to find the right balance .
I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The EU has committed to achieving the Millennium Development Goals , such as reducing the maternal mortality rate by 75 % by 2015 .
Although , on the whole , the EU countries are on the right path , slow progress is recorded in the field of maternal health .
The European Commission 's initiatives to allocate funds for the health systems reform in order to improve the quality of prenatal and postnatal services , as well as of the access to such services , the support of research in the field of reproductive medicine and the training of medical personnel were opportune for achieving goal No. 5 .
The Charter on enhancing the performance of health systems , adopted in Tallinn , in June 2008 , is also important progress .
Nevertheless , there are developed countries , such as France , Great Britain or the Netherlands , with a very low mortality rate , for which the 75 % reduction by 2015 seems difficult , since evolution is slower than in the countries with a higher maternal mortality rate .
Also , there are still disparities as regards the progress made in the EU states and even in the regions of various countries .
Therefore , in order to manage to achieve the goal set for 2015 , the rapid modernisation of the European health systems is necessary , with a special emphasis on research for improving prenatal and postnatal services , as well as more efficient sanitary education and family planning .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union is a firm supporter of the Millennium Development Goals adopted by the United Nations and which established the targets to be achieved by 2015 as regards peace , security , development , governance and human rights .
Out of the 8 goals , special attention should be given to the improvement of maternal health , since over half a million women , mostly from Africa and Asia , die during pregnancy or childbirth .
The main cause leading to the increase in mortality rate at world level is the absence of qualified personnel to provide maternal assistance both during pregnancy and delivery .
This situation must be remedied by investing important funds in the underdeveloped countries , both in training specialized personnel and in medical equipment .
The targets for Romania , as regards the improvement of maternal health , are the reduction of mortality rate to 10 maternal deaths / 100,000 births by 2015 and ensuring universal access to health services .
At present , Romania has negative natural growth , with a mortality rate of 12 % .
By social assistance and information programmes , mother and child services , as well as additional financial support from the EU , the birth rate needs to resume its ascending trend and Romania to remain in the European Union 's demographic strategy .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0457 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part One
Subject : Food crises in the EU and protection of European consumers
Following the repeated food crises in Europe , has the Commission decided on specific measures to provide effective consumer protection ?

Mr President , I should first like to thank Mr Arnaoutakis for his question on the ever topical issue of food safety .
The Commission has many ways of ensuring that consumers and European citizens are protected against a possible food crisis .
Firstly , the Commission ensures that the competent authorities in all 27 Member States are promptly and simultaneously warned via the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed ( RASFF ) .
Secondly , the Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office ( FVO ) carries out systematic inspections in the Member States and in third countries .
Thirdly , the Commission carefully examines all information received from the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , the international media or other sources .
Where necessary , and especially when food or feed might seriously threaten public health and that risk cannot be dealt with effectively at Member State level , the Commission takes the necessary measures at EU level .
For example , in the case of the Ukrainian sunflower oil contaminated with mineral oil , the RASFF received notification from the competent French authorities on 23 April 2008 , which was received by all the Member States .
The Commission , through the RASFF , at once notified the other Member States of this incident , and on 10 June 2008 it issued Decision 2008 / 433 / EC imposing special conditions governing the import of sunflower oil originating in or consigned from Ukraine due to contamination risks by mineral oil .
Investigations were also launched to locate the source of the contamination .
In addition , the traceability system provided for in Regulation ( EC ) No 178 / 2002 , better known as the General Food Law Regulation , makes it possible to carry out targeted , accurate product withdrawals or recalls , to supply adequate information to consumers and food business operators , and to evaluate the risks and avoid unnecessary disruption to trade .
The Commission also systematically checks the ability of the Member States ' competent inspection authorities to ensure compliance with food legislation , both within and outside the EU .
In Malaysia , for example , the Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office identified significant problems in relation to compliance with the requirements for the export of fish products .
In the EU , the Commission reacted immediately , prohibiting the import of fish from Malaysia .
This is just one of many examples of how the Commission effectively manages to protect the consumer and prevent a food crisis .
The Commission therefore believes its existing legislation provides the necessary mechanisms for effective management of food crises and effective consumer protection .
At the same time , however , we are taking care to ensure a steady improvement in the channels of communication and cooperation with the Member States for this purpose .
For example , we are providing new guidelines on using the RASFF , which the Commission is to adopt shortly .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your report .
Let me say that what European consumers are now experiencing is a loss of confidence .
Their confidence has been shaken .
We therefore need to see , from the Commission 's side , what actions need to be taken to inform consumers .
Indeed , you may very rightly be doing everything you said you would do , and deserve congratulations .
However , in Greece , for example , we had the Ukrainian sunflower oil , some of which was consumed by half the Greek population .
How can the consumer be protected , and what actions do you intend to take ?
Let me point out that the increasing stir this issue is causing and the warnings given through the RASFF prove that the system is really working .
In the case of Greece and the Ukrainian sunflower oil , a general warning was indeed issued 23 April 2008 that this contaminated sunflower oil was on the EU market .
On 5 May 2008 , when the Swiss authorities issued a specific warning to our centre here that this sunflower oil was on its way to Greece , Italy and Turkey , among other places , the Greek authorities made the necessary investigations and began to give us the information and withdraw the products .
I wish to stress , however , that we should not confuse the measures the European Commission has the authority to take , and is taking , with the obligations of the Member States , as these are internal affairs .
Of course , you will ask me whether any checks are carried out .
Yes , they are .
The FVO service , which makes periodic visits to various Member States , checks that the departments are operating , identifies any shortcomings and points them out to the Member States .
Naturally , this happens both in Greece and in other countries .
Commissioner , the EU has done a great job in its farm-to-fork system , and consumers should have confidence in it but , as an ancillary point , what about protecting EU producers ?
I do not believe that we put the same rigour on imported food products as we do internally .
For example , we allow substances to be used externally that we ban within the European Union , and with the new plant protection products legislation we are going to do that increasingly in cereal production .
Could I ask you , Commissioner , to address that particular concern , because we might be consuming food in Europe that you could not actually produce in the European Union ?
( LT ) I would like to ask : what is a food crisis ?
Could the appearance of an unsafe food product on the EU market be considered a food crisis ?
In that case , we could be talking about a toy crisis , as toys not complying with safety requirements are known to be sold , as well as a whole range of other unsafe products .
How can we define a food crisis ?
Could it be defined as relentlessly increasing food prices that affect all consumers ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , because Mr Tajani has been held up by a Council of Ministers meeting , I am happy to respond to Mrs Raeva , particularly because the subject to which her question relates is a matter I have had very much to do with personally and which I hold very close to my heart .
In 2001 the European Union set itself the target of halving the number of road accident victims by 2010 .
This target was recognised by the European Parliament and by the Council .
In 2003 it was the subject of a European Road Safety Action Programme , which defined 60 measures aimed at encouraging road users to behave more sensibly , using technical advances to make vehicles safer , improving road infrastructure , making commercial transport safer , improving the treatment of victims and developing the analysis of accident data .
To monitor changes in the road safety situation , a number of performance indicators were set up by the Commission : the number of victims per million inhabitants ; the rate of seat belt and helmet use ; the number and percentage of people under the influence of alcohol involved in road accidents ; the number and percentage of people exceeding the speed limit .
In the area of Community legislation , I should mention the new directive on the driving licence , adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on 20 December 2006 .
This directive was to improve road safety for young road users and the free movement of citizens within the European Union .
We also have a directive on the safety of road infrastructure , adopted after agreement at first reading in June 2008 .
Then we have the proposal for a directive on controlling traffic offences , submitted by the Commission in 2008 and currently under negotiation in the European Parliament and the Council .
The Commission is also trying to encourage the exchange of road safety best practices as much as possible between Member States .
As part of the call for proposals it is participating in funding road safety campaigns and innovative projects in this area , which include several Member States .
Similarly , the Commission is giving financial support to the research plan for projects likely to improve knowledge in specific areas and to give rise to future legislative proposals on reliable scientific bases .
The DRUID project ( Driving under the influence of Drugs , Alcohol and Medicines ) is one example of this , while the fight against driving under the influence of psychoactive substances is becoming a priority in new Member States .
Finally , Mrs Raeva , a new European action programme is currently in preparation for the period 2010-2020 .
This action programme will be the subject of a public consultation at the start of 2009 and will then go through the process of adoption by the Commission .
This was the information that Mr Tajani wanted to provide in response to your question .
author . - ( BG ) Commissioner , I am extremely happy to congratulate you for the efforts you have made to date in your recent capacity as Commissioner responsible for transport in the European Union , one that you have made in the last few years .
Also , thank you very much for the presentation of the summary in respect to the Common European Policy for road safety .
It is precisely in this direction that I would like to ask : " At the existence of indicators , at the definite existence of a very serious initiative on the part of the European Commission concerning road safety in Europe , how is control of the execution of these indicators provided and in what way is it truly guaranteed that we in Europe will have a reduction of fatal cases by at least 50 % ? "
Because for a country like Bulgaria this indicator is too high .
We in Europe definitely need sanctions in case of violation of these requirements .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , honourable Member , the supervision , controls and penalties for offences obviously lie within the competence of the Member States .
However , I would just like to remind you that on 21 October 2003 the Commission adopted a recommendation on enforcement in the field of road safety , which defines best practices for controlling traffic offences , and I would particularly like to mention that we have an opportunity , with the European Road Safety Day , to assess each Member State .
This assessment highlights the record of some Member States and the weaknesses of others .
I believe European Road Safety Day is an excellent way of really shedding light on the performance of the different Member States .
It is true , and you are right to point it out , we have not achieved the performances we had hoped for .
We have many concerns about the target , which was to halve the number of victims by 2010 .
It may be that in the next multi-year programme , which will cover a 10-year period , we can further increase the constraints on Member States .
I would also like to take the opportunity , Mr President , to remind you of how much importance we are attaching to the vote on the directive , which will enable offences committed by motorists in a Member State other than their own to be punished .
Impunity for drivers who do not obey the rules when they are in a Member State other than their own is currently too great , and I think this will be a good way of making European citizens behave better on the road .
Thank you for asking this question .
I know my successor , Mr Tajani , is also very committed to the issue of road safety , and I can tell you that all your suggestions and action will help us to bring an end to this terrible scourge .
As the author is not present , Question No 37 lapses .
Part Two
Subject : Information and education for young consumers
It is a fact that young and adolescent consumers account for a significant part of the markets in goods and services .
Young consumers are bombarded by , frequently misleading , publicity campaigns promoting school articles , games , clothes , food , drinks , audiovisual material , etc .
Apart from the Europa Diary , which is already in operation , does the Commission intend to devise a pan-European campaign to inform and educate young people of consumer age about matters which concern them and what methods and means will it use to organise such an initiative ?
With particular regard to the Consumer Scoreboard , what methods will the Commission use to process the data obtained concerning young people of consumer age and how will the relevant information reach them ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the concerns expressed by the honourable Member and would like to draw his attention to the fact that existing Community laws on consumer rights already offer considerable protection of young people .
For example , the Directive on Unfair Commercial Practices ( UCP ) aims at protecting consumers , including young people , from practices that harm their economic interests , such as misleading advertising or aggressive practices .
Vulnerable consumers , among others younger citizens , are specifically taken into account when assessing unfair commercial practices .
The Directive also includes a black list of commercial practices which are prohibited in all circumstances across the EU .
For example , the inclusion in an advertisement of a direct exhortation to children to buy products is banned across the European Union .
The Commission will launch a communication web campaign on the UCP Directive in September 2008 .
This is quite a new directive and will also target young people .
The campaign will make use of a dedicated website , including animations , illustrations and quizzes , in order to explain UCP rules in a more interesting and interactive way .
To attract consumers ' attention , banners and fake advertisements will be disseminated in several key consumer websites .
There will be portals for specific categories of consumer , such as young people , virtual communities , music websites and blogs .
The information will be circulated on the internet over a period of one month and , although it is difficult to predict for how long this data will be hosted by the partner websites , we expect the information to be available on the web for at least a few months .
The UCP dedicated website which is being created will be accessible to consumers for an indeterminate duration .
For the time being , the Commission has no intention of launching a special pan-European campaign to inform and educate young consumers .
However , besides the Europe Diary , it is also developing a web-based consumer education tool called Dolceta which contains a teaching module aimed at primary and secondary teachers .
As regards the consumer scoreboard , at the current stage our data do not distinguish between different groups of consumers .
It is not possible for the scoreboard to address in detail all markets or all different types of consumer .
However , where we have specific data covering younger consumers , for example students , such as Eurobarometer surveys , we will publish the data for this group .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your full and detailed answer .
How very reassuring and gratifying that this campaign is being launched online , now , in this month of September .
Let me just ask a supplementary question : is the Commission thinking of prohibiting television commercials directed at children , as has happened in some Member States , where certain children 's television advertisements are forbidden until after a certain time - 10 or 11 p.m. , I think - before which children watch television ?
Member of the Commission . - This information is well known in my DG as well , but actually this falls rather more within the scope of my fellow Commissioner , Viviane Reding , because it is also related to the freedom of information which comes very broadly within the scope of the activities of her DG .
What I can tell you is that we have the TV Without Borders Directive , which tackles such issues , and we have our black list in the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive .
The reason why we have such a tool as a black list is that , if there is a need , and if we have enough evidence , we can add a practice to the black list when we agree that it is something which we need to target and ban all over Europe .
Of course , such action needs to be evidence-based .
So we are fully aware of the problem .
It is not directly part of Unfair Commercial Practices ( UCP ) but we are ready to look at it if there is a practice which we could consider as meriting inclusion on a black or grey list , and Commissioner Reding is doing her best to be certain that the TV Without Borders Directive is tackling issues like these .
( LT ) 55 % of food advertisements on TV market unhealthy food products .
80 % of kids ask their parents for exactly the same brands of food for breakfast that they have seen in TV advertisements .
My question would be : should the European Union shift its focus from advertisements , which are commissioned by manufacturers ?
Could we find a way of encouraging their manufacturers to produce and subsequently advertise healthier food products ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission does not have the power to set prices or define the quality of educational products .
Otherwise , I really find the question quite relevant .
However , consumers are protected under EU laws against misleading or aggressive practice when they purchase educational products .
Under the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive , which I have just talked about , traders must not mislead consumers with false or deceptive information as regards , for example , the benefits of a product , the results to be expected from its use , or the results of tests or checks carried out .
The Directive also includes a black list of practices prohibited in all circumstances : claiming that a product has been approved or endorsed by a public or private body ( such as , for example , stating that an educational book has been approved by the ministry of education when this is not the case ) is banned outright across the EU .
Furthermore , traders must provide consumers with all the information they need in order to make an informed choice .
The Commission has , for example , received a complaint relating to courses to be purchased on an English-speaking website , which were then delivered in another language .
Omitting to inform the consumer of the language used for the courses can be considered a misleading practice .
It is , however , up to the national authorities and courts in charge of enforcement of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive to determine , subject to the free movement principles enshrined in the EC Treaty , what information is material on a case-by-case basis , in line with European law .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer .
Price distortion in relation to product quality is a matter of concern to the consumer .
I am not talking about setting the price , but about defining the relationship between price and product on the basis of competition , and also the transportation of educational products from one Member State to another , and cross-border consumer protection .
Do you have any information on cross-border protection when educational products are transferred from one Member State to another ?
Member of the Commission . - Concerning cross-border problems with teaching materials , we have European Consumer Centres whose work is based on consumer cooperation regulation and which are good ambassadors for consumer rights all over Europe .
In the event of a cross-border disagreement between a consumer and the provider of an educational service , book or material , the consumer can approach a Consumer Centre .
If the consumer cannot solve the issue directly , the Consumer Centre in his country can help him get a satisfactory solution in the country of origin of the educational services or material .
I do not have with me a full record of all the different experiences and cases in the various Member States , but can tell you that these European Consumer Centres meet together several times per year .
It is already a very enhanced and good network , and most of the Centres are very active and able to solve the issues raised by consumers .
Since the question referred to the education sector , the Centres could be asked for information on how they have solved such issues .
However , the basic principle is the same , and this regulation is functioning really well .
( DE ) I would be interested to know how things actually look with regard to online learning .
With regard to complaints , would it be possible for the Commission to set up a homepage showing which institutions offering distance learning are associated with problems so that there is greater transparency here ?
( DE ) Time and again we have the problem where very many people in Europe are asking the question : where is European value added ?
Now , the European Union is admittedly not responsible for educational issues , but we are responsible for quality assurance and consumer protection issues .
On this we are also agreed .
Would it not be possible for schools and perhaps even the low levels of education to be very consciously addressed here as recipients in the context of the Commission 's general information activity ?
With projects and competitions we can show how Europe provides European value added here .
We could perhaps - and in connection with the previous question - thus bring this subject to the attention of the very young .
Member of the Commission . - This is about the internet , which is a very important issue .
The internet presents an enormous opportunity for consumers .
It gives them access to better information and expands the size of the market they operate in , giving them access to more providers and more choice .
Already , 150 million EU citizens - a third of our population - shop over the internet .
The rapid growth in the number of EU citizens buying online is not matched by the growth in the number of those who do so cross-border , however .
This shows that the Commission is right in addressing the issue , which is linked to consumer confidence with a range of information measures .
The online digital user 's guide , which is being prepared by the Commission , has to be mentioned .
It will be published online by the end of 2008 .
As a follow-up to the guide , one could consider drawing up guidelines on how to implement the unfair commercial practices legislation with regard to unfair commercial practices emerging online .
Another tool about which we have already talked is Dolceta , which is geared towards educating consumers , for example on distance selling and consumer redress .
Educating young consumers who are particularly active online is crucial .
The Consumer Diary , with a record distribution of 2.8 million copies ( and this information might also be interesting for Mr Angelakas ) in more than 18 000 schools this year , includes information on internet use and cross-border redress .
The Consumer Policy Strategy 2007-2013 foresees actions related to consumer information as part of its priority - better informed and educated consumers .
The main tools the European Commission uses to inform citizens and stakeholders about consumer policy in this framework are a website , the Consumer Voice newsletter and information campaigns .
The letter contains e-commerce as a major campaign theme in several newer Member States .
Concerning the second question , which concerns enforcement and redress , the Commission strongly believes that , in order to make the internal market work , European consumers must be confident that they can enforce their rights and obtain redress across the European Union .
Complaints relating to e-commerce , including complaints regarding non-delivery of products or delivery of unsatisfactory products , may be addressed under the current EU redress framework that we have already set up for European consumers .
This framework includes the ECC-net , the two Commission recommendations on alternative dispute resolution , the recently adopted Mediation Directive , and the regulation establishing a European small claims procedure .
The Commission is also in the process of considering whether an EU initiative on consumer collective redress is necessary and , if so , what type of initiative that should be .
I am fully convinced that the screen is a new marketplace .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have already partly answered the question I was going to ask , about the problems experienced when buying .
The procedures are long , complicated and costly .
The damage suffered is particularly great in that it often affects the most disadvantaged among us .
Given that there is a legal void , do you think that European consumer centres have the means to engage in these procedures , collectively perhaps , but also individually , instead of the injured consumers ?
( DE ) It is simply a matter of our being concerned with future possibilities for publicising complaints transparently .
If cross-border operations are repeated , the courts and prosecution services also gain access .
Do you believe that it is possible to set up a database here ?
( LT ) Commissioner , in your speech you have very persuasively referred to the expansion of e-commerce and I am quite sure that this expansion is happening much quicker in the older EU states .
I would like to ask what is being done to encourage e-commerce within the Member States that joined the European Union in the 21st century , how consumer rights are being protected and what measures are being developed to level off that proportion .
One more thing , regarding abuse : are cases of abuse more frequent in the older Member States or the new ones ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I thank the honourable Member for his positive comments about the internal market scoreboard .
I agree that the scoreboard results need to be widely communicated .
All editions of the scoreboard are available on the Europa website .
Paper versions were sent to the permanent representations of the Member States and to the Commission representation offices in the capitals of the 27 Member States .
In addition , copies were circulated to other EU institutions as well as the national administrations .
Following the publication of each scoreboard , a press release is issued in 21 languages and the results are communicated during a press conference to ensure that they are easily accessible to the national media .
author . - Thank you , Commissioner , for dealing with this question .
I welcome the work that has been done in this area , which relates to the whole issue of the perception of the European Union in Member States .
In Ireland we had a particular problem during the debate on the Lisbon Treaty since , whenever something negative arises , we tend to blame the European Union .
Can I just raise one typical example of an area in which we have no comeback : that of a Member State failing to act on a European Union directive .
In Wicklow , in my own area of Cromane , there was a case about eight years ago where funding was made available , under a directive , from Europe to the Irish Government , but no action was taken , and as a result 50 families are now not able to carry out their normal work of mussel harvesting .
The local papers blamed the European Union .
We have no redress ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Member of the Commission . - Users of debit and credit cards in border areas can face three categories of charges associated with card payments .
These are : usual charges related to the use of cards independently of the geographic location or Member State ; charges for currency conversion if the payment is made between Member States using different currencies , for example the euro and sterling ; and third , charges at the point of sale of a cash withdrawal at an ATM .
Looking at the first category , i.e. the normal charges for card users , regulated at European level as far as payment in euros are concerned : according to Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 / 2001 on cross-border payments in euro , when a cross-border payment in euro is made between two Member States , the charges levied for such payment should be the same as the charges for a corresponding payment in euro within the Member State in which the card was issued .
At the same time , payments by cards linked to non-euro accounts , for example sterling accounts , are not subject to this regulation .
When a euro payment is made between a euro-area Member State , such as Ireland , and a non-euro-area Member State , such as the United Kingdom , supplementary charges may be applied for the currency conversion for payments by cards .
The Payment Services Directive regulates the conditions under which the currency conversion shall be offered .
However , it is yet to be implemented by Member States .
Finally , card payments can also be subject to a surcharge at the point of sale or to an additional withdrawal fee at privately-owned ATMs .
The issue of surcharging or offering a discount on a given payment instrument is , according to European legislation , left to the discretion of the merchant .
At the same time nothing impedes the Member States from banning or limiting such surcharges .
This is explicitly confirmed in the already mentioned Directive on payment services in the internal market .
The Commission has therefore no legal basis for intervention in the matter of supplementary charges on cross-border payment services in the UK and Ireland .
However , the Commission believes that competition on both sides of the border will keep costs at a reasonable level .
If market players would reduce or limit competition , the competent national authorities shall intervene in the best interests of the citizens .
author . - Like myself , the Commissioner is totally au fait with the Irish situation , where 18 000 workers cross the border every day from one jurisdiction to another and where 5 200 students and 1.7 million people either take holidays or go shopping from one side of the border to the other .
I know the Commissioner has said that it is up to national governments and that the banks are not subject to Regulation ( EC ) No 2560 / 01 , but surely it should be possibly to introduce regulations to ban these surcharges .
We had a very good example where your colleague , Commissioner Vivien Reding , Commissioner for Information and Media , took a very tough stand with the mobile phone companies - and we can see the result to the benefit of the consumer .
It seems wrong that this should be allowed to continue , particularly when there are sister banks on both sides of the border .
Member of the Commission . - I should firstly like to underline that the protection of the interests of minority shareholders in listed companies is one of the key objectives of the Community rules on takeover bids .
In the event of a change of control in a listed company , all shareholders should be afforded equivalent treatment and minority shareholders should be protected .
The Commission is very much attached to this fundamental principle .
Minority shareholders in state-owned companies which are listed are entitled to exactly the same rights as minority shareholders in companies owned by private parties .
This principle normally implies that persons acquiring control of a listed company should launch a mandatory bid over the capital held by minority shareholders .
However , the Community rules allow Member States to derogate from the mandatory-bid rule in order to take account of circumstances determined at national level .
Greece has made use of this discretion .
Its national law foresees that the mandatory-bid rule should not be applicable in certain situations .
This includes , in particular , the case where the privatisation process of a company is ongoing .
This exemption is general in nature but , as usual , the devil is in the detail .
The Commission does not challenge the fact that the Greek national telecommunications operator , OTE , about which the honourable Member is enquiring , was a state-owned company .
Although the state held only 28 % of the company , the company was fully controlled by the Government .
The real question at issue here is : how long can a privatisation process be ongoing ?
In the case of OTE , the privatisation procedure appears to be long .
In fact , it seems to be very long indeed .
The process , which is apparently still ongoing , started 12 years ago .
How long can a company be kept out of the scope of application of the mandatory-bid rule of the Takeover Bid Directive ?
The Greek supervisor , the Hellenic Capital Market Commission , has decided that OTE is still undergoing a privatisation process and that , in consequence , no mandatory bid was necessary .
In conclusion , when Member States derogate from the mandatory-bid rule , they must nevertheless respect the general principle of protection of minority shareholders and ensure that they benefit from a treatment equivalent to that of majority shareholders .
I have yet to see how the Greek authorities will ensure such protection in the present case .
Therefore I have asked my services to enquire whether such protection has been achieved and to examine whether the rules of the Takeover Bid Directive have been respected by the Greek authorities in this case .
Commissioner , this is precisely the problem .
I cannot understand what you have been looking for all these months .
The Greek authorities are contravening Articles 3 and 5 of Directive 25 / 2004 / EC ; they reject equal treatment and public tendering on the laughable grounds that a company , OTE ( the Hellenic Telecommunication Organisation ) , in which the state has a 28 % holding , is a state-owned enterprise .
Will the Commission continue to break the law , contravening the directive on equal treatment and protection of small shareholders ?
Perhaps , Commissioner McCreevy , you have not read Directive 25 / 2004 / EC , just as you did not read the Lisbon Treaty .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission adopted a report on the first year of implementation of the Black Sea Synergy on 19 June 2008 .
This describes the accomplishments in a wide variety of sectors and formulates proposals to develop the Synergy into a regional cooperation process .
The latter include the setting of long-term measurable objectives , and also the selection of lead countries ' or organisations to coordinate actions to meet those objectives , and the creation of sectoral partnerships to co-finance the necessary projects .
As the Commission stated earlier , bilateral policies applied in the region - mainly the European neighbourhood polices - provide the strategic framework , and the Black Sea Synergy complements them at a regional level .
Neighbourhood policy is at the bilateral level , and this is the first regional complement .
The sectors mentioned in your question are high on the Commission 's agenda .
These are proposals to establish Black Sea partnerships in several fields , including transport and the environment , and Member States present in the region are particularly active in promoting those initiatives .
The coordination between the Commission and the three Member States has been reinforced both in developing the Synergy and in working with the Organisation of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation ( BSEC ) .
Further progress of the Synergy requires the active involvement of a growing number of Member States and Black Sea partners , and the Black Sea Member States can and do play a crucial role in this .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
Black Sea Synergy does indeed bear your personal stamp , but you are also aware that the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation ( BSEC ) is now a mature institutional structure for regional organisation ; its cooperation is indeed intensifying and broadening .
This is especially so because Europe and Asia meet here , and they do so at many levels .
I should like to know one thing : beyond this Black Sea Synergy initiative , does the Commission intend to plan the structure of inter-regional relations between the EU and Black Sea countries within a stricter institutional framework , so that an institutionally safeguarded form of inter-regional cooperation emerges ?

Member of the Commission . - I would agree that EU election observation missions ( EOMs ) everywhere in the world represent money well spent .
Over the past eight years EU observers have been reporting on crucial elections , thereby contributing to reducing conflict over the electoral outcome or highlighting areas requiring urgent electoral and political reform .
As such , these are achievements which have an impact in the longer run .
The European Union is now widely seen as one of the most credible international election observers .
I know Mr Evans himself has just come back very recently from the Sri Lanka elections .
I think he will also have his own ideas on what worked well , and maybe on what has to be done for the future .
The Commission will therefore continue to prioritise the EU EOMs , and as long as I am there I will try to do that .
Having said that , however , election observations are not and cannot be actions standing on their own .
Election observation is not an objective in itself but should also contribute to addressing deficiencies in the electoral framework , and also to triggering institutional and democratic reform in the longer run .
The reports of the EOMs are a key entry point for addressing deficiencies in the electoral framework .
They have a long-term perspective by definition .
The recommendations of the EOMs usually identify possibilities for electoral change , for instance in the regulatory framework or in the management of the elections .
They are increasingly embedded in a broader electoral support strategy , thereby enhancing the long-term impact .
With reference to other recent EOMs , I can confirm that , for instance in Rwanda , in Cambodia or in Yemen , we have been giving support to the respective electoral commissions .
These projects resulted , then , directly from previous EU EOMs , which had identified a number of deficiencies in the electoral framework .
But , in the same context , over the past years the Commission has also substantially increased the financial contributions for electoral assistance , thus building on the recommendations of the EU EOMs .
This is now EUR 400 million since 2000 , so this is quite a good amount .
A lot of valuable work setting the stage for electoral reform in follow-up to an EU EOM is also done by delegations of the European Commission in the country , and of course by the chief observers when they return to the country to present their final report .
Finally , as electoral reform is often very political in nature , it does not always happen very easily , and requires different actors and continuous involvement .
I believe that , in addition to the chief observer , Parliament can play and very often does play a relevant role addressing electoral reform in the follow-up to the EOM .
I would therefore encourage the regular EP delegations to a country to get more involved in the matter as well , by then addressing deficiencies in the electoral framework in a context of broader institutional and democratic change .
This has been the content of a first seminar between the Commission and Parliament and there will be another one later this year , I think it will be in December , between Commission and Parliament .
author . - I thank the Commissioner , and agree with her that the election observations are some of the most useful work that the European Union does .
It is high-profile work in those countries , and almost without exception it is money well spent .
I have been very proud to go on a number of election observation missions over the years , most recently in Pakistan .
I was actually in Sri Lanka for a delegation visit .
But I wonder if I can push the Commissioner slightly on one point : during the four or perhaps five years between one election observation mission and the next , does the EU actually offer specific help and suggestions to address any deficiencies or areas where we think that there may be a need to improve and that we can offer ideas , support and perhaps finance to make sure that countries do not repeat in one election the errors they may have made before ?
Mr President , I would also like to agree with Mr Evans on the value of election observation missions .
I too was honoured to be appointed by the Commissioner as the chief observer in the recent elections in Cambodia .
I thought that the missions - as do all of the election observation missions - proved a very useful aid to the Cambodian authorities in the conducting of their election missions .
My request to the Commissioner is that she look to the resources that she has available to do even more of these missions in the future , if possible , because I also agree that they are an extremely valuable , attention-raising measure .
They are highly valued by the countries where they take place and also by the heads of state in the various missions .

Member of the Commission . - I believe the honourable Member is referring to the delay in the monthly transfer of customs revenues which Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority .
The last delay dates back to the month of June , and it followed almost immediately the sending of a letter by Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad in which he objected to the ongoing discussions on the further development of relations between the EU and Israel .
At the time , the delay in transferring tax and customs revenues was raised at the highest levels , and I myself also raised this question with the Foreign Minister .
I asked Israel to execute the payment which was due to the Palestinians and , finally , I must say - and I can say - the transfer was made a week later than normally .
Since then , no further instances of delays in transferring tax funds have been reported to the Commission .
author . - I thank the Commissioner for her reply and for the fact that she did take action , and the action came after I put down the question .
She will understand that there is a long delay between putting questions down and getting answers .
But I want to reinforce the point that this money is Palestinian money .
It is not under any circumstances Israeli money for them to withhold .
Holding on to it is tantamount to theft , if not of the money then of the interest .
It is used regularly as blackmail against the Palestinians , and I hope the Commission will continue to press the Israelis to release this money as soon as it is due to the Palestinians , rather than using it as yet another political tool .
( DE ) It is good that this problem was apparently able to be resolved quickly and promptly .
Just one query : on many occasions at that time we had the problem of the Palestinian Authority using money in a way that possibly conflicted with the intentions of the donors .
Have these problems also been sorted out in the meantime ?
Member of the Commission . - In response to the first comment , there have indeed been long delays in recent years regarding Palestinian money - and I agree with you that it is Palestinian money - but I have always tried when it was necessary - and very often the Palestinians asked me to do so - to intervene personally in order to get the money unblocked .
This could take a long time and there were periods when it was really very difficult , but I always tried .
I agree with you that this also has to be done in the future .

Mr Rack , I can definitely assure you that the method by which we send our money to the Palestinians - previously through what is referred to as the TIM , the Temporary International Mechanism , and now through the PEGASE financial mechanism - is designed to give us full control .
I believe this was also the substance .
Incidentally , even the Israelis have now used this Single Treasury Account in order to transfer Israeli money .
With Salam Fayyad as both Finance Minister and Prime Minister , we also have someone here who has the confidence of the international community .
However , we have carried out our own inspections in the main and I am giving this matter a lot of attention , as far as I am personally able .
My delegation has built up its own system and its own team here so that no irregularities occur .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Trade in services ( debate )
The next item is the report by Syed Kamall , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on trade in services .
rapporteur . - Mr President , firstly I would like to pay tribute to the shadow rapporteurs and their group advisers for their useful input on this report .
I think we had some very interesting debates and we did not always agree .
But at least we managed to conduct the discussions in a very civilised manner .
I would also like to thank the International Trade Committee secretariat for their input and , while I am on my thank-yous , I would like to thank all the DG Trade officials for their useful advice and suggestions .
Clearly the European Union , as the largest exporter of services , has a strong interest in opening new markets for services .
However , my personal interest in this subject is more focused on how services can be used as a tool to help the poorest people out of poverty .
But before we do that , let us remind ourselves of the importance of services .
Services represent 75 % or thereabouts ( there is some debate / disputes over the exact numbers ) of the EU 's GDP compared to only about 2 % for agriculture .
In Africa , services represent 52 % of GDP and rising compared to 16 % for agriculture .
So , given these figures , it is a real shame that so much emphasis was placed on agriculture in the DOHA development round when it is really the opening of trade and services that promises to take so many people out of poverty .
That is why I was prepared to accept amendments stating that negotiations on trade and services would not only serve the interests of the EU , but the economic growth of the poorest countries .
We should not forget what development actually means : it is taking people out of poverty , and we can achieve this by encouraging entrepreneurs to create wealth and jobs .
In many of the poorest countries , entrepreneurs tell me that they are desperate to tackle poverty .
But what they really need are banking services for getting that cheaper loan to be able to expand their business and employ more people and create more wealth locally ; insurance services , making sure that when their life or their business is ruined and something goes wrong , they have something to fall back on ; legal services , enforcing those contracts made with partners ; and communications services , knowing the best prices at local markets , deciding when to go to local markets and actually get into local markets .
However , we should all recognise that where governments through no fault of their own are unable to provide basic services such as health , education and water to the poorest citizens , then entrepreneurs must have a role to fill in the gaps in service provision .
Unfortunately , trade in services only accounts for about 25 % of world trade but has a potential to create so much more wealth and jobs .
But let us turn to some of the contentious points in the report .
One of the points of debate has been over the so-called ' services of general economic interest ' , but we should remember that different countries define these in different ways .
Some countries believe that health , education and water should only be provided by the state .
Others have turned to non-state players .
In Ethiopia , Nigeria , Kenya and Uganda , more than 40 % of people in the lowest economic quintile receive their health care from private providers .
Surely we should be encouraging more investment in these sectors .
In education , I urge my colleagues to look at the work of Professor James Tooley of Newcastle University .
He began his research at the London-based Institute of Education with the belief that private education was actually an abomination .
However , he soon found out , perhaps counter-intuitively , that private schools could provide a better education to the poor .
When a survey was conducted of state schools in India , some were simply shut .
In some , teachers did not turn up and in one case a teacher made his students make tea for him all day long .
So the working poor voted with their feet .
They saved up to pay for private education , not in a steel and glass tower , but usually a simple room above a shop .
These schools then subsidised free education for the non-working poor .
What is wrong , I ask , with encouraging trade in these services when it helps the poorest ?
Now I hear some Members of this House who believe that only the state can provide these services and it should be on a monopoly basis .
And even where there is state failure or where the state collects insufficient revenue to provide these services , they do not believe that non-state players should be allowed to fill in the gap .
Would they rather see the poorest people have no access to water ?
Would they rather see the poorest people have no access to education ?
Would they rather see the poorest people have no access to health care , rather than go to a private provider ?
The next point of contention has been over sovereignty .
Now , I agree with those who say that we should not force the opening of trade and services down the throat of our negotiating partners .
But surely we should agree that where a country decides to liberalise what we may consider to be a service of general economic interest , we have no right to tell them not to liberalise their markets .
I have to say , though , I have been disappointed by some of my colleagues : some Members of this House believe that we should actually tell developing countries to close their markets .
It should not be about private versus state .
It should not be about local versus foreign providers .
It should be about what works . Instead I believe we should all work together to bring down trade barriers that condemn the poor .
We should work together to end state monopolies that leave many of the poorest without essential services and we should be always be a friend to those entrepreneurs who want to tackle global poverty by creating wealth and jobs through increased investment in services .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am grateful to the European Parliament for this report .
As it reflects , services account for the largest share of GDP in developed countries .
The liberalisation of trade in services is therefore of key importance for our economic growth , as it is for developing countries , where services are not sufficiently advanced .
I largely share the views that are expressed is this report .
They are in line with our global Europe strategy .
It is built on an ambitious multilateral agenda and on a carefully crafted set of bilateral agreements .
We are fully committed to the development dimension of the multilateral trade round and , as the report affirms , we see a multilateral deal on services as positive , both for the interests of the EU as well as for those of poorer countries .
I welcome the encouragement of the report for an ambitious level of commitments in the ongoing and upcoming negotiations for bilateral and regional agreements .
We take careful note of the recommendations of the report for the different ongoing negotiations that generally touch upon the sectors that our services industry considers of importance .
Allow me to make a general reflection on the negotiation of services agreements which is applicable to both bilateral and multilateral deals .
There is no easy fix for negotiations in services , no simple formula that can apply across all service sectors and all countries .
These negotiations involve addressing the complex and often detailed set of regulatory frameworks of countries in areas as diverse as those reflected in the last section of your report - from financial services to health care or education .
We ought to do that in a non-intrusive way that preserves the right of third countries to regulate the different services sectors domestically as they wish , while opening them to external supply if competition is favoured .
There should be no discrimination .
We acknowledge that some services sectors account for a larger share of GDP than others and that , to this extent , the liberalisation of their trade may have a larger impact on our overall welfare .
However , in prioritising any given sectors , we also have to take into consideration , amongst other factors , the relative specialisation of our EU countries and regions in different sectors .
Finally , let me offer a reflection on the multilateral process .
Your report welcomes the announcement of a signalling conference on services as part of the DDA ministerial negotiations .
We actually pushed very hard for this event , which took place in July in Geneva . It was a relative success .
We did not hear all the signals that we would have liked , but we heard enough to say that WTO members and several of our target countries understood the importance that we attach to a satisfactory market access outcome in the services sector .
I have no crystal ball to see where the multilateral talks in the DDA will go from where we left them in July .
We are in the situation where one issue - the special safeguard mechanism in agriculture for developing countries - has provided the proximate cause of breakdown , even if there are other issues that also need to be resolved .
So support for the outline modalities deal as a whole is very fragile and not just a question of the US and India resolving their differences in agriculture .
I feel as if we have a priceless , wafer-thin vase of great craftsmanship in our hands , but which now has to be carried from here over a very slippery floor .
One false move and the whole thing could crash into many pieces .
So we need to be careful of the moves we make .
We cannot stand still but , equally , it is difficult to move forward .
We stand ready to re-engage at whatever level is useful to make sure that we do not lose what we had achieved and which remains on the table .
But there has to be genuine political commitment by others to participate in a negotiating process .
In this context , the progress made at the Services Signalling Conference will not be lost .
The signals made threw some light on the flexibilities that our key trading partners have in the services field , and this is precious information .
The best contribution that we can all make in the current circumstances of the breakdown in negotiations in Geneva is to be realistically positive and explain how big an opportunity we may miss if we fail altogether .
Your report , therefore , is timely , for it sends a clear and balanced message on the importance that the liberalisation of trade in one of the key areas of a DDA deal - services - would have , both for us and for our partners .
I look forward to continuing my cooperation and dialogue with Parliament , both in this area and other areas of trade policy .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( SV ) Mr President , trade in services has today become a necessity for all economies .
It is impossible for any country to achieve economic success with an expensive and ineffective service infrastructure .
Therefore I would like to express my great thanks to Mr Kamall for an excellent and important report .
Producers and exporters of textiles , tomatoes and other goods will not be competitive if they do not have access to an efficient banking system , efficient insurance companies , accountancy firms , telecommunications and transport systems .
The opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs emphasises that access to financial services such as micro credits , access to basic banking services and international bank transfers are necessary for individuals in developing countries to engage in basic economic activities and start companies .
The Committee also maintains that the particular nature of the financial sector demands considered solutions in a globalised world .
This is also something which Commissioner Mandelson himself was talking about .
If our partners in the negotiations , primarily the developing countries , say no to the opportunity of opening up the service markets , this will impair their chances of economic development .
To those of you here in this assembly with doubts , I say : look at how your own countries have developed !
Development of trade in goods has gone hand in hand with the development of trade in services .
To the advantage , Mr President , of all citizens !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , behind the socialistic approach to non-liberalisation of this market is the fear that if the service is given into private hands the state will lose power over it , and something would be wrong .
Fifty years of Communism has shown that this is not the case .
Competitive services in tourism , finance and transport - to make things available - and in education and training are a big challenge , and a hope for helping poor countries to develop .
How do I see that help for development if we compare the market for goods - tangible things - and services ?
Services are people doing activities .
They give the chance to transfer knowledge .
It is not about giving a fish but a fishing rod , as we used to say in this House .
What is more , it gives the chance to release personal initiative , innovation and more involvement in various activities .
Also , the services market is more capable of adapting to cultural demands , it is more flexible and it can adapt more easily to the exigencies of local regulations , which would have to be observed in any country .
Through this it can diminish unemployment .
On the social level it can achieve greater involvement of people from different backgrounds and social classes .
We are talking about water , education and health , and why not ? The 50 years of Communism and recent changes in my country prove that liberalisation is a force for good rather than for bad , and I strongly support it .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur for the quality of her report .
It has given us the opportunity for a new in-depth debate on trade in services .
We have been able to define convergences and identify some points for discussion .
We will see whether these constitute serious divergences at the end of the debate and the vote .
Whether we are talking about the internal market or external trade , we agree on the fact that the services market accounts for the largest share in the creation of wealth and a quarter of world trade .
It is indeed possible that this economic sector still has growth potential for the European Union .
It is therefore legitimate to include the services market in bilateral and multilateral trade negotiations .
However , we will have to define the principles and terms of the market for trade in services .
The first point my group wishes to highlight is that a distinction must be made between the services market and the goods market .
Services are not like goods , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , services are not of the same nature ; some are linked to fundamental needs and rights .
We very much believe in the need to make a distinction between commercial and non-commercial services , whether in healthcare or education .
Vital services such as water and energy must also be thought of as having a special status .
Services are not like goods because trade in them often very directly involves human endeavour and not just the virtual trading of a technology .
Although they potentially create jobs , they are also the sector in which we find the most informal employment and the greatest precarity .
I am therefore delighted that the report states that the rules of trade must respect the employment standards drawn up by the ILO .
In our development goals we must also fight against precarity and poverty .
Finally , we have not lost sight of the Doha objectives and international trade as a vector of development .
This notion commits us to taking account of the differing interests of the Member States and developing countries when negotiating commitment schedules and economic partnership agreements .
The European Union must take account of the stages of development , pace and wishes of countries when opening up services markets , particularly when liberalising some of their services .
I am thinking particularly of financial services .
Exerting pressure on third countries over their way of conceiving of and regulating their services is out of the question .
The sovereignty of these countries must be respected when it comes to issues as sensitive as public services and financial services .
I do not know if we will reach a total consensus on this question .
It is possible that this is a subject that divides right from left in this Parliament .
Mr President , this report clearly highlights the importance of services in our economies , and the importance of gradually liberalising them .
The truth is that it has been interesting for this shadow rapporteur to follow this debate , which has confirmed why some of us are sitting in the centre of this House and not at one end or the other , why some of us sit here , in the middle .
What is it that really differentiates us , putting it kindly , from people who continue to hold to a strict idea of what services are , of what can and cannot be privatised , from people who are still allergic to the idea that some services can be provided very efficiently by the private sector , often more efficiently than by the public sector , often even irrespective of how developed the country is , from people who still want to force the State to carry a great deal of weight in less developed countries , as if the answer to all their problems were for the State to be in charge of it , without taking into account that the State carrying this great deal of weight is often what is behind the enormous power that corruption has in those countries ?
A few notes , a few strains of mistrust towards free competition , free enterprise , and the possibility of citizens receiving services through society itself via the free economy .
This is what we have heard in this debate .
However I would also like to make it clear , and this is why we are in the centre , that we also do not entirely agree with the feeling that we sometimes get that the rapporteur - although subsequently he was generous in accepting amendments from other groups - does not really have , or at times may not have had sufficient sensitivity to assess what the general interest means , to understand that not everything is subject to the rules of the market , to understand that the Member States do of course have to have and retain the freedom to protect certain services outside of the pure market , in a regulated form or by providing them solely through the public sector .
What are those services ?
We cannot say .
Even in Europe we are not unanimous about what the general interest is : there are different solutions to the weighting of the public and private sectors in waste collection , education , water , funeral services , cemeteries , public transport and the postal service even within Europe .
However , it should be understood that education , health , etc. have a dimension that cannot be submitted purely and strictly to private enterprise .
Let us therefore promote the liberalisation of services ; let us understand that by doing so we are improving the services that citizens receive .
It is important for the European Union to take the initiative on this in all of its trade agreements , especially when we are seeing the collapse - which we do not know whether it is temporary or permanent - of the Doha Round , and of the multilateral framework as a whole in this area .
The European Union therefore has a considerable responsibility in demanding this increase , in practically forcing the liberalisation of services , even in less developed countries , but of course respecting their freedom and understanding that this needs to be accompanied - and I will conclude here Mr President - by very strong regulation .
In many cases liberalisation needs to be accompanied by regulation , and clear rules , respecting the freedom and autonomy of each of the Member States to decide on what , for them , due to tradition , the reality of the population , or the reality of the circumstances , should continue to be part of the public sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to congratulate Mr Kamall on his excellent work .
The services sector - as he himself acknowledged - is the most important sector almost all over the world .
Even in Africa and Asia it is the most important component of GDP .
However , this strategic sector must now be the driver for economic growth , particularly in countries where there is still a lack of development .
The report does well to comment on the significant growth in trade in services as a vehicle for greater welfare and stability , particularly for countries that still need to develop .
Trade in services also means a knowledge transfer between countries and citizens . The freedom to carry out such trade , provided that it is contained within a set of shared and respected rules , is therefore fundamental for any growth strategy .
However , no one should try to export or import models for others : each developing country must adopt the proper timescales for its own growth capability .
Therefore , the new road to liberalisation must take into account the fact that governments must satisfy the needs of citizens and not - as has sometimes happened in Africa , unfortunately - sell the opportunity to provide services to public companies linked to the governments of other countries when they are unable to provide their own people with basic services such as water or energy , because clearly there is the risk then of economic , political and security problems , even at international level .
The failure of the Doha Round has unfortunately punished everyone : the European Union , industrialised countries , but above all - we believe - the poorest countries .
Therefore , we hope that with this report we can send out another strong message that we are embarking once more on the harmonious development of the whole of society .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , let me start by thanking the rapporteur for his openness and cooperation .
However , having said that , our group will not be able to support this report in tomorrow 's vote , partly indeed because of this presumption that trade in services is essentially exactly the same as trade in goods .
As Mrs Castex has already said , that simply is not the case .
We cannot agree with that , not least because trade in services almost always requires changes in national legislation or in implementing regulations , which often go to the very heart of the social fabric of a society , especially if it concerns basic services on which people depend .
It also goes against the evidence that WTO members themselves increasingly distinguish between trade in goods and trade in services .
At the last WTO ministerial meeting just a few months ago in July in Geneva , a group of Latin American countries even circulated a proposal to remove health care , education , water , telecommunications and energy entirely from the WTO , exactly on the basis that these are essentially public services and they are human rights which should not be treated as tradable commodities .
Finally , the report does quote quite selectively some positive national examples of liberalisation and basic services , but it does not refer at all to the very many devastating examples which could equally well have been cited and which we ought to be mindful of as well .
The issue that I want to focus on is the problem of the liberalisation of financial services .
No issue has dominated the headlines more this year than the global financial crisis .
It is widely agreed to have been facilitated by a lack of adequate regulation in financial markets .
Yet , in the WTO negotiations on services , further deregulation and liberalisation of financial markets is being sought by richer countries , and indeed this report entirely supports that proposal .
It does seem a bit ironic to me that the WTO Director , Pascal Lamy , has called for a conclusion to the WTO agenda as a solution to the global financial crisis when its actual policies would , by any objective estimation , probably be much more likely to contribute to further financial instability .
I am disappointed that all our amendments that would have required at least a pause in further liberalisation of financial services until the financial stability forum has issued its recommendations about some basic new regulations such as capital requirements and cross-border liquidity - this was just a fairly mild request that we should wait for that - have actually been rejected .
For that reason we have retabled those amendments and we would certainly ask you to support them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report 's consensus is the common conviction that a multilateral system of standards and regulations is important and necessary , that trade and development must not show any contradictions and that the European Union has a particular responsibility , given its economic weight in shaping international economic relations .
There are fundamental differences in approach , however .
Admittedly , it is important essentially to improve worldwide access , quality and the choice of services , particularly in developing countries .
This cannot be achieved , however , with a blanket concept of competition , liberalisation and privatisation , especially in the public sectors ( water , health , education , energy and passenger transport ) .
Much less is the deregulation strategy , which the Commission is pursuing in multilateral and increasingly also in bilateral negotiations , the right way to boost global sustainable development , because this mainly targets worldwide access for European enterprises operating transnationally and concentrates far too little on small and medium-sized enterprises .
One further point : the European Union would like to conclude free trade agreements , which also apply to foreign investments , with countries like China , Korea , India and the ASEAN and ACP countries .
Germany , in contrast , is currently introducing a law by which the proportion of foreign voting shares in a German enterprise can be limited to a maximum of 25 % .
When Bolivia thought that the far higher proportion of foreign capital in its natural gas production had to be limited , Europe screamed blue murder .
My group is convinced that every country has to decide for itself when , according to which rules and to what extent it wants to open itself up to global competition .
President Arias said today : we need an asymmetrical approach .
That is the bottom line .
( EL ) Mr President , as the rapporteur and Commissioner Mandelson have said , services are one of the most dynamic sectors in both the European and the global economy .
However , we must acknowledge that there is considerable scope for strengthening the international services trade , with the benefits that this would bring , both for companies and , even more so , for the consumer .
In terms of export trade , the service sector is also particularly important for the developing countries .
The progressive opening up of their markets , based on the principle of differential treatment , may contribute to the transfer of technology and know-how and to an improvement in their infrastructures .
The primary targets for the EU are the binding consolidation of at least the status quo as regards access to markets , and their further liberalisation .
What is needed , in my opinion , is a reduction in the obstacles encountered by European companies , and the securing of greater transparency and predictability in foreign markets .
The level of offers and the general course of WTO negotiations have so far been disappointing in the service sector .
Bilateral or interregional negotiations on ambitious free-trade agreements are becoming a necessary addition to the multilateral framework , especially since the failure of the negotiations in July .
In the negotiations on the further opening of the markets , it will be necessary to secure the regulatory right of the EU itself and of its trading partners , especially in the areas of public services and services of general interest .


( ES ) Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Zaleski and Mr Guardans that , as they know , there is a famous painting by Goya entitled ' The dream of reason brings forth monsters ' , and sometimes the dream of liberalisation , with the strict rules of the market , can bring forth inefficiency and inequality .
When we are talking about services , we need to keep this very much in mind .
Let us imagine , for example , a poor country in which education is not functioning well , where it is decided that external actors will come in order to supposedly provide the children of that country with a quality education .
How can we be sure that those private companies will not do this with the aim of becoming a monopoly , or an oligopoly , or fixing prices that are not accessible to the consumers , in this case the pupils , and also end up providing poor quality education ?
Who can assure us of this ?
Because it could happen .
In that case we would not be in a situation of free competition , but in a situation of entirely regulated competition in private hands .
We therefore have to say a very clear yes to the privatisation of trade in services , while distinguishing public services and services of general economic interest , ensuring that criteria and rules on accessibility and quality are fulfilled , and that , of course , the social criteria are clearly present .
Strengthening economies means strengthening the Member States - those that are open to the rules of the market , but without putting citizens solely at the service of those who are more capable of applying them .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to acknowledge Mr Kamall on account of his very good report .
Congratulations !
It should be stressed that market access and free trade in services are of fundamental importance for economic growth and reducing unemployment .
Our states and regions are benefiting from this solution .
This benefit also covers partners from outside the EU , especially poor countries .
Negotiations under the Doha agenda should lead to the appearance of a harmonised services package , including financial services , in respect of which the EU is most open and transparent .
This openness should , however , go hand in glove with mutuality and respect .
In this context we should also take a look at what are known as ' tax havens ' .
Regulations that are adopted should bear in mind the need to encourage competition , thus lowering prices and raising the quality of services , while on the other hand combating corruption and market monopolisation .
Here I would like to point out that trade in services more and more often includes high technologies , IT , cultural goods , etc .
Services provided via the Internet need special care .
Intellectual property rights and personal data protection must be guaranteed and there must be protection against fraud , trade in pornography and other criminal actions .
An ageing society and the disabled require increasing volumes of health and care services .
We must therefore envisage an increasing number of immigrants working in these fields .
The current political situation should also draw our attention to energy and communications services .
We have heard that everywhere in the world services play a very important part in GNP .
The global trade in services reveals a growing trend and already accounts for a quarter of services .
Let us hope , then , that we can manage to create a system of clear and fair rules that ensure that all parties are treated equally .
This will not be easy , but then , who said we should only have easy tasks to deal with ?
( SV ) Mr Kamall calls for the far-reaching opening up of the service markets in developing countries .
Unfortunately this is entirely in line with the EU 's current trade policy .
For example , Mr Kamall wants what is currently carried out by local companies or the public sector in developing countries to have competition from multinational European companies .
This is a policy which has already been tested in Europe .
My country , Sweden , was one of the first countries to deregulate its energy , electricity , rail and postal services markets .
Today we see the result : higher prices , poorer maintenance , and also often poorer service .
A few monopolies can now extract unprecedented profits from what was previously under common ownership .
Is this a development model we should sell to the developing world ?
No !
Fortunately there are countries which do things differently !
Norway , which is independent of the EU , has withdrawn all demands under GATS to liberalise the service sectors of poor countries .
In general , Norway has raised its voice against the laissez-faire policy which the EU pursues within the WTO .
This inspires hope .
The EU should put the needs of poor countries first , instead of calling for deregulation and privatisation .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Kamall on his report , in which he highlights the need to develop an international services market that takes into account the different situations of developing countries , without forgetting that the conditions must be fair for all parties .
On the one hand , there is the great potential for the European Union to open up its services sector to new markets , in which it has a major comparative and competitive advantage at global level : the development of new channels for the sector , one of the main tools with which Europe can face up to the challenge of globalisation .
On the other hand , it has many advantages for developing countries .
Firstly , benefiting from the European Union 's knowledge and skills in this field , which they need in order to develop their own economies , especially in basic and cross-disciplinary sectors such as financial services .
It would therefore facilitate the transfer of technology from European institutions and businesses .
The existence of a more favourable economic framework would cause a ' call effect ' of investment from other parts of the world ; therefore the benefits for their economies would be multiplied .
Secondly , the progression of the negotiations would improve conditions , both for those who want to provide services and for businesses who want to establish themselves in Europe .
I would like to highlight in the report the need for the ILO 's fundamental rules to be complied with , especially with regard to child and forced labour , because there should be openness with asymmetry , yes , but while respecting the rules of fair competition and fair play ; never forgetting the interests of our businesses .
We need to ask for more commitment , in particular from the big emerging economies , China , India and Brazil , always within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
The report mentions specific situations with different trade blocks such as ASEAN , the Gulf States , India and Korea .
There is one area missing from the report , whose level of development and economic situation are ideal for developing our services sector .
I am talking about Mercosur , and within it , particularly about Brazil ; I was rapporteur for a report on the status of the negotiations with that country in Parliament .
Therefore , even though it does not expressly appear in the main points of the report , I did want to mention it so that it would also be included .

Mr President , I would like to acknowledge the enormous amount of work my colleague , Syed Kamall , has put into this report on trade in services , but I am afraid I cannot unreservedly congratulate him on his work , as I have fundamental disagreements with some elements of his approach .
The key issue is services of general economic interest .
Here , normally in the European Parliament , between the Socialist and the Christian-Democrat groups we reach a point of compromise that reflects the political balance of forces in this institution .
But I am afraid , here on this occasion , that compromise has not been reached : in fact , we have heard some comments from his colleagues that suggest that some of his own group members , those with a more developed social conscience , are squirming and feeling rather uncomfortable with the approach that has been taken by the rapporteur .
This must be the most liberal report - and I say that , in case there is any confusion , in the pejorative sense of the term - that the International Trade Committee has ever passed to the plenary .
It makes no effective distinction between commercial and non-commercial services , and I and a large majority of my group will only be able to vote in favour of Mr Kamall 's report if Amendment 2 , Amendment 11 and , in particular , Amendment 5 are adopted , which will protect universal , accessible and high-standard public services for all .
( DE ) Mr President , services are an essential part of our economic future .
This is true not only for the highly developed economies here in Europe , but also and in particular for the so-called developing countries .
Because this is true , we have to show that the deregulation we achieved in the past in the goods transport sector is also our aim in the service sector .
It is perhaps even more important in many instances here .

Both the rapporteur , Mr Kamall , whom we have to thank for the report , and Mr Zaleski have pointed out what is possible in the service sector : knowledge transfer , better qualifications , jobs and better infrastructure .
These are things that we should all in fact jointly support .
Looking at matters from this angle , we ought to be encompassing many of the ideologies over which we have been fighting here in Europe in recent years and centuries , without looking backwards quite so much .
' Yes ' to special needs in certain sectors , but ' no ' to these surrogate battles that some Members of this House want to fight on the back of the developing countries .
( DE ) Mr President , we all want to have open borders for the provision of services .
I would like to address two points in this regard .
In 2006 the European Union made its position on the provision of public services clear and did not even subject the sensitive area of public services to open competition .
Now , of course , the attempt is being made under GATS to liberalise this sensitive sector through the back door .
We cannot use the same approach here as for commercial services .
The reverse also applies for developing countries , of course .
The EU should not be putting any pressure here on developing countries and forcing them to liberalise public services .
They must be able to decide to do this themselves .
A second delicate point concerns the financial services market .
Since the 1980s , the financial services markets have featured enormous growth spurts on the most extensive globalised market sectors , even for financial transactions .
The currency markets have an annual turnover of USD 360 trillion .
Involvement in globally expanding markets is , of course , an economic freedom and developing countries therefore display a high degree of vulnerability towards external shocks .
The liberalisation of financial services should therefore [ take account of ] the development status of the particular ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , there are two issues in this debate to which I would like to draw attention .
Firstly , it is true that in 2007 the services sector in the European Union accounted for as much as 75 % of GNP , and the export of services from the EU represented more than 28 % of total world exports , but there are still numerous barriers to the free provision of services within the European Union itself by service providers from the new Member States .
I would like to express the hope that the EU will take some major steps forward in this matter in the near future .
Secondly , strong opposition should be mounted to the solutions proposed in the report whereby the EU , as part of the WTO negotiations , should unilaterally reduce agricultural payments and subsidies in order to obtain , as it is put , a reward in the form of additional profits from the trade in services .
This approach , which has already been taken many times by the EU , has led to a restriction of production , and sometimes even to the elimination of many sectors of agricultural production within the European Union , which has significantly weakened food security for EU countries , and in recent months has also led to a marked rise in the cost of agricultural raw materials .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that there has been talk of liberalising the banking system , but we all know that after Basel II a monopoly emerged in this sector and we saw entire businesses , entire economic units wiped out precisely as a result of the monopolisation of the financial system .
Therefore , I believe that we must in some ways resurrect the old system , the cooperative system , which in rural areas and in so many other parts of Europe has provided the lifeblood for small private initiatives and families to grow .
Let us talk and act , then , truly in terms of liberalisation , instead of a monopoly , in this crucial banking sector , which affects the lives of families and businesses throughout Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe small and medium-sized enterprises are very specifically in demand even in the area of financial services .
We have 25 million enterprises in Europe .
I believe many of them would definitely be able to achieve equivalent success on the international market .
Finally , one of the fundamental issues even in the least developed countries is also how income can be generated .
Commissioner Mandelson therefore thinks it is particularly important not to back down in the WTO negotiations , but to create fresh impetus here .
We need trade facilitation , we need the corresponding commitment and I hope we shall achieve this soon .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I certainly intend to press on with determination in the negotiations to complete the Doha world trade deal .
It is very important indeed and I am grateful to the honourable Member for reinforcing that .
I did not actually intend to comment on or respond to this debate .
The reason I do so is because I feel that , in some of the contributions that have been made , there has been demonstrated not only a bit of a misunderstanding about the provision of services in the 21st century , particularly amongst developing countries , but , beyond that , a false ideological boundary is being put in place through the remarks of some of those who have contributed to this debate between what they call ' commercial ' and ' non-commercial ' services .
I have to say that spending most of my time as I do in the world and amongst developing countries , this distinction and this ideological boundary that has been described in this debate is increasingly fading without trace .
It is not the case , as Mrs Lucas has suggested , amongst WTO members that developing countries increasingly see trade in services as quite different and separate from trade in goods .
Actually , the exact opposite trend is occurring in the WTO and in trade negotiations .
Increasingly , developing countries are bringing trade in services into these negotiations .
I think that it is wrong - and I speak as somebody who is a social democrat of many decades standing who , I think and I hope , has a developed social conscience - to put forward a proposition in the case of services that state provision is good and that private provision is bad .
This is not only out-of-date thinking ; it is contrary to the interests of developing countries and to the very needs of the poorest members of those countries and those communities who we should be seeking to stand up for with our values as Europeans and our principles as Europeans .
So I hope that we will not follow and not reinforce , if I can respectfully suggest , this extraordinary equation that you can put the needs of poorest people first by denying to developing countries the opportunities to supply not only water and energy and telecoms more efficiently and more cheaply for consumers , but also supply health care and education using investment , technology , management skills and techniques from a variety of international sources on a competitive basis .
This most certainly does not mean that these services therefore should go unregulated .
I do not support monopolistic behaviour , price-fixing and cartels , but this goes to the very point that the honourable Member was making .
Regulation by national governments in developing countries is , of course , essential in relation to these services , but please let us not create or give support to what I believe is , as I have described , a false ideological boundary between the commercial and the non-commercial .
Both are equally valid if properly regulated and if properly serving the needs of the people who are desperately in need of more services of this kind , more efficiently provided and more cheaply in many cases .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I really do not know where to start , as everyone has been so kind .
I thank everyone for their contributions to the debate , welcoming every single contribution .
I would like to tackle some of the issues that were raised , in the couple of minutes I have been afforded .
It is not often I get up to speak , so you will have to allow me some self-indulgence .
Mr Markov talked about ' one size fits all ' .
It is made quite clear in this report that , at the same time as we should not be imposing liberalisation on other countries , we should also not be imposing protectionism on other countries , or state monopolies .
That is the point I have tried to make , so it is far from ' one size fits all ' .
We recognise that there is a diversity of solutions for different countries , but let us allow them the option of liberalisation .
Many people in poorer countries have said to me they are sick and tired of not having a choice , of having to go to a state monopoly that performs badly or to a private monopoly that they all know has links to the ruling elite .
What they really want is access , in the first place , or a choice through which they actually have some sort of access .
Regarding a pause in financial services liberalisation , there is a difference between the financial crisis , seen globally , and bad lending and bad debts .
Poor African entrepreneurs have said to me they want access to capital markets in order to borrow money to buy a tractor so that they can plough the fields and create more wealth locally , so let us give them that ability and access to capital .
Finally , I was condemned by my colleague , Glyn Ford , which I actually take as a compliment .
I am very happy to hear that this is ' the most liberal report ' and hope that will be on my tombstone one day - though not immediately .
I want to point out that there is a difference between a social conscience and a socialist conscience .
A social conscience means looking at what actually works and how we can really help the poor , rather than clinging to an outdated socialist ideology which , as Mr Zaleski said , lost its legitimacy after being imposed on Central and Eastern Europe for so many years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 4 September 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Again in July we saw the failure of another attempt to conclude the ' Doha Round ' , which aims to take trade liberalisation a step forward , and Parliament is already seeking to approve an own-initiative report which strives to such a sickening extent for the worldwide liberalisation of trade in services either within the WTO or through bilateral or multilateral agreements with third countries promoted by the EU .
What we have here is an authentic primer laying out the road towards liberalisation of all services , including public services , which it dubs ' public and general interest needs ' .
Among other examples , it aims for greater liberalisation of health care , water distribution , education , cultural services , tourism or financial services .
The report takes the trouble to explain that ' the principles of GATS do not prohibit either privatisation or deregulation ' and stipulate that after the entry into force of the WTO Agreement , periodic negotiation rounds should be held ' with a view to achieving a progressively higher level of liberalisation ' ...
With the objective of breaking the current ' deadlock ' in the WTO , it insists on and welcomes new initiatives - such as the ' signalling conference ' - which aim to make an agreement possible in the near future .
Big business in Europe could not write it any better themselves ...
Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems ( debate )
The next item is the report by Timothy Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems - C6-0418 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the proposal the honourable Members are debating today seeks to modernise rules adopted in 1989 on the market for the distribution of airline services .
Computerised reservation systems ( CRS ) act as intermediaries between airlines and travel agents in the sales chain for air tickets .
In the early 1990s , computerised reservation systems were practically the only channel for the sale of airline tickets .
In addition , all the CRS were controlled by airlines .
The latter were therefore more tempted to abuse their position in the CRS , for example , by biasing displays in their favour .
The code of conduct for the use of CRS establishes a number of safeguards to prevent abuse .
It complements competition law since it adds measures to deal with sector-specific risks .
It requires that all companies participating in the system are treated on a non-discriminatory basis .
For example , the same fee is to be paid by all airlines .
The Code also lays down special obligations for parent carriers - i.e. those which own or control the CRS .
The code of conduct has been very effective in preventing all kinds of abuse .
However , since the code of conduct was introduced , the market for the sale of air tickets has changed considerably as alternative sales channels have developed .
Today , nearly half of all reservations no longer go through a CRS but are made on internet sites or through airline call centres .
The competitive pressure of these alternative sales methods has significantly reduced the risk of abuse through a CRS .
The new situation also requires an adjustment of the code of conduct .
The rules laid down in the code of conduct significantly restrict the margin for negotiation between the CRS and airlines .
The CRS are therefore not genuinely in competition with each other , and the fees paid to them by airlines and passengers are escalating .
The Commission 's proposal seeks to allow for more negotiation and , in particular , the possibility to set prices as regards the fee for the use of a CRS .
This will enable airlines to negotiate the reduction of rates with the CRS .
Boosting competition between the CRS will help to reduce costs and to improve the quality of the services they provide .
At the same time , the proposal maintains and strengthens the safeguards for the prevention of abuse and protection of consumers , and in particular the neutrality of information provided and the protection of personal data .
In addition , the proposal continues to impose special obligations on CRS parent carriers .
The definition of ' parent carrier ' has led to heated debates , since the obligations imposed on those companies are very burdensome .
Modernisation of the code of conduct will make it possible to reduce the cost of distribution of their services while guaranteeing the protection of consumers ' interests .
This is urgently required from the viewpoint of the competitiveness of our industry , as our companies ' competitors already benefit from a liberalised environment and lower sales costs .
I am therefore pleased at the speed with which Parliament has taken up this issue .
I wish to express my appreciation of the work performed by your rapporteur , Tim Kirkhope , and the TRAN Committee , as well as the committees which expressed their opinions .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am really glad we had the opportunity to debate this important matter tonight , and I am proud to present this new proposal to enhance the position of European consumers .
The revision of the CRS code of conduct and the deal we have on the table represent a chance for an early and successful conclusion to an important piece of work .
The new code is designed to re-energise the travel sector , so the sooner it is introduced , the sooner we see the benefits of that - lower air fares , more choice and greater transparency .
CRSs should , of course , be able to negotiate freely the conditions of the distribution of air services but , under my revision , CRSs will have to compete more aggressively with each other for air-carrier participation , on the basis of lower booking fees and better quality of service .
This will have great benefits for European consumers .
Firstly , choice : consumers will get more choice and should get better service from their travel agents .
Greater competition will also provide a boost to the quality of information available to travel agents and , thereby , the consumer .
Secondly , price : this in turn should mean that the price of airline tickets , kept artificially high by the present system , could go down by as much as 10 % as a result , according to the Commission 's research .
Thirdly , transparency : through tougher safeguards , travel agents and consumers will be better protected from market abuse and distortion .
Two main safeguards are built in .
One concerns audit provisions .
I deemed it necessary to rethink those provisions and , as a result , they will prove more effective , and hence the regulation provides the Commission with an important tool to monitor the activities of CRSs .
Fourthly , the definition of who is or is not a parent carrier .
This issue has dominated the whole report and my work on it .
It is important to get this right , because we do not want airlines investing in CRSs for the purpose of influencing the running of the business to the possible detriment of others .
Let me say to my colleagues who have worked so hard on this report that I believe that , within the deal we have on the table , we have a robust but flexible test , one which deals with all the concerns you have expressed .
Some have suggested tabling a split vote tomorrow but , frankly , this could leave us with too broad a scope of definition .
I repeat what I have said in writing to those people .
Deleting the reference to ' decisive influence ' does not provide the useful clarification of the elements in Amendment 12 that it was designed to do .
Indeed , following such a deletion , it might be interpreted that any investor would be deemed to be a parent carrier , as ' any other governing body of a system vendor ' could mean literally anything .
Should any air carrier participating in a CRS with rights to merely receive information , for example , of annual decisions or just the annual accounts , be defined as a parent carrier ?
Surely not .
On the suggestion made by the ALDE Group that the question should be referred back to the committee - that we should carry out a close examination of the ownership and governance structure of the concerned CRS - the Commission would need a new regulation to do that .
When the Commission states that it needs to examine this on a case-by-case basis , I do not see this as proof that we have a weak definition .
On the contrary , we discussed this at length in committee , and an independent study was commissioned by me to help the committee .
I made sure the shadow rapporteurs were fully informed at all stages on the state of informal contacts with the Council .
They specifically agreed to what is in the deal .
I purposely held this matter back for a month while I made sure that all views were taken fully into account - environmental issues , Mrs Lichtenberger ; full liberalisation , Mr Evans .
So , tomorrow , I am asking for your support .
We must vote for lower air fares , more choice and greater transparency .
All of us have a duty to protect and inform the rights of consumers and get them the very best deal possible .
That remains the priority .
Gesture politics is not my priority , but it is my priority to get the best deal for all those consumers we represent here in Europe .
Mr President , European consumers are groaning under the weight of high food prices and I think one of the causes of the exorbitant price increases is the concentration in the retail market on a few big players .
I have grounds for concern that a similar development could also occur in future in the case of travel agencies .
The liberalisation of the Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems proposed by this report should ensure greater competition on the market .
I fear , however , that only the large tour operators will be able to survive in future , by concluding several CRS provider contracts .
This will be necessary , however , to offer customers a comprehensive choice .
The small operators unable to afford several contracts with CRS providers will fall by the wayside .
Whenever the United States is called upon as an example of consumer-friendly competition in this context , I have to remember that there are no airlines in the Member States that still participate in a computerised reservation system .
I would therefore advocate a rigid definition of the term ' parent carrier ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope , most sincerely .
He has presented a very balanced report and has worked very closely with the shadow rapporteurs .
His version , which he has negotiated with the French Presidency , affords consumers better protection against dubious flight and rail offers based on clear regulations on transparency and at the same time ensures fair competition between rail companies and airlines .
Incidentally , the recast version documents the fact that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats as the first group had rightly stopped the Commission 's attempt in 2005 to abolish this regulation as obsolete .
We need it - and we shall prove it by the way we vote - to protect consumers .
Even if more and more travellers do in fact reserve their tickets directly with the airlines or on the Internet , the majority of consumers will continue to rely on their travel agencies , which for their part must be able to rely on non-discriminatory , genuine bargain offers in the computerised reservation system .
The prices indicated must in future include all taxes and charges so that the travel agencies can pass genuinely transparent and comparable offers on to the consumer .
The parent companies should also be subject to tighter regulations on transparency and competition in future in order that the systems are prevented from making preferential offers to the disadvantage of other airlines and to the disadvantage of consumers .
I must come back here to the rapporteur and appeal to my fellow Members .
I believe the version we have agreed with the French Presidency in relation to parent companies offers adequate protection against positive discrimination in favour of certain airlines .
Any change made by the famous amendment to Amendment 48 is therefore totally superfluous and if this goes through tomorrow , it would delay the adoption of the whole thing or even call it into question .
I appeal to you to take a clear , final decision tomorrow in order to protect consumers .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Kirkhope for his unfailing cooperation and support for all members on the committee .
Two years ago I looked at an internet-based travel agency , a travel website , for a ticket from London to San Francisco .
The website , or the computer , told me that there were no direct flights from London to San Francisco and recommended a connecting flight via New York with , I think , United .
Of course there are direct flights , but it was not just in that particular website 's domain to issue them .
But it highlighted to me , in a simplified form , the problem that we are trying to address with this revision : as Commissioner Mandelson said , a revision that goes back some 20 years or more .
We must recognise the real changes that have taken place in technology over that period .
Now a large majority of people , and indeed all travel agents , have access to the internet , and I agree with the previous speakers who have said we have a duty to ensure fairness and equal access to the market and , as Commissioner Mandelson said , fair rules , effective rules , and protect the consumers and ensure competition .
But , Mr Mandelson , you also said that you are pleased with the speed at which this has all gone through .
Whilst I share your aims and always want to do things as quickly as we can - and Mr Kirkhope 's aims of price transparency and consumer protection - I think that , in our speed to get this through , we have drifted away , certainly from the position that the Committee on Transport adopted at the end of May , and that the position that Council has come up with , the so-called compromise position , is different from the position that we went for in the Committee on Transport .
In the Commission 's clarification yesterday , he speaks about ' all past analyses will have to be done again under a new perspective , and the Commission will have to examine each case on a case-by-case basis ' .
That , I think , means it is not clear enough , and we have not got to a position where , certainly , a lot of Members on this side and in other groups would like to be , where we can say with absolute certainty that the position Mr Kirkhope hopes he has achieved has actually been such .
That is why I will be recommending to my group to support a proposal that Mrs Lichtenberger , I believe , is going to make shortly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we had had to cope with the correspondence that this report has generated over recent weeks using a horseback messenger , we would have exhausted a few horses - without a doubt .
Modern communication has allowed us to stay in constant touch and to keep up to date at all times .
The greatest credit for this , however , is due to Mr Kirkhope , who in a truly exemplary manner has kept Members informed , has always corresponded with the shadow rapporteurs and has actually done everything he can to convey the Committee 's requests to the Council .
The Council , however , has not made his work easy .
Quite the opposite .
Wording was proposed - we were able to follow proceedings well - which actually would have done nothing other than cover up distortionary competitive practices more effectively - and I object to this !
I must honestly say that even the home countries of the distortionary competitive airlines would do well here to take consumer protection more seriously by providing fair information as well as following our suggestions to ensure this happens .
The Code of Conduct is not the strongest instrument we have at our disposal .
We must be clear about this .
Even more important is clear wording , which assures us that another back door will not be opened .
Together with my colleague Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert , I should also like to guarantee this clarity by referring it back to committee .
I consider this to be a major issue .
We have to stand by the fact that we are protecting consumers and also have to accept the obvious consequences of this .
I thank my fellow Members , however , particularly the rapporteur , that the concerns regarding environmental protection have found echoes in this report , as far as was possible in this sector .
My sincere thanks once again to my fellow Members and the rapporteur .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , my colleague Mr Liberadzki and I submitted an amendment to this report .
Its aim was that airlines should withdraw from the airline ticket central reservations system within three years .
This amendment was seen as radical and did not gain the required majority .
Note that this radicalism is , after all , nothing other than implementation of the principle , which appears to be generally recognised in the European Union , of equal opportunities in a competitive market .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism recently adopted a version that may be regarded as transitionally very good .
Transitionally , on the way - yes , that is right - to a full withdrawal of involvement .
At the same time the matter underwent a change in the Council : the amendments submitted , still more than in the version originally presented by the European Commission , strengthen the position of three carriers - that is to say , Lufthansa , Iberia and Air France .
We hear that it is a success and that they are gaining customers because of this .
It is probably a further success that the rapporteur stood up to enormous pressure from lobbyists .
This I can imagine , as we had to too , we individual MEPs .
Those lobbyists , though , are representatives of companies that are fighting for an even break .
They have not got it , however , as the interests of a few national businesses have come out on top .
On the other hand we do not call these businesses lobbyists , particularly when these interests are being represented by the country that currently happens to hold the Presidency of the European Union .
Then everything is fine and what gets mentioned is the excellent cooperation with the Council .
Is this not hypocrisy ?
Is it not yet more hypocrisy to call this report a Code of Conduct ?
To whom is this Code in its amended version supposed to apply , when the new definition of a parent carrier effectively eliminates this carrier ?
( FR ) Mr President , there is hypocrisy first of all in saying that consumers are injured .
There is not a consumer on the streets of Europe who knows what an airline computerised reservation system is .
Not one !
All consumers use private booking systems , the internet or the telephone .
What this is about today is the relationship between the airlines and the information they give out about their flights , particularly to travel agents .
This text moralises , and introduces very strong transparency and non-exclusivity principles .
It is a text that takes the traditional view when it comes to competition law and controlling mergers .
A number of lobbies are using it to try and force off the board of directors those who , in Europe , created the largest computerised reservation system .
That would be a very serious matter because we have never done anything here but enact competition rules and methods for controlling them .
We have never forced anyone to adopt a particular status , or a particular shareholder base .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , I will vote for the compromise found , skilfully and through a lot of work , by Mr Kirkhope , between the Council , all the Member States of the Council - as I recall - , the European Parliament and the European Commission .
It would be better to vote in favour of this compromise than to re-enter a war with the lobbies , in view of the many interests at stake , and to prevent this text from ultimately being substantially modified , which would do consumers a disservice .
( DE ) Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope , has already been thanked several times today - quite rightly - for having now reached a clear consensus on a highly complex issue in committee and in cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs as well as with other fellow Members and I hope that this will also continue this morning .
It was said just now that even the term ' CRS ' was not clear to very many Members at the start of the discussion .
Today we know what it means and today we know what important issues we have rightly been discussing .
Sincere thanks once again for this fine work on a hopefully good European legal instrument .
We have accommodated a range of content in this report , which now necessarily has an important function beyond the heavily technical nature of this report , even in another context .
Consumers are protected while a final total price can actually be displayed by the price display method and this cannot be covered up with various special or supplementary prices .
We have - because our group is always being reproached with this - achieved considerable progress .
We have stated that we do not want to talk merely about preferential treatment for rail , but we do want to know for certain with regard to short- and medium-haul flights that rail transport has a fair chance of being included here .
As has already been addressed , we have also proved the CO2 consumption or demanded that it be proved - as well - in order to establish by comparison what we want to achieve and what the consumer can contribute .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the controversial problem of the definition of parent companies .
The purpose of the definition is indeed to prevent airlines with shares in a CRS abusing their position .
At present this palpably concerns Air France , Iberia and Lufthansa , which have a minority holding in Amadeus .
The current practice of the Commission examining this on a case-by-case basis when abuse is suspected has been proven .
Cases of the abuse of influence have been resolved and prosecuted .
To date this has occurred on two occasions .
There are no reasonable grounds for changing anything in this essentially proven practice .
The definition found of a parent enterprise based on the expression , with regard to competition law , of the determining influence complies with this proven practice .
The term has been proving itself for 40 years now .
Some Members , however , want every airline with a capital share to be automatically defined as a parent company .
For the air transport market this means massive and unnecessary interference in the current competitive situation .
Nor would consumers obtain any advantage from this .
The four winners would be , for example , British Airways , American Airlines and others that would benefit from such a shift in the competitive situation .
In addition , the only European computerised reservation system would have to accept a competitive disadvantage with regard to US competitors on the hotly contested European market .
This I consider politically unreasonable , even negligent , and I therefore recommend that the compromise found be accepted .

( RO ) The compromise obtained by our colleague Kirkhope is based upon strengthening the principles of non-discrimination , efficiency and transparency , all of them clearly to the advantage of the final beneficiary , namely the European citizen .
First of all , both potential abuses directed against air carriers and potential interferences of the latter with the good operation of the activity of agencies are prevented .
Secondly , transparency is ensured and the misleading of consumer as regards the selection of flights , duration , operators and , last but not least , the price , is prevented , also ensuring the protection of personal data .
Thirdly , beneficiaries are also provided with the possibility to choose the variant of railway transport for short routes , which may bring environmental benefits in time , by reducing the carbon dioxide emissions .
Unfortunately , there are a few aspects that the code of conduct does not regulate and which are not included within its scope .
These are the tariff policies of low cost companies , which are not subject to cooperation with the computerized reservations systems .
I believe that the healthy principles behind this code of conduct should be adopted by all transport documents reservation and purchase systems , including in the case of low cost companies .
From the consumer 's point of view , it is regrettable that these companies are not integrated into CRS , in their turn .
Besides the multiplication of options for passengers , this integration would also create positive pressure to ensure the quality of services and the transparency of prices .
On this occasion , I request the European Commission and the Member States to reinforce controls and apply sanctions through the relevant bodies , where necessary , for real protection of consumers , for whom the companies not listed in CRS represent an affordable , yet deceiving means of mobility .
I also support and recommend the suggestion that , in the future , CRS should consider the possibility to introduce regular coach services into the systems as well .
Mr President , in thanking the rapporteur for his report , I recognise his efforts to try and get a first-reading agreement on this important dossier .
A first-reading deal would indeed have been possible if the Council had accepted the Committee on Transport 's position .
The rapporteur is right .
We did discuss it in great detail in the Committee on Transport , and we came to a view in the Committee on Transport . But what happened subsequently is that that Committee on Transport view has been altered .
Alas , the Council 's intervention and the subsequent Council amendments not only served to muddy the waters , but caused serious concern for consumer organisations , travel agents and passenger associations .
Subsequently , what is now proposed by the rapporteur via the Council has serious implications , not only legislatively , but internationally also .
Never in the field of EU legislation have two amendments caused so much mayhem and confusion to the detriment of the Committee on Transport 's democratic position .
Some people do not have a problem with that , but the reality is that the Council 's intervention has caused great uncertainty , both morally and legally .
There is a suspicion that the Council is creating loopholes to protect certain major air carriers , particularly as it applies to parent carriers .
Also , the undue haste to get an agreement could lead to bad legislation .
Therefore , I support the call for this report to be taken back to committee so that we can address all the concerns raised , get this legislation right , not for our major air carriers , but for our consumers , whose representations tell us they dislike the Council 's additions .

( SK ) I should first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Timothy Kirkhope , for including provisions on display in the regulation on a code of conduct for computerised reservation systems ( CRS ) .
Travel agents use displays , screens , to display CRS information and therefore it is vital that travel agents receive neutral and balanced information .
I believe that the use of impartial displays increases the transparency of travel products and services offered by participating carriers and increases consumer confidence .
Travel agents will be able to use fair assessment criteria to offer the most transparent range of options for consumers , for example the main display will make it possible to assess the most suitable travel option offered by a scheduled air or rail carrier .
I appreciate the efforts of the rapporteur to ensure the transparency of prices by direct reference to the PRICE of a product , since the current definition of FARE does not include all the price elements , which is often misleading for consumers .
I believe that this report will contribute to fair competition between CRSs , which will be of benefit mainly to consumers who will obtain travel products with high-quality services at a favourable price .
( RO ) The Regulation on the code of conduct for computerized reservations systems lays down the rules that the air and railway transport operators must comply with when making reservations .
The existing situation indicates that reservations made through the computerized reservations systems used by tourist agencies lead to higher prices .
I insist on the need to protect the passengers ' personal data .
I think passengers should have the possibility to choose the most convenient ticket and , for this purpose , the passenger should be adequately and completely informed .
I insist that the requirement have no discrimination either between the distribution channels or according to the place of residence of passengers of tourist agencies .
Certain distribution channels , such as the Internet , comply with the principle of non-discrimination , but the computerized reservations systems require certain conditions from tourism operators , which often lead to higher prices and discriminations based upon the passengers ' place of residence .
I consider this regulation to be important ; we should always take into consideration the consumer and I insist again on compliance with the personal data protection .
( RO ) As a fictional Rapporteur for opinion on this file in the INFO Committee from PPE-DE , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur on his work , as well as for the report drafted .
I would like to emphasize the importance of this report with regard to ensuring real competition in the field of computerized reservations systems .
We should also never disregard consumer rights and we should make sure that they benefit from the amendments to this code of conduct .
Consumers should be provided with all the details regarding the trip they intend to make .
It is also very important that they know the exact price of the tickets and are not misled by potential hidden costs .
I would also like to emphasize the fact that what matters the most is that the companies in charge of these websites be no longer part of the boards of directors , because they always have hidden costs .
In conclusion , I would like to assure the Rapporteur of my full support tomorrow , at the vote .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to give every support to the position taken by Mr Simpson .
He has shown that the new definition of a parent carrier is very unclear .
The additional phrase ' exercising a decisive influence ' prompts the question : does Lufthansa , with its 22 % shareholding in Amadeus , exercise a decisive influence ?
How about Lufthansa , Air France and Iberia , with 44 % between them : is that a decisive influence ?
This needs looking at from every angle : either we adopt Amendment 48 , or we send this draft back to the Committee to be re-worked .
Otherwise the idea of competition will certainly be harmed .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to welcome this agreement , which is based on consensus and therefore which not everyone is one hundred percent happy with .
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the Commission , the Council , and also , of course , Parliament , represented by the Committee on Transport , its rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs .
I think that the concerns of consumers have been answered regarding the problem of Marketing Information Data Tapes ( MIDTs ) , including the new developments relating to trains and emissions , which are ingenious and respond to this new problem .
I think that the controls system , into which competition has been introduced , has been strengthened .
Therefore , seeking to now expel three companies from the system would only lead to a reduction in that competition , which , as we are all aware , benefits consumers .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to commend honourable Members for the high standard of this debate .
I welcome most of the amendments proposed .
They clarify several points in a useful way , in particular as regards the neutral display of travel options on the travel agent 's screen and the protection of personal data .
I would like to thank Parliament for having had the courage to raise the thorny issue of parent carriers .
I would like to set out the Commission 's position in this regard .
We all know that this is an extremely sensitive issue which has given rise to very intensive lobbying .
At this juncture , the Commission supports the compromise reached between the presidency and the rapporteur , which was supported unanimously by the Member States .
The new definition , as proposed in Amendment 13 , removes any ambiguity or legal uncertainty .
The Commission would thus be able to carry out an analysis and determine whether a company controls the CRS and whether a company which has rights and participates in the management of the CRS influences the latter in a decisive manner .
This concept relies on the Commission 's long experience in the field of competition , which enables it to ascertain what a shareholder 's real power and influence are , for example by analysing the rights attaching to the shareholding and the agreements made between shareholders .
In view of this , I believe that the text before us will enable the Commission , when acting on a complaint it has received , or on its own initiative , to exercise its prerogatives fully , strengthening significantly its powers , and to determine in each individual case , and at any time , which companies are parent carriers and must shoulder the major obligations arising from that status .
With regard to the identification of the travel agent in the statistical data provided by CRS MIDT , I also support the compromise text which strikes a balance between the need to protect travel agents against improper use of the data and the usefulness of the data when it comes to airlines ' strategic planning .
I believe that with this text we are establishing a regulatory framework which takes account of market developments and enables travellers to benefit from an injection of competition into the distribution of air and rail tickets , while keeping safeguards in place to prevent any abuse .
On this basis , I really think that it is important to go ahead with an agreement in first reading during this legislature .
The new legislation is expected by all actors and will reduce the administrative costs for the operators .
In order to meet the concerns expressed with regard to the definition of parent carrier , I can take the commitment that , in the framework of the current compromise , the Commission would issue a formal notice explaining how it intends to interpret that definition when applying the regulation .
Such notice would be similar to those issued from time to time by the Commission with respect to competition matters .
This notice would be published in the Official Journal before the entry into force of the regulation so as to provide the necessary legal certainty to all interested parties .
I very much hope that you will consider this proposal favourably .
I think I have covered the main points raised during this debate .
As usual , I shall send a full list of the amendments and the Commission 's position on each of them to the Parliament 's Secretariat .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Kirkhope report
The Commission can accept Amendments 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 27 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 43 , 44 , 45 and 48 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 10 , 19 , 26 and 28 in principle .
The Commission can accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 18 , 25 and 47 with redrafting .
The Commission can accept Amendment 33 in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 12 , 13 , 15 , 24 , 29 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 and 46 .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for that extremely clear exposition of his position and the confirmation that , once we have concluded our proceedings in Parliament ( in a positive manner tomorrow , I hope ) , there is more work than can and will be done by himself and others in the Commission to ensure that what Parliament wants is put into effect .
I wish to thank my colleagues for their contributions , despite the fact that I do not agree with their every interpretation .
That is probably understandable because this is undoubtedly a very complex matter .
Despite the very open way in which I have proceeded with the work , it is inevitable that some of the interpretations of its outcome will be politicised or maybe even misunderstood .
However , I believe it is in the interests of the consumer and in the wider interests of clarification that we proceed in the way we have agreed .
I am proud of the work I have done .
I am proud also of the work that others have done to help me .
The smiles and acceptances of the shadow rapporteurs during the proceedings gave me confidence that they would support me , not only this evening , but also with their groups tomorrow .
Therefore , I hope that on consideration , and having heard the very sensible and positive contribution by the Commissioner tonight , they will come back tomorrow and allow us to go forward in total unanimity to make sure that Europe is a better place for travellers , a better place for consumers and a better place for enforcing competition policy in future years .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 4 September at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , the text we are debating this evening was the subject of lively discussions within the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and not without reason , since it is important legislation for the tourism and air transport industry , and also for citizens .
It was not easy to find a balance between maintaining competition between the airlines and guaranteeing the independence of travel agents , while enabling passengers to receive useful , unbiased information .
The text on which the rapporteur and the French Presidency have agreed respects these requirements , and I am pleased about this .
A balanced definition of the concept of ' parent carrier ' has been agreed and that is essential for ensuring healthy competition between the various computerised reservation systems .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will approve the text at the first reading so it can be rapidly applied .
Thank you for your attention .
Computerised reservation systems ( CRSs ) are mainly intended to serve the customer .
That is why it is so important to ensure transparency in the air ticket reservations market , especially in the event that airlines , by having a holding in computerised reservation systems , can limit competition in the market .
Obviously the situation in the airline market has changed significantly over the last few years , and most airlines have disposed of their shares in CRSs , which does not mean that all airlines have done so .
The most important thing , though , is that , apart from shares in reservation systems , airlines do not have the opportunity to exert such an influence on the functioning of systems as might give preferential treatment to the routes they operate , and this must be properly reflected in the definition of ' parent carrier ' .
A simplification of the Code of Conduct will increase the potential for negotiation between market participants ( airlines and CRSs will freely be able to negotiate the level of payment for a reservation taken by the CRS ) .
Currently the provisions increase the CRS cost and restrict the flexibility of the CRS in tailoring its services to the specific needs of airlines and travel agents , through the lack of potential for differentiation of the tariff range for individual CRSs .
I hope that the amendments introduced will bring about greater competition in the air ticket sales market , to the benefit of the customer , especially where expansion of the current range and a lower end price for air tickets are concerned .
in writing . - I support this report which recommends that the rules regarding the Computerised Reservation Systems used by high street travel agents to book airline tickets are simplified and modernised .
The current rules regarding CRS only serve to stifle competition and maintain high fares .
These proposals will promote competition between the companies which are in charge of providing these systems and will hopefully result in lower fares and more choice for travellers .
At present , usually the most attractive option for consumers is to book directly with an airline .
The new code of conduct will result in a greater degree of price transparency , giving the travel sector a boost and ensuring a fair deal for the consumer .
European ports policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Josu Ortuondo Larrea , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on a European ports policy .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , along around one hundred thousand kilometres of coast in the united Europe , we have more than one thousand two hundred merchant ports , as well as several hundred more dotted along the thirty-six thousand kilometres of internal waterways .
90 % of our international trade passes through them , as well as 40 % of the tonnes per kilometre of intra-Community trade .
Ports generate half a million jobs and guarantee the development of entire regions .
They are also key for the regular passenger and ferry services , which provide social cohesion for the islands and other territories that are more easily and more sustainably reached by sea .
There is therefore no doubt that we are talking about a sector that is of great importance for our well-being .
Nevertheless , our ports are facing major challenges , including the increase in international demand for transport , which is increasing even faster than the rate of global economic growth .
In this context it is worth mentioning the advances in navigation technologies , logistical telecommunications and exploitation , the commitment to reduce pollution and greenhouse gases , securing new investment and the need to bring training up to date for the staff that manage and deal with these aspects .
However , ports also have the challenge of maintaining dialogue and coordinated action with their respective surrounding areas , neighbours , cities and regions , and to develop the best possible connections and convenience in relation to other modes of transport , for their mutual benefit and in order to seek the most harmonious and sustainable planning solutions .
The ports are also part of our internal market , and they therefore have to comply with the relevant Community parameters .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism , which appointed me as rapporteur for this matter , wished to produce an own-initiative report , which , having been debated and agreed by the various groups is now being put before the plenary sitting of the European Parliament .
In our analysis we considered that the European ports policy should aim to promote competitiveness in maritime transport and the provision of high-quality , modern services , promoting safety , fast services , low costs and respect for the environment , creating a European maritime transport space without barriers .
We believe that technological and economic progress and the widening of the Panama Canal will accentuate the current trend towards larger vessels , and will bring about changes in the international routes . We also believe that at the same time , in Europe , where there are not many ports that are deep enough to allow large vessels to operate there , there will be development of intermediate ports and also small and medium-sized ports , thus boosting cabotage and river transport .
For this future we need an integrated European policy to boost regional competitiveness and territorial cohesion , and efforts need to be redoubled to reduce water pollution and CO2 emissions , therefore we are asking for the current fuel to be replaced by diesel by 2020 .
We need the port authorities to cooperate with each other and with the local and regional authorities and transport sector associations , not only maritime and river transport , but also rail , air and road transport .
We consider that the legal certainty of the Community legal framework in the maritime field , flowing from the international legal framework , depends on the speedy approval of the Erika III maritime package , and we ask for this to be done with the greatest of urgency and the greatest possible consensus .
European ports are sometimes in competition with ports in third countries that have discriminatory policies ; we therefore need a list of bottlenecks .
We understand that technological changes will have major financial implications , and that therefore the regions should also be able to use the structural funds in order to finance the acquisition of advanced technological installations , create jobs in innovative fields and rehabilitate urban areas freed up by the transfer of port facilities .
We are in communication with the Commission in order for it to publish guidelines for State aid to ports in 2008 , distinguishing between access and defence infrastructures , which should be exempt , and project-related infrastructure and superstructure , and so that aid for environmental improvements or decongestions and reducing the use of roads should not be considered as State aid , or when it is essential , as in the case of islands , in order to ensure cohesion .
We approve the extension of the transparency requirements in this respect , but instead of an absolute obligation we ask for ports that do not reach a reduced minimum threshold for annual revenue to be exempted .
Finally , we support port workers being provided with a recognisable qualification and we ask the European social dialogue committee to address these issues .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me begin by thanking the Committee on Transport and Tourism for setting out its vision of ports policy , and Mr Ortuondo Larrea , the rapporteur , for his report .
The report acknowledges the efforts made by the Commission in developing a genuine European ports policy , and that is what unites us .
The communication on a European ports policy is a response to the sector 's needs and concerns as identified by the Commission following a broad consultation of the port sector from November 2006 to June 2007 .
The consultation results showed that there was agreement on the challenges faced by European ports : an increased demand for international transport , technological change , commitments to reduce greenhouse gases and other emissions , the need for dialogue , the need to ensure a level playing field .
To face these challenges , we need an effective and efficient European port system .
The communication is intended as an inventory of the state of play in the port sector , which is characterised by great diversity in terms of the size , role , traffic and management methods .
Parliament 's report rightly notes this diversity .
As the communication clearly states , the Commission has no intention of interfering with this diversity .
I agree with Parliament that the importance of our ports is linked not only to economic factors but also to the role of ports in society .
Indeed , Parliament highlights the importance of ports , not only for maritime river and intermodal transport in Europe and internationally , but also as a source of employment and a factor in the integration of the population .
It logically follows that the sector lends itself to a Europe-wide approach .
The measures announced in the communication , which the industry agrees with and even clearly calls for , need to be implemented : guidelines on state aid , guidance on the application of environmental legislation , the European Maritime Transport space without barriers , and social dialogue .
We have already started , and we are striving to achieve tangible results in the near future .
The Commission has adopted a communication proposing a clear framework and an action plan enabling European ports to face the challenges of today and tomorrow , to attract investment , and to contribute fully to co-modal transport chain development .
I am firmly convinced that the communication and the practical measures it will generate will produce positive and beneficial results , ensuring that European ports continue to play a pivotal role in the logistics chain and as centres of growth and employment .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I would sincerely like to congratulate Mr Ortuondo on his main recommendations for the necessary development of European ports .
I would also like to congratulate him for taking on board all of our proposals and I thank him on behalf of all my colleagues .
Within the EU , the free movement of goods and people is essential for our growth and also demonstrates our solidarity .
The goods transport chain - 90 % of international trade and transport - requires that each link , each node , is optimised in view of this rate of flow .
The 21st century port is not escaping the impact of this new mobility .
As a part of the city , it has to be integrated into the sustainable planning of cities , in accordance with the main stated , proactive , objectives of the fight against climate change .
As a part of regional development too , it must be optimised in view of the integrated approach in the Leipzig Charter .
The European Ports Policy , which we are pinning our hopes on , must therefore respond to this important need as well as to the objectives set in this report , and must thus be integrated into our general approach .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ports in Europe are a driving force for the economy .
No less than 90 % of Europe 's international trade takes place via the ports .
This must hold appeal for Mr Mandelson , as Commissioner for External Trade .
Every year sees the transhipment of more than 3 million tonnes of goods from all over the world .
The ports employ more than half a million Europeans .
The growth figures are still substantial .
Growth brings opportunities , but also problems : available infrastructure , good hinterland connections , environmental capacity .
This is the very reason why it is so important that Europe does not hinder ports but help them and solve their problems .
This does not require a Directive on port services , or legislation , but it does require clear guidelines .
It is important that the European Commission speed up the process of adopting guidelines on unclear and sometimes even inconsistent environmental legislation .
Vague terminology and inconsistent wording make for judicial appeals procedures and bring important projects to a standstill .
The Commission has yet to name a date for presentation of these guidelines .
Can it provide any clarity on this point this evening ?
It is also important to introduce guidelines for state aid .
A level playing field between European ports is an essential precondition .
Transparency requirements are also important with regard to ports .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the European Commission and opposes the enforcement of thresholds advocated by our rapporteur .
We shall therefore be voting against these parts of the report .
We shall also be voting against the amendments by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , as they are contrary to sound proposals by the Greek Government , and it is wrong for the European Parliament to put paid to these .
My Greek colleague will discuss this in a minute .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his report and thank the various members for their openness and their contributions , particularly that of Willi Piecyk , who recently passed away .
In 2006 Parliament rejected the proposal on market access to port services for the second time .
At the time it opted for measures favouring greater transparency , healthier competition , less precarious work , better employee qualifications and improved safety , and emphasised that unregulated liberalisation of the European port system is counterproductive .
This report reinforces this position .
As the shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I have always upheld the following points that are raised in the final report : the need to use existing opportunities in terms of European funding or State aid to develop and purchase advanced and environmentally-responsible facilities and to better integrate them into the European port network ; the need for local and regional authorities to make use of the possibilities their ports offer to develop their regions , creating more transport intermodality and competitiveness between ports ; the need to improve current social conditions in the maritime sector , in particular through better training , lifelong learning and better safety conditions in the workplace ; the need to enhance the European Union 's competitive position as a global maritime power , in particular by strengthening regulatory frameworks in the area of maritime safety and financial incentives , rules to aid public or private investors from various backgrounds ; improving the adaptation of existing ports to strict environmental requirements , in particular in terms of reducing greenhouse gases ; strengthening the current regulatory framework for ports , as variables determining the global equilibrium ; adapting the European port system to extremely rapid technological development without disregarding the environmental impact ; accepting that some investments by public authorities may not be seen as State aids , for outermost regions and islands , when they are essential to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion , as long as they do not benefit a single user or operator , and recognising the specific situation of outermost regions as recognised in the Treaty on European Union .
Madam President , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports the Commission 's new European ports policy strategy .
Now that two proposals for the Ports Directive have failed , this must be rethought .
In addition , the series of consultations arranged by the Commission , in which all port stakeholders have taken part , has demonstrated the need for clarification of both the government support rules , in order to ensure equal competition between the ports , and the environmental rules .
Therefore , it is the correct strategy at present for the Commission to prepare guidelines for state support .
Decisions need to be made concerning many details .
There may be questions about how far into a port a road is considered a public project and the point at which this becomes the port 's responsibility .
The guidelines must give clear answers to this type of question .
It is important that there is openness and transparency in questions concerning state support and I would like to give my wholehearted support to the rapporteur 's recommendations in this connection .
The Commission will also provide clarification on how EU environmental legislation is to be interpreted in relation to port expansion and development .
In terms of the overall picture , port expansions improve the environment by promoting maritime transport , which is more environmentally sound .
Naturally , the development of ports should not be at the expense of the environment .
Greater clarity will also ensure that environmental matters do not arise that in reality are merely aimed at delaying and complicating port expansion - matters that have not been raised out of genuine concern for the environment .
The Commission will promote the development of a port network and ensure the development of good supporting investments .
How we get goods to and from ports is a major problem and good traffic links on land should be better reflected in the EU 's support programmes in future , not only in regional support but perhaps also in a programme such as Marco Polo .
We will increase the efficiency of the ports through increased use of new technology and by reducing bureaucracy .
In addition , I think that it would be a good result for the consultation process if the dialogue between the social partners could be more constructive in future .
To be a port worker is to be a part of a culture , but at a modern port it is also a highly specialised job that is performed in a dangerous workplace .
This requires a focus on qualifications and training .
I also think that it is good that training has become a part of the toolbox launched by the Commission .
I would like to wish Mr Ortuondo luck with an excellent report and look forward to the Commission implementing the action plan .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , we cannot go along with the assessment of this European Commission initiative , as we consider it is attempting , as a last resort , to promote the liberalisation of port services at European Union level .
In its communication , the Commission states how it faced the challenge of the need to reconcile ports ' and development management with transparency , competition and the body of EU law in general , as well as the establishment of a real internal market for maritime transport in Europe , for which it will put forward a legislative proposal , that is to say , the objective is to extend the inclusion of port management in the competition rules of the European Union 's internal market .
Obviously the Commission does not have the power to privatise .
However , it seeks to create the conditions so that when privatisations do occur , they do so within the framework of the European Union through the liberalisation of port services , for example , as regards service concessions in the ports sector , and I quote , ' so that it does not limit open competition beyond what is required ' or as regards public financing for all merchant ports , and I quote , ' irrespective of their ... turnover ' .
For this reason , we believe that explicit mention should be made in the European Parliament report of the rejection of any new attempt to liberalise port services at European Union level as regards public financing , port concessions , technical-nautical services or cargo handling services .
The ports sector is a public service of strategic importance for economic and social development , the environment , the defence and sovereignty of each Member State , which is why it should not be liberalised at EU level .

Madam President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Ortuondo Larrea for his report on a European ports policy .
I wish to note with regard to the report that the unfair competition between European ports must be stopped .
It is unacceptable that one European port should have to support itself commercially whilst another lives on state aid .
My first request to the European Commission is connected with this .
Can Commissioner Mandelson promise that he will publish the guidelines for state aid to ports before the end of 2008 ?
I should also like to urge the European Commission to publish guidelines on the application of Community environmental legislation by 2008 .
At the moment , the complexity and lack of clarity of this legislation is standing in the way of the development of Europe 's ports .
( PL ) Madam President , I am an MEP who comes into contact with the maritime economy on a daily basis .
Ports are of major importance not only for transport in Europe , but also as an important element in the economy and a source of employment .
Sea transport and sea ports contribute to and bind together the single EU market and the world economy .
Their effective functioning and continuing development are of fundamental importance for the competitiveness of the European Union , and for Europe , in a world where globalisation is proceeding .
Although the cross-border scope of the sector requires the coordination of a ports policy at European level , the foundations of this policy cannot be laid without reference to local and national needs .
In view of this , it is with moderate optimism that I accept the , after all , limited means of influence of the European Union on individual Member States in the form of soft law - in other words , guidelines and the removal of administrative hurdles for an integrated or sustainable maritime policy .
( GA ) Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's initial recommendation .
It is a very useful document and I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur on his hard work in preparing this report .
The report emphasizes that ports are an essential infrastructure .
There are more than 1,200 mercantile ports in the European Union employing half a million people directly or indirectly .
I would like to welcome the section of the report that emphasizes the importance of good inland connections with the ports .
In Ireland , for example , there are hardly any rail connections with the ports and there is no connection with the national airports or with the international airports .
The Minister for Transport in Ireland , who is a member of the Green Party , admitted that the situation in Ireland as regards carbon emission is very bad and getting worse and will no doubt worsen considerably because of the transport situation .
This is caused , no doubt , by the absence of rail links between the ports and the airports .
Exporters and importers in Ireland have no choice but to use motor vehicles and this is scandalous .
I am always very pleased when the Transport Committee publishes reports like this which endorse the European Union 's environment legislation .
( PL ) Mr President , may I take the liberty of thanking Mr Ortuondo Larrea for his report .
I do this as one of the instigators , two years since , of the rejection of the draft directive on access to port services .
I am in favour of treating ports as an element of the infrastructure , and thus also of the public sector taking strategic responsibility for port development .
Ports do not have to be state-run , but the public sector must take responsibility for them .
It also suits me that we are talking about public aid .
That may perhaps be something we need , and the rules of the game will undoubtedly serve us well .
I would like to emphasise the importance of stabilising the conditions for port employees .
This is a group of people who , along with the port as an infrastructure element , create a source of economic potential .
The final element to which I wished to draw attention is the need to modernise access to ports - in other words , roads , railway lines and inland waterways - to establish a multi-modal transport hub .
( ET ) I would like to thank the rapporteur and I hope that this report is successful this time .
My home country , Estonia , is also a maritime country and I am pleased that this report focuses on debottlenecking in the port sector in several Member States .
Ports are of great importance to economic and social development and to the competitiveness of the whole European Union , but we will only be able to cope in a world of global competition if we are above average in terms of innovation and best in terms of quality .
In a maritime country , maritime matters are an inseparable part of a complex logistical system and are an integral part of the country 's overall economic system .
Maritime transport is an important means of transport within the European Union as well , and on that basis I welcome the initiative to establish a single maritime transport space without barriers .
I am of the view that the European Union should not place short-sea shipping at a disadvantage compared to other forms of transport and that Community-cleared goods should not be subject to further customs inspection in Europe .
It is necessary to establish common rules governing the activity of European Union ports .
However , by the same token , it is important for the European Union to give greater support to its own ports to counter unfair competition from third-country ports .
One of the important terms in a debate on ports is ' maritime safety ' ; improvements to this are required and cooperation between maritime rescue coordination centres must unquestionably be improved .
I hope that all the steps highlighted in the report - my allotted time of two minutes does not allow me to address them all of course - help to increase the competitiveness of European Union maritime transport and contribute to the development of a European ports policy .
( SV ) Madam President , when the Ports Directive was up for debate in 2006 , the June List clearly and emphatically voted against it .
The reason for our opposition to the directive is that the ports of Europe already work well and are competitive even from an international perspective .
The report we are now debating contains several elements which were included in the Ports Directive that we voted against .
Furthermore , the report contains many proposals which are as worrying as they are undesirable .
For example , it is proposed that Community-cleared goods are to be exempt from customs controls .
This is a major problem , particularly regarding the smuggling of drugs , for example .
It should be up to each Member State to decide whether a container is to be opened or not .
This is a report which stinks of unnecessary regulation , hidden protectionism and major costs for the taxpayer .
Therefore I urge you all to vote against it tomorrow .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , towns and cities have developed around our ports , and these ports are linked with the development of our people .
It is vital therefore that our ports should be exemplary and legitimate and operate in strict accordance with the law .
Unfortunately , I must point out that there are two ports in Italy , Naples and Gioia Tauro , that have been found to be in serious breach of the law .
Organised illegal imports of products take place , from China , for example , and this then undermines the economic fabric of the country .
Then there are the Mafia organisations that organise clearly illegal imports of drugs and weapons and continue to undermine the economy and law and order of our country and Europe as a whole .
Therefore , the authorities and the European Parliament should keep a close watch on these situations , where disorder still reigns , unfortunately , the Mafia rules and there is no control or proper regulation .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the proposal on the table is better than the document presented last time .
It contains much more scope for decentralisation of responsibilities .
This also increases the role of Member States - and , as a member of the Committee on Regional Development , it is this that I should like to discuss once more .
What strikes me is that the position of ports is very clearly defined on the one hand , but that on the other the necessary hinterland connection lags behind in a number of cases .
One example is Antwerp here in Belgium and the Ruhr area .
The activation of the Iron Rhine - the railway link that would finally put an end to the constant stream of containers that cars find in front of them on the motorway - has been under discussion for years .
The situation is ridiculous : things could be different , but the main responsibility lies with the nation-states .
This also goes for the Netherlands , where the Betuwe Line - in which billions of euros were invested - has been laid from Antwerp to the Ruhr area .
Imagine my amazement : the optimum interconnection is lacking at the German border .
Surely this is something we need to discuss .
In view of the growth in international transport via the ports , those arteries , we must adopt a stricter integrated approach .
I know that the European Commission is working on a document regarding the territorial cohesion that must be realised not only in Western Europe , the old Member States , but also in the new Member States and beyond .
There is easily scope for a little more direction in this .
I am not talking about hard law and regulations , but a way to review each other 's responsibilities .
Nor am I talking about spending money from the Structural Funds .
Billions of euros are being channelled into port development and clusters without coordinating this properly with the hinterland .
This is the message I wish to convey .
May I ask the Commissioner whether this priority area features in the Green Paper on Territorial Cohesion to be presented in October ?
( RO ) I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur for the work and effort submitted in drafting this document .
Maritime transport and ports represent two key components of the chain linking the European single market with the world economy and they are essential for handling 90 % of Europe 's international trade .
From the perspective of regional development , ports represent one of the essential elements of cohesion in Europe , both due to the development of tourism capacity and the creation of over half a million jobs , which both dynamize and develop ultraperipheral regions .
In this context , aspects such as improving the image of ports and their better integration into urban life , their modernization by taking advantage of the possibilities provided by FEDER and the cohesion funds , as well as the involvement of local and harbour authorities in water and air quality management , contribute essentially to regional development .
For a competitive European policy , an integrated perspective is necessary , by correlating economic , environmental , social and security aspects .
We should also not neglect the stimulation of cooperation programmes within the Union 's neighbourhood and enlargement policy , as well as connecting the port areas to the Trans-European transport networks .
In the end , I would like to call attention to the Black Sea ports which , although they successfully meet all requirements for terminals , still need to be doubled by inland ports and waterways to facilitate the multimode transport and trade with Member States not bordering the sea .
Thus , I consider that the Danube represents a potential to be turned to good account with a view to building a logistic corridor linking the Black Sea region , Europe 's Eastern gate , with Western Europe .
Consequently , the Union should give special attention to the Black Sea region , which could become a pole of growth and development for Europe , thus contributing to the reduction of disparities between the ultraperipheral and the central regions .
Madam President , as the report rightly points out , ports are not only important for transport but also provide our citizens with jobs , have a significant impact on our economies , and are strategic for the security and defence of our Member States .
In terms of policy , we should primarily focus on their modernisation and development of the sector which includes all of the other logistic operations that are interconnected with ports .
With the expansion of any industry , we should always keep the environment in mind , especially when our maritime and waterways are involved .
While our policy may protect the environment and the social impact , we should address the problems associated with the non-EU countries which impede on our success in this sector by not applying the same rules and safeguards .
Madam President , paragraph 44 of this report calls on Member States to employ a trans-border approach to the use of existing capacities when co-financing port infrastructure .
In simple terms , that means that one state should not duplicate and prejudice existing neighbouring facilities .
Yet that is precisely what is set to happen in my constituency of Northern Ireland - which is an area that the Commissioner knows well .
Warrenpoint on Carlingford Lough has been built up , particularly through recent high investment , into a very successful roll-on , roll-off ferry port .
Just six miles away at Greenore in the Republic of Ireland , on the same lough , it is proposed to duplicate those facilities with public money , through a company that is part-owned by the Dublin Government .
I hear a lot from Ireland 's politicians about wanting to help and cooperate with Northern Ireland , so have to ask why it is they are trying to supplant and destroy our port at Warrenpoint .
I hope the Commission will take an interest in this matter and look out for the state aid issues , and that it will realise that such action is totally incompatible with any sensible ports policy .
( EL ) Madam President , without competing ports , the EU will not be able to meet the challenge of globalised trade - 90 % of our imports are imported by sea - neither will it be able to decongest its major roads in favour of sea routes .
However , the ports will finally have to emerge from the Stone Age .
They must stop being hostage to trade unions and must operate transparently , cut red tape and open up to more commercial horizons .
The Greek Government has set in motion a very ambitious programme to transfer parts of port operations to independent , private operators , who will bring a new dynamism not only to the Greek economy , but also to the wider area of South-East Europe .
I would therefore like to urge my fellow Members to support this option and reject the amendments of many left-wing Members aimed at undermining and diminishing the importance of the Greek programme for sea ports .
Madam President , I warmly welcome this report .
An integrated ports policy is necessary to boost trade and investment , while taking advantage of the environmental benefits of maritime transport .
There are also massive gains to be made by greater cooperation between ports and different Member States .
In my own city of Cork and ports there , there is a proposal for a new service between that port and a port in Spain .
Currently there is no roll-on roll-off link between these Member States .
The benefits will accrue not only to Ireland and Spain , but also to the UK and France .
Road freight between Ireland and Spain must now pass through the UK and France , adding to the congestion on their roads .
Road freight will be taken off already congested motorways and transported over a shorter route by sea , saving time , money and carbon emissions .
However , a word of warning must be added .
The port I referred to has recently attempted to relocate to a location outside the city , to deeper water .
Unfortunately , planning was refused by the planning board , who are not accountable to the Government .
They refused on the grounds that there was no rail link to the new proposed facility .
The Government does not have any policy on freight transport by rail .
This displays a lack of integrated thinking , where policymaking is uncoordinated across government agencies .
Therefore I welcome this report .
( BG ) Commissioner , this report is satisfactory for the people who live by the sea .
In the context of the new policy of the European Union , the new maritime policy , it is very important to implement an effective ports policy .
And since ports are each country 's open doors to the world , and since out of twenty-seven countries twenty-four are considered maritime ones , the ports policy proves very important for the economic development of many regions .
It is necessary for local communities to be involved in what happens on their territory and to be included in determining the ports policy .
Protection of the environment in maritime territories and coastal zones is necessary because this is exceptionally important .
This year the Bulgarian Black Sea coast was polluted by oil slicks on three occasions .
We should again turn to the discussion of the matter of drafting a directive on the application of minimum requirements in accordance with the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil .
( PL ) Madam President , our discussion on European ports policy coincides with a time of very dynamic changes in the shipbuilding industry .
On the one hand , we may see prospects for development in the industry .
The number of orders is rising , and the demand for large container ships is increasing .
On the other hand , we must bear in mind that our competitors are in a very strong position .
Nearly 75 % of container ship building is now carried out by Asian countries - South Korea , Japan and China .
Our shipyards are being forced back onto the defensive , with world competition ever harder for them to match .
A further problem faced by the industry is the low dollar exchange rate .
This situation is threatening many shipyard undertakings with bankruptcy in the longer term .
( RO ) Approximately 30 % of the movement of goods in Europe takes place in the ports of Rotterdam , Anvers and Hamburg and 20 % in the biggest nine ports at the Mediterranean Sea .
Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession provides the European Union with an exit to the Black Sea and , implicitly , direct access to important sea ports such as Constanţa , Mangalia , Varna and Burgas , as well as to ports situated on the maritime Danube : Galaţi , Brăila , Tulcea and Sulina .
Many European ports deal with differences between the storage and loading-unloading capacities , deficient organization of terminals , insufficient routes and maritime or land access , long waiting time , insufficient security for trucks , trains and barges , low productivity and excessive , slow and expensive formalities .
I consider investments in creating new installations and improving the existent ones , creating waste treatment installations , reducing emissions , simplifying procedures , the transparency of public financing , ensuring health and safety at work a priority .
Structural funds , the State aid , the Naiades and Marco Polo programmes are only some of the available Community instruments .

( EL ) Madam President , let me first thank the rapporteur , Mr Ortuondo Larrea , for his excellent work , the attention he has given to Members ' proposals and his cooperation with the political groups .
I also thank the European Commission for presenting a mature , comprehensive proposal that takes account of all the challenges and aspects of a modern policy on sea ports .
In particular , I should like to underline the issue that was finally included , after proposals made by me and other Members : the attention that should be given to island regions .
The ports in these regions must be strengthened .
It should be stressed that state funding may be allowed so that regional and island ports can be strengthened to meet the challenge of economic and territorial cohesion .
I believe this is a real contribution towards the EU 's aims of solidarity , competitiveness and cohesion .
Mr President , I would like to add to my earlier comments by urging the Commission to promote the exchange and dissemination of good practice in the port sector in general and with regard to innovation and the training of workers in particular in order to improve the quality of services , competitiveness of the ports and the attraction of investment .
We welcome the fact there is to be a European Maritime Day on 20 May each year , with an open day to help the public gain a better understanding of the work and importance of the port sector for our lives and our well-being .
We urge the operators to reduce the number of empty containers transported and the Commission to promote a single harmonised transport document for all European Union containers , also simplifying customs procedures for goods that have come from or are going to destinations within the Community to the same level as for road , rail or air transport .
We also urge the Commission to continue its efforts to ensure that the United States regulation which plans to scan all of the containers that we send there is changed , and replaced by cooperation based on the mutual recognition of authorised economic operators and of security standards agreed by the World Customs Organisation .
To conclude , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , all of my colleagues who have spoken and the secretariats of the Committees on Transport and Regional Development for their help and significant contribution to the final result of this report , as well as staff in the Commission and Directorate B of the Directorate General for Internal Policies of the Union , who produced an excellent report for us on this subject .
Thank you to everyone , and I hope that tomorrow we will have support to move forward with this important report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 4 September .
Freight transport in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Michael Cramer , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on freight transport in Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs most sincerely in connection with the report on freight transport in Europe as well as the secretariat of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , particularly Mr Catot .
Cooperation was fruitful , not least because it showed that the report had been unanimously accepted in committee without any negative votes or abstentions .
Europe 's citizens are increasingly suffering under the burden of rising freight traffic , particularly on the roads .
My report strives to bring the scourge of the lorry under control .
The European Commission has clear objectives for its action plan on freight transport , which it wants to introduce soon .
The independent rail freight network in Europe is unequivocally rejected .
Even if it is a pleasant dream , mixed traffic is in most countries comfortable on tracks , i.e. freight and passenger trains travel on the same tracks .
The utilisation of existing infrastructure must therefore be improved at every technical and logistical opportunity and - of course - must also be extended when necessary .
The report on the Commission 's idea of ' green corridors ' has provided greater substance .
Transport should be shifted on to environmentally friendly modes of transport in order to reduce not only accidents , congestion and noise , but also air pollution and encroachment on the countryside .
Renewable energies ought to have an important role in this , whereupon wind and solar power are expressly mentioned in the report .
With the acceptance of the user and polluter pays principles for all modes of transport , the report also delivers a clear message in the debate on the Eurovignette : transport by heavily polluting lorries should no longer be subsidised , and external costs must be completely internalised .
( Heckling )
... and particularly for aircraft .
Shifting freight traffic from road to rail remains a central aim .
For this reason the report is demanding a minimum investment of 40 % of EU transport funds in the railways .
Only around 17 % of freight is transported by rail in Europe .
In the highway country of the United States , however , the proportion is 40 % .
The EU will only be able to deal with the increase in freight traffic if it improves its rail infrastructure .
The Member States ' transport ministers are being asked as a matter of urgency to look beyond their national perspectives and make the investments necessary for Europe in their own countries .
Interconnection of transport modes is also important .
A standard carriage document is also required for shipment by sea , rail , lorry and aircraft , a European maritime transport space without barriers , a not only European , but also worldwide standard for intermodal loading units and , in particular , a better connection between maritime and river ports and the hinterland 's road and rail network .
Despite the unanimous vote , my group put forward amendments because some votes in committee were extremely close .
The most important amendment concerns the challenge to the Commission to specify the areas of major congestion and problems in the European rail freight transport system .
This kind of analysis is necessary in order to quickly eliminate the weak spots in the rail network and thus create greater capacity .
The Commission itself , incidentally , has very much welcomed this idea and I hope that tomorrow - during the vote in plenary - a majority will be obtained on this .
Many thanks once again to all my fellow Members and for their attentiveness .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , in a set of four communications adopted in 2007 and 2008 , the Commission has developed its strategy for improving the performance of the systems of freight transport in Europe .
These communications are : firstly , the EU 's freight transport agenda , boosting the efficiency , integration and sustainability of freight transport in Europe ; secondly , the action plan for freight transport logistics ; thirdly , towards a rail network giving priority to freight ; and fourthly , the multiannual contract for rail infrastructure quality .
I am particularly pleased to see that all of these communications have now become the subject of a motion for a resolution in your assembly , which indicates the importance Parliament attaches to this matter .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Michael Cramer , for the work that he has done , and all the Members who have contributed to it .
In terms of tonnes per kilometre , the White Paper of 2001 foresaw a 50 % growth in goods transport in Europe between 2000 and 2020 .
The Commission will update that estimate next year , but it is already clear that it was pretty accurate .
The major challenges presented by this growth , the fight against congestion and climate change , reductions in pollutant emissions and guaranteed security of the energy supply are more topical now than ever they have been .
The choice of means of transport should , therefore , be directed towards the least pollutant ones , although each means of transport , including road transport , should be used where it is most efficient and most suitable .
There is also a need to improve the efficiency of the European transport system by implementing measures aimed at introducing information technology on a large scale , in administrative simplification as well as enhanced service quality .
I welcome the fact that the draft report is encouraging the Commission to pursue a goods transport policy that places a greater emphasis on sustainability .
Our wish is to create a transport system that is reliable , effective and viable , both financially and environmentally .
To this end I am convinced that co-modality - that is , the rational and optimum use of all modes of transport on their own and in combination - must become one of the guiding rules behind our thinking and action .
In addition , the various modes of transport must meet a number of performance criteria that are essential to competitiveness .
In particular , punctuality , regularity , reliability , high quality , sufficient capacity , interoperability and transnational coordination on international corridors are some of the watchwords for an array of services that has the customer absolutely in mind .
It is through specific , immediate action at a controlled cost such as those contained in the text of your resolution , together with other European initiatives such as the Green Paper on the future of the TEN-T , that we will be able to increase the efficiency of the European transport system .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group supports the own-initiative report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism with its multifaceted proposals for freight transport in Europe .
The framework conditions for environmentally friendly freight transport tailored to suit market needs are crucial for growth and employment in the European Union .
I must also say , however , that the European Union and the Member States are being called upon to increase their efforts considerably in developing and upgrading efficient transport structures .
We shall be reminding the Commission of this when we carry out the mid-term review of finances .
Making grand speeches does not help if the money is not made available to upgrade the trans-European networks .
Upgrading the transport infrastructures applies in particular to rail transport .
The priority here is to upgrade the most heavily used rail corridors and equip them with the ERTMS cross-border European rail traffic control system so that we quickly shift freight transport from road to rail .
However , to tell you the truth , Commissioner , when you compiled the list of proposals for freight services - I still remember that Neil Kinnock had already had the idea of separate rail networks for freight transport - you were once again acting on the Commission 's proposal ' Towards a rail network giving priority to freight ' .
Since that time nobody at the Commission has been talking about this because you and we know that there is not enough money to provide a second rail network alongside a normal , sensibly developed system tailored to suit market needs .
As the Commission you should therefore be telling the truth : the idea of separate freight networks is dead .
Let us develop sensible , dual-use networks : primarily passenger trains by day and primarily freight trains by night .
We then have to resolve the problem of noise because in cities in Germany and elsewhere , and along the Rhine , the noise at night really gets on citizens ' nerves and stops them sleeping .
Therefore , let us talk about practical sound-proofing measures on the railways , on the trans-European networks and on the dual use of the rail network .
It is even more important , however , that we take sensible action on the logistics .
That , Mr Cramer , is mentioned all too little in the report .
It is important that the Member States and the EU work more effectively together with industry and the service enterprises in order to make better use of the freight logistics .
The use of logistics is , of course , a primary task of the enterprises .
They know best how logistics are used .
However , the European Union and the Member States can help by lifting unnecessary national restrictions and - this I fully concede to Mr Cramer - by providing standard customs documents , for example , in order that better use can be made of the logistics .
Let us therefore upgrade the infrastructure nationally and let us cooperate with the industry in determining the best use of transport logistics .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank the Commission for the Logistics Action Plan , which has taken into account the majority of the European Parliament 's previous proposals .
I would also like to thank Mr Cramer , the rapporteur , for being open to constructive dialogue .
This has achieved a more integrative text in which logistics should not only contribute to the sustainability of transport in general , and of freight transport in particular , but also to improving mobility by including logistical solutions for all modes of transport and support for green corridors as models of mobility and convenience .
I also welcome the fact that emphasis is placed on using the existing rail traffic networks which are being freed up as a result of the progress made with high-speed passenger trains , and can be specifically dedicated to freight transport .
I also think that the inclusion of the prominent role of internal logistical platforms and dry docks is important , as well as the promotion of urban logistics through determinedly enhancing the logistics aspect of the very interesting CIVITAS programme , which we welcome .

We would also like to thank Mr Cramer for the emphasis placed on the logistics factor in priority cross-border rail freight corridors , among which I must mention the line that includes the central Pyrenees crossing that will be a future link between the Spanish logistical platforms such as Plaza and those in the South of France .
To conclude I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the proposal to arrive at a programme for strengthening cooperation between the national logistics plans of the Member States by the end of this year , which would help to prepare more effective formulas for mitigating the current shortage of resources and dealing with the needs of what is a key sector at this time , in this economic climate , in which fuel prices , the demands of combating climate change , the peripherality caused by enlargement and the dangerous working conditions in the sector mean that it is more urgent that intelligent , innovative and attractive solutions are applied , which only an ambitious European logistics action plan can offer us .
My group therefore supports Mr Cramer 's report and his Amendment 4 on multi-annual contracts .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , at various stages of the production process goods are hauled to a faraway place , subsequently ending up in a completely different place as finished products .
They are often transported in the most environmentally unfriendly way : by lorry on the increasingly congested motorways .
The enormous growth in freight transport , which is still continuing , has been caused by a steady decrease in the costs involved .
This is bad news for the environment , for safety , for working conditions and also for animal welfare .
My group therefore opts for restricting the growth in transport , and for transferring the necessary remaining transport to the railways and inland waterways as far as possible .
This desire is reflected in toned-down form in the European Commission proposals and in the supplementary proposals by the rapporteur , Mr Cramer .
We object to the possibility of precedence being given to freight transport at the expense of passenger trains , however .
The growth in freight transport may necessitate a supplementary infrastructure to prevent the two interfering with each other .
In addition , I would draw attention to the problems with the launch of the uniform European safety system ERTMS .
Investment in this will be beneficial for the future , but will cause problems in the short term .

Madam President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Cramer for his work as rapporteur .
The report is a good one , and I should like to highlight the following aspects of it .
Freight traffic must be unrestricted , honest and clean , and we are working hard in this House to make this happen .
Earlier this year , the end of cabotage restrictions came into view .
That was a good start .
This report continues in that vein , and that is excellent .
The rapporteur rightly points out that urban freight logistics require a specific approach .
It is of the utmost importance that European towns and cities be cleaned up .
I think that computerised speed adjustment in towns and cities is an excellent instrument , therefore , and I hope that the European Commission will support measures and make proposals to ensure that freight transport in towns and cities is not constantly having to brake and accelerate .
This is the way to make freight transport faster and cleaner .
( RO ) The Union 's economic development and competitiveness depend on efficient transport of goods .
We have to develop the railway infrastructure , the maritime corridors , the ports infrastructure and co-modality .
Improving the connections between seaports and river ports and the inland railway and road network is an important component of the logistic infrastructure .
Romania 's and Bulgaria 's accession provides the European Union with an exit to the Black Sea .
The Danube is now almost entirely a waterway inside the Union .
This means new opportunities for the European transport of goods .
Nevertheless , I emphasize that the efficient transport of goods needs : balanced use of all types of transport , decongesting traffic , simplifying procedures , legislative stability , investments in logistics systems and intelligent transport systems , such as Galileo , but especially ensuring transportation safety .
Programmes such as Naiades and Marco Polo are not sufficiently used by Member States in order to improve the transport of goods .
Nevertheless , I call the Commission 's attention to the barriers met by some road carriers , and I refer to the Romanian ones , when transiting the territory of certain Member States .
Madam President , Commissioner , we also have to think of our own failings , of course .
We cannot always be talking about sustainable transport on Sundays and doing the opposite from Monday to Friday .
It does seem to be the case that in the Commission 60 % of the money flowing into transport flows into roads as co-financing and only 20 % of it into environmentally friendly railways .
It can be said that transport in Europe is too cheap and environmentally friendly transport too expensive .
This is also to do with the framework conditions .
We do , for example , have a compulsory rail toll system for each Member State .
This applies to every engine , every kilometre of track , whereas the toll in environmentally damaging road transport is voluntary , its amount is limited and it applies only to motorways , and usually only to lorries of 12 tonnes or more .
You need to change these unfair framework conditions , otherwise you will resolve neither problems to do with climate policy nor transport problems .
The forecast is that traffic is on the increase .
But why is it on the increase ?
Because it does not cost anything .
There are several examples that could be mentioned .
I should like to mention one example from your home country .
The United Kingdom exports 1.5 million tonnes of pork every year .
If you look at the balance of imports , this shows that the United Kingdom also imports a further 1.5 million tonnes of pork .
We could eliminate this .
We could eliminate this transportation and use the capacity , which we definitely need , to do so .
In Europe we therefore have to eliminate a lot of the nonsense over transport capacity and then we have to shift transport over to environmentally friendly modes and design it to be efficient so that we can guarantee mobility , while providing people with the goods , but also protecting the environment , because this is the order of the day .
Without a healthy environment , neither we nor our children and children 's children have the future we all want .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 4 September .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Sustainable and efficient freight transport must indeed seriously be improved as the transport sector is responsible for a large share of CO2 emissions in the Union .
As the sector is expected to grow substantially , increasing its efficiency and sustainability should be seen as an opportunity to develop its economic competitiveness and to create numerous jobs .
The Union should therefore allocate resources sufficient to achieve the ambitious objectives of improved mobility , intermodality in transport modes , energy efficiency , reduced consumption of oil and reduced pollution .
We welcome therefore the strategic approach of the proposed Freight Transport Action Plan and its objectives : to focus on freight corridors using a combination of the various modes of transport ; to promote innovative technologies and infrastructures ; more efficient freight transport management and to enhance the attractiveness of modes of transport other than road .
To ensure the success of a sustainable European transport policy , we - of course - have to bear in mind the importance of fostering synergies and complementarities with other European policies such as energy and environment policies .
Cross-border harmonisation of national rules and synergy with the other related policies are necessary conditions for the achievement of the objectives of sustainable and efficient freight transport .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.50 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
( DE ) Madam President , just very briefly : some of our colleagues may not be aware of this yet , but it was mentioned to me that yesterday , it was decided that the next part-session will be held in Brussels .
I have heard that there are tremendous problems getting beds here in Brussels as the hotel rooms are booked out due to a trade fair .
This part-session should simply have been postponed or transformed into a mini-part-session .
That would have been the best solution .
With a measure of good will , that could have been done .
The second point which I would briefly like to make is directly related to this : has the safety situation actually been checked here in this building ?
I hear that there are major structural defects here .
Has this building been checked using the same criteria as have now been applied in the Strasbourg building ?
Ladies and gentlemen , let us not start a debate on this topic now .
Announcements will be made this afternoon at voting time .
All the appropriate steps are being taken to check the buildings on a preventive basis and to make the appropriate repairs at Strasbourg so that we can return there as soon as possible for our work .
We shall not return until we are sure that it is safe .
Madam President , I shall be brief , as I accept you do not want a debate .
If there is to be an announcement at 12 o 'clock , could that announcement also state whether the Bureau is considering - and I am not trying to be provocative - having a longer period of being in Brussels , so that we can have decisions in due time in order to get hotels and meeting rooms ?
Because these constant one-by-one decisions are not making life easy for any of us .
Practically , could that be considered , and could we have a comment back in the announcement at 12 o 'clock , please ?
Mr Bushill-Matthews , it is not Parliament 's practice to change the sitting from Brussels to Strasbourg for no reason .
There was a serious , unexpected reason and Parliament is attempting to deal with the matter with composure , determination and consistency .
We must all show the same composure , seriousness of purpose and maturity .
Information will be provided when the facts are available and will be given in sufficient time to enable Members to book their rooms on site as necessary .
I think that what is needed to deal with this problem is maturity , the right attitude and composure .
I do not consider this to be a serious crisis , as we have averted one that might have occurred .
Documents received : see Minutes
Palestinian prisoners in Israel ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Mid-term review of the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Frédérique Ries , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the mid-term review of the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Secretary of State - and may I express our appreciation of the fact that you clearly took trouble to be here in time for the debate - , Commissioner Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , health and the environment are not always compatible subjects , especially now at the beginning of the 21st century .
Our citizens are exposed to pollution in various forms , more often than not as a combination of different factors , and this applies whether you live in town or in the countryside , by the sea or in the mountains .
It is therefore anything but a coincidence that , according to the latest statistics put out by Eurostat , six out of every ten Europeans believe it highly or relatively likely that environmental pollution is affecting their health and also , and this is important , that the European Union is not sufficiently active in this area , which is the whole object of our debate this morning .
First and foremost , I would like to thank my colleagues and most particularly the shadow rapporteurs of this report , Mrs Ferreira , Professor Trakatellis , Mrs Breyer , Mrs Belohorská and Mrs de Brún , for the excellent collaboration that we have maintained since the start of this particular project , which dates back to 2003 .
Indeed it was in 2003 that the European Commission set the ball rolling with what was then the SCALE initiative , which focused on children 's health , followed the year after with the launching of an Action Plan that is due to run until 2010 .
This is an initiative that we consider to be inadequate in scope in that at its February 2005 sitting Parliament adopted a resolution that was fairly critical , it has to be said , based on the simple assessment that an action plan , in essence , cannot set itself the sole objective of producing more data and conducting more research , even if these are of an essential nature .
We were therefore disappointed , and all the more since one Member State after another , notably France with its national health and environment plan along with many of the German Länder , Belgium , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and others , went on to set up ambitious national plans of their own ,
Three years later how far have we got in reducing illnesses that can be attributed to the impact of pollution ?
At Community level not very far , it seems to me , and I therefore now want to present a proper mid-term review of the situation as it stands .
Certainly the European Union , as we have said over and over again , can pride itself on having achieved many successes in combating various forms of pollution .
While it is impossible to list them all , they include the recent legislation on ambient air quality - which owes much to your vigorous efforts , Commissioner - the pesticides package , which is about to be completed , and of course the REACH initiative , which places controls on more than 10 000 chemical substances and proposes to replace those that are causing the most problems .
I would also like to mention another important aspect , namely the funding provided by the Commission over the last three years for more than 38 projects devoted to health and the environment as part of the Sixth Research Framework Programme , which comes to an estimated total of more than EUR 200 million .
In other respects , and given the difficulty of assessing the impact of this plan , which has so far failed to live up to its name , I would say that our overall impression is somewhat mixed .
Our draft resolution today therefore centres on the need to restore the precautionary principle , which I know is also held dear by the Secretary of State .
Like her , I sincerely believe that we need to redeem and revive this principle , which as I have said before is that of action rather than abstention , and ensure that it is applied as part of Community policy , as provided for in Article 174 ( 2 ) of our Treaty and now established as an ongoing precedent by the Court of Justice .
Still on this subject I believe that it is important that we should seek to shift the burden of proof for all product legislation - and this is what we are providing for in point 13 of our resolution - because it is only right , and indeed it is obvious , that the producers and importers should be responsible for demonstrating that a product is harmless .
I would add that , wrongly perhaps , this is what most consumers already believe .
The second subject of concern , and of no less importance , is that which is covered in points 23 to 25 , namely the issue of climate change .
We have examined this crucial question in close collaboration with experts from the WHO .
The phenomenon that is most frequently depicted by these experts is that of an increased intensity and frequency of heat waves .
How can we forget that after the summer 2003 heat wave more than 70 000 additional deaths were recorded in some ten European countries ?
It appears to us that a system of preventive measures - reduced exposure to heat , an early warning system and of course aid for the elderly - needs to be put in place here .
I would also point out that the increase in temperature levels brings with it the appearance of certain viruses , such as the chikungunya virus that struck Italy in 2007 , and that while this was anything but an epiphenomenon , at least according to the experts , it was perhaps an early warning sign of numerous pandemics in Europe .
Obviously this also calls for a response that is appropriate to the potential scale of the problem , and at the very least a proper system of coordination between the Commission , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control in Stockholm and the various European capitals .
I would like to round up my presentation by referring to what has , for the health sector , been the soap opera , the saga of summer 2008 , one that has been running everywhere in many countries - in France , Belgium and others besides - and here I am talking about the flood of information , articles and studies , most of them contradictory , on the health risks , proven or otherwise , of mobile telephone devices , and particularly of the threat they pose to the most vulnerable groups , especially children .
Here the highly , if not to say excessively , media-conscious David Servan-Schreiber was not the first to set the alarm bells ringing .
What we are stating in paragraphs 21 and 22 of our resolution is simple : all these various studies tend to show that electromagnetic fields have an impact on human health ; moreover , exposure limits , it has to be recalled , have not been amended since 1999 and therefore remain the official European Union standard , while at the same time we have a complete lack of consensus among researchers as to whether or not GSM waves pose health risks .
This scientific uncertainty is likely to run and run .
The time will come when the policy-makers have to take a decision and that is what we are doing in the resolution that is being presented today .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Ries , ladies and gentlemen , European citizens in every country are quite legitimately worried about the quality of the environment and are increasingly concerned about the link between the environment and health .
The Environment Ministers had an opportunity to deal with this issue last December and the Council is now attaching increasing importance to this matter .
Different pathologies are involved here , and while these are numerous , the facts and the links between pollution and health have still not been properly established .
What we are referring to here are respiratory diseases , asthma , allergies , cancer and endocrine disruptors , especially those that affect the most vulnerable sections of the population , as Mrs Ries has already pointed out , including children , pregnant women , the elderly and the disadvantaged .
The European Union 's new strategy to promote sustainable development , as adopted by our heads of state or government in June 2006 , quite rightly includes public health as one of the key challenges we face , the aim being to promote health without discrimination and to improve protection against the health risks that are now being posed , and all this has to be achieved - and I will come back to this - by means of robust preventive measures .

There are several ways of improving the current situation , and all have been mentioned .
There is better cooperation between the health sector and the environment sector , which unfortunately sometimes tend to develop in separate directions .
There is the need to improve the quality of the environment , and that is what we are doing , especially with our work on the IPPC Directive and the proposal for a directive on soil quality , which we shall speak about presently , as well as the need currently facing us to improve Community expertise in this area .
There is the work that we are all doing together at international level , and especially within the World Health Organisation .
Finally , there is the objective that we are pursuing in a very hands-on way , which is to improve the manner in which environment is incorporated into every relevant policy , plan and programme , and especially in the course of the health and environment programme that is to run from 2004 to 2010 .
In short , it is important to bring this mid-term review to a successful conclusion so as to ensure that the actions taken are as effective as possible .
Like Mrs Ries , I in turn would like to stress the need for preventive measures in all the different fields of action , and in all the points that have been mentioned in your work .
The Council in its conclusions of last December , just like Parliament today , takes the view that action is needed as soon as possible .
We have to act quickly and we have to act ahead of events .
We need to act according to the principles of prevention and according to the principles of precaution , which certainly means developing new tools capable of anticipating and analysing potential threats as soon as they appear or as soon as any suspicion arises , and then being able to view these various problems against a different background , such as that of climate change or biosecurity , for example , which are both areas that are connected with human health .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , about a year ago now the Commission adopted the mid-term review of the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 .
This review is a report on the implementation of the Action Plan to date .
I am pleased that the European Parliament 's response to this mid-term review has been positive and that , in common with the Commission , it considers the mutual interaction between the environment and health to be very important .
I am particularly happy that the French Presidency , both today and via the Minister on previous occasions , has shown its full support for this subject , which is so important to European citizens .
As you know , the aim of the European Action Plan for the relationship between the environment and health is to improve the provision of information , and to encourage research on the environment and human health , in order to better understand the threats and risk factors posed to human health by the environment . Political leaders at European and national level will thus be able to create more effective legislation and measures to protect the health of European citizens .
The Plan covers 13 specific courses of action for the 2004-2010 period .
It was drawn up after extensive consultation with experts and bodies working in the European environmental , health and research sectors .
In the Action Plan , emphasis is laid on the vital importance of close cooperation between environmental , health and research departments , at both national and European level .
This cooperation is key in dealing in the best possible way with the mutual impact that the environment and health have on each other .
Four years after the adoption of the Action Plan I am happy to report that this close cooperation between the various services has now been consolidated .
This is clearly a very positive development , according to last year 's mid-term review .
Let me give you a specific example .
The Member States are now working together to coordinate a European approach to the issue of human biomonitoring .
This involves the ministries of research , health and the environment .
I think it is important to add that , after the approval of last year 's progress report , the Commission also undertook other important activities , especially regarding human biomonitoring , the relationship between climate change and health , air quality in indoor areas , research on the environment , and health and electromagnetic fields .
I am therefore glad that these issues are included in the European Parliament 's report .
Let me briefly elaborate on the new developments .
The Commission is now adopting a broader approach to the issue of air quality in indoor areas .
This approach also corresponds to the European Parliament 's 2005 resolution .
Many activities have been undertaken that go beyond the specific targets in the Action Plan .
For instance , new research projects have been funded by the Commission , a working group of experts has been set up and a Green Paper on tobacco smoke and scientific opinions have been approved .
What still remains to be decided is the legal means to deal with the issue of air in indoor areas in the best possible way .
With regard to human biomonitoring , the Commission regrets that the proposal submitted by the consortium of 24 Member States was not judged suitable for funding on the basis of the 7th Framework Programme .
In any case , a new call will be published this month to submit proposals on human biomonitoring .
Meanwhile , the Commission will continue preparatory work on the pilot project within the framework of an ERA-NET network and within the framework of an administrative arrangement with the Joint Research Centre in Ispra in close collaboration with the Member States .
As for electromagnetic fields , the Commission is carrying out continuous monitoring of scientific developments , through the Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks and through the ΜΝΤ network for electromagnetic fields , a project in the 6th Framework Programme .
The Commission is promoting research in the most important subject areas in order to determine whether the exposure limit values laid down in the Council 's recommendation should be revised .
The Commission recently asked each Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks to reconsider its opinion on the basis of the most recent data and reports .
The relationship between climate change and health is clearly an issue of growing importance , according to the mid-term review .
The relationship will be dealt with in the White Paper on adaptation to climate change , due to be adopted very soon .
These developments show that the Commission places great importance on an even higher level of incorporation of the health dimension into European environmental policy .
Recent legislation , such as that on chemicals , REACH , and the new directive on ambient air quality , reinforce environmental and health protection and are examples of a mutually beneficial way of dealing with the environment and health in the interests of European citizens .
Finally , let me thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ries , for her report , her excellent work and the enormous interest she has shown in the issue of the relationship between the environment and health .
I should also like to reiterate the firm intention of the Commission to continue its efforts on the Environment and Health Action Plan .
The Commission is determined to shape effective environmental legislation and ensure the correct implementation of existing legislation in order to protect both the environment and the health of European citizens .
With this in mind , the Commission will play an active role in preparations for the Fifth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Health , scheduled to be held in July 2009 .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , allow me first to welcome Mrs Kosciusko-Morizet , whose convictions and determination in this area are well known , along with the Commissioner .
I would of course also like to congratulate Mrs Ries for the excellent work that she has carried out in dealing with an issue that is of special importance and sensitivity for our citizens .
Hippocrates once said that to study medicine you have to study the climate .
While we can certainly recognise the efforts that the European Commission has made since the launch of the Environment and Health Action Plan in 2004 , it is a matter of some regret that this initiative is not based on a genuine prevention policy that is aimed at reducing diseases linked to environmental factors and one that pursues a clear and properly costed objective .
Ten years ago , when climate change was being debated , the health risks as such were never mentioned .
Today the frequent occurrence of heat waves , floods , wildfires and natural disasters of all kinds within the European Union is altering the appearance of those illnesses that are caused by bacteria and viruses and transmitted by some insects .
We therefore have to acquire a better understanding of the consequences that all this may have for human health , and especially that of the most vulnerable members of society , so that we become better able to manage the risks involved .
Where the main objective of the 2008-2013 health programme is to act upon the factors that traditionally determine health , namely diet , smoking , alcohol consumption and the use of drugs , the present 2004-2010 Action Plan is to focus on certain new health challenges and address the determining environmental factors that affect human health .
I am also thinking about air quality , electromagnetic waves - a subject that has already been touched on - worrying nanoparticles , as we have seen in the REACH programme , substances that are classed as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction , endocrine disruptors and all the health risks posed by climate change , and I have already spoken about these .
I also wish to point out that while respiratory illnesses rank second as a cause of death and in terms of incidence , prevalence and cost , within the EU they constitute the main cause of death among children under the age of five and are continuing to progress on account of indoor and outdoor air pollution in particular .
With reference to the subject of urban environmental health , and particularly the quality of indoor air , the Commission should do more to combat domestic pollution , given that Europeans spend on average 90 % of their time inside buildings .
We know that this subject , this link between environment and health , is a particularly important and sensitive issue and we need to find a proper response to it as soon as possible for our citizens ' sake .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Kosciusko-Morizet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to salute the work done by our colleague and the determination she has shown in dealing with this dossier .
This is a determination that I share , because the link between environment and health , which is now widely recognised , warrants a response in the shape of our political actions .
It is therefore essential to move forward so as to update our knowledge in this area and , more especially , to implement actions designed to limit the negative impact of our environment on human health .
The different subject areas have been clearly identified and are covered in the Action Plan .
It has been necessary not only to take account of the effects of climate change and to devise methods of risk assessment but also to discuss other factors such as electromagnetic fields .
I am also gratified to see that the report contains a reference to the 2007 document produced by the European Environment Agency showing that atmospheric pollutants , and particularly those associated with fine particles and ground-level ozone , represent a considerable threat to the proper development of children and are reducing life expectancy in the EU .
However , I regret that the problems associated with health in the work environment have not been included in the text .
It should be remembered that millions of people now suffer from illnesses that are linked to their working environment and whose origins are many and varied : stress , work intensity , various pollutants , musculoskeletal disorders associated with poor workplace ergonomics and so on .
I hope that this issue will be considered seriously by other committees .
As Mrs Ries has said , the biggest problem is also that we are falling behind .
The Commission , it seems to me , has not been sufficiently active in honouring the commitments that it set itself .
Here I would refer , for example , to the issue of nanoparticles , a subject that is currently the focus of numerous reports and one that is raising many questions .
For example , I read in the Commission 's 2007 communication on the objectives for 2004-2006 that the intention is to examine the possible effects of nanoparticles on health and the environment .
Following that , for the 2007-2010 period there is provision for research into the potential risk that nanoparticles pose for human health .
This means three years to look into a subject and another three years to carry out studies . It seems to me that we could be more efficient than this .
Doubtless there are reasons for this inadequate approach : lack of human resources and lack of financial means .
However , what kind of credibility can the EU expect if it fails to keep to its own commitments ?
We know that on these issues Europeans can recognise the valued added of the European dimension . Let us therefore not disappoint them .
I will finish with a question that is directed at the Council and at the Commission : you referred , Commissioner , to cooperation between the different services and between the research teams , which is a good thing .
Is there also coordination between the different national environmental-health plans drawn up at government level and the European Action Plan ?
Finally , Madam Minister , when you take the floor again , perhaps you can tell us whether France , for example , has linked its efforts to those that it has been making under the environmental Grenelle ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , I usually say that the EU must become narrower but sharper , in other words that we should focus our actions while also respecting subsidiarity .
This action plan is exactly this kind of area .
I would like to raise a few things which our rapporteur Mrs Ries addresses in her report .
Her criticism of the lack of quantified objectives and indicators is very serious .
We must add to the action plan .
The criticism from Mrs Ries and several other Members of the fact that there are insufficient precautionary measures is serious .
It is directed at this material and we must take it into account in our ongoing work .
I would particularly like to highlight three areas : weak groups , endemic disease and the link between climate and health .
We must become much better at seeing the differences in treatment and medication of adults and children , and women and men .
It is a scandal that this is still not self-evident and has not already been implemented in medical research and treatment .
The work which has started on patient mobility in the internal market is incredibly important to different patient groups , e.g. those with neck injuries , where different standards of treatment are found in different Member States .
I welcome the focus of the French Presidency on Alzheimer 's disease , one of our major endemic diseases , but we also need a coordinated approach for diabetes , asthma and rheumatism , to name but a few examples .
This is also the case for working environment-related injuries .
We are now witnessing a trend in Europe and worldwide of more pandemics and the greater spreading of viruses , bacteria and parasites in a manner which has not been seen in a very long time .
Much of this is naturally related to climate change .
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria mean medicines and treatments are not working and this is one of our most urgent health problems .
It is a shame that the development of new antibiotics has largely ground to a halt in the major pharmaceutical companies .
I hope that the Presidency and the Commission will tackle this very serious and major problem as soon as possible !
We also need an analysis of different climate change scenarios .
What effect would a global increase in temperature of two degrees , four degrees or even more have on health in Europe ?
No such material is available today .
If we are to be able to make concrete and good decisions on the climate change package , we also need reliable material on the various climate scenarios we will have to cope with in the future .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , as I take the floor on behalf of the UEN Group in the debate on the mid-term review of the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 , I should like to draw attention to the following issues .
Firstly , the very appropriate measures to improve the natural environment and combat climate change require additional financial resources . This puts public authorities and economic entities in the new Member States in a particularly difficult situation .
The new Member States are obviously focusing mainly on catching up with the more developed countries of the European Union in terms of development .
Secondly , the European Union is endeavouring to take the lead , for example as regards limiting carbon dioxide emissions , but the Commission allocated the limits without taking account of how much individual Member States had to make up in terms of development .
As a result , my country , Poland , was awarded a lower limit of carbon dioxide emissions . This led to electricity prices rising immediately by between 10 and 20 per cent .
I dread to think how far electricity prices will rise after 2013 , when power stations will have to purchase all their emissions limits on the open market .
In this way , a sensible measure to limit carbon dioxide emissions and thus combat climate change has become a burden for consumers and resulted in increasingly widespread social discontent .
Thirdly , the appropriate measures contained in the report on health care also require additional financial resources .
It is particularly hard for the less developed Member States to find these resources , as they are already experiencing serious difficulties in financing very basic health care for their citizens .
As I conclude , I should like to thank Mrs Ries for a very comprehensive and detailed report on the impact of the natural environment on human health .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we are at the half-way point in this Action Plan , and it is time for a review .
We are taking stock of what has been done up to now , and the question we must ask ourselves is this : have there been any visible results ?
The Commission is sitting back and saying that it is satisfied .
However , if the air we breathe and the water we drink are making us ill , it is high time for Europe to take action and become the driving force for a new overall approach to such health risks .
That is why the Action Plan cannot be regarded as simply an add-on to existing EU policy ; it must set new benchmarks .
I welcome the fact that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has adopted a highly critical position towards the Action Plan and has demanded major improvements .
We are firmly convinced that the Action Plan is doomed to failure unless it is based on a pro-active policy of prevention , and one thing must be clear : without clear-cut quantitative goals , it will remain a paper tiger .
We are pleased that the environmental report bears a green handprint , especially when it comes to nanotechnology .
It is clear that the potential new risks have not been taken into adequate account in the Action Plan .
Indeed , it is scandalous that when it comes to the risks associated with nanotechnology , the European Commission is still burying its head in the sand and is claiming that the current legislation in place is quite adequate .
We know that the very opposite is true .
Nanotechnology is being allowed to develop in what is in effect a legal vacuum .

Then there is the issue of electrosmog : we know that electromagnetic radiation poses a major and increasing problem , so it is quite unacceptable for us , as the European Parliament , to water down limit values which are already set much too high .
Yet another issue is indoor air quality : the EU has set milestones when it comes to protection against fine particles , but what about indoor air quality , given that we spend most of our time in closed rooms ?
The Commission cannot continue to ignore this issue .
We call on the Commission to bring forward clear legislative proposals to improve air quality in all the relevant areas : construction projects , glues used in furniture , etc .
Achieving better protection for particularly vulnerable groups such as children and pregnant women is also a matter which is very close to our hearts , and the precautionary principle should be the guiding principle for our legislation in all these areas .
Naturally , we would have liked to achieve more , but we hope that the Commission will not stop at that . This area of work must not be allowed to come to a standstill , and we believe that we can take this issue forward .
I want to welcome this report from Ms. Ries .
I call upon the Commission and Member States to recommit fully to the goals of the European Environment and Health Action Plan and furthermore to step up the plan by making it more ambitious and more in tune with our needs .
I welcome , in particular , that which Commissioner Dimas had to say .
The rise in the incidents of certain types of cancer shows us that we cannot afford to rest on our laurels .
In particular , I want to single out action in the field of mental health as being of the utmost importance .
Mental ill-health is a major risk factor for suicide in Ireland and suicide itself is the biggest killer of our young people .
The EU should give more support to developing adequate prevention strategies , any actions at an EU or international level to help us promote mental health would be welcomed warmly .
I also support the calls for action on the issue of indoor air quality and on the safety of chemical compounds used in equipment and furnishings .
The Commission has taken some important action but we need a comprehensive policy on indoor air quality given the extent of respitory illness in the EU .
We must also provide support for our SME 's to ensure that they can comply with environmental health regulations and to take steps to improve the impact they have on the environment .
In my constituency a wonderful project in relation to this subject was supported by Interreg .
Our climate is changing and this brings with it new challenges in both the fields of health and environment .
The new threats to our environment and our health caused by climate change must be met head-on and in an effective way .
A lot has been done , but more ambition and sensible concrete actions is the message I want to send to the European Commission today . !
( SK ) Thank you , Commissioner , and you , Minister , for coming to listen to our views .
Thank you to Frédérique Ries , the rapporteur , for producing this report .
This is a very ambitious programme , which is very difficult , even impossible , to assess .
Furthermore , we are assessing the implementation of ambitious objectives in the highly diverse environment of the 27 Member States with differing health care systems and differing natural environments .
One of the most serious worries going forward is cancer .
We have often been faced with future predictions which are very threatening .
There are statistics showing that this disease results in a huge loss of population mainly of working and retirement age .
In many cases , the effect of the environment on the state of health of the population has been clearly demonstrated .
No less important - and the report supports my emphasis on this - is the provision of information to the population concerning both the effects of the environment on health and the incidence of serious diseases and concerning the ability of various non-governmental organisations to support these activities .
There are two sides to every coin : on one side , an important role is played by the provision of information by the European Union or local institutions , but on the other side , it is very important for the population to have access , to know how to obtain such information and facts and how to deal with them .
Prevention is only effective if its properly understood and interpreted and , if these conditions are met , it is also possible to monitor the response in real figures .
It is possible to assess the plan with a short-term view , but the main consequences of implementation of these tools are best observed and quantified with a long-term view .
Madam President , while this review is very welcome , I think we also need more frankness in the debate , and we must accept that we cannot protect people - our citizens - from themselves , nor should we try to legislate for all life 's risks .
Popular support for the EU project is actually at risk if we give the impression that we are on a mission to regulate every aspect of our lives - and that is the interpretation on the ground at the moment .
We must be very careful to communicate exactly what the EU project is all about .
I would also like reassurance that the majority of this plan is not just repackaging and rebranding of projects already planned .
We need better implementation of existing EU legislation at Member State level , and better monitoring and enforcement by the Commission .
Greater assessment and , indeed , debate on the roll-out and effectiveness of the existing legislation is a priority as far as I am concerned .
The priority concern in terms of new legislation in this House has to be the climate and energy package .
Climate change will impact on health in many ways , including malnutrition resulting from food scarcity in parts of the world ; deaths and injuries as a result of extreme weather events such as heat waves , floods , storms , and fires and the consequent social problems therefrom ; the increased burden of a range of diarrhoeal diseases ; increased frequency of cardio-respiratory diseases ; serious problems with water scarcity - over 40 % of the world will , in part , actually have water scarcity problems within 10 years - and drinking water .
It is very welcome that this resolution on the mid-term review recognises the health impacts of climate change , and I applaud it for that .
On another point , a very serious issue - which really is still a Cinderella issue in terms of how we treat it at European and Member State level - is the whole area around European mental health .
One in four Europeans suffers from mental health problems at least once during their life .
In Ireland alone , the cost of mental ill health is estimated at up to 4 % of our GDP and , tragically , there were over 460 suicides last year alone - recorded suicides .
That was an increase of 12 % on the previous year , in 2006 - in Ireland , a country which , on the best-place-to-live barometers , comes way up there , I think after Luxembourg .
( I do not know who draws up the criteria for these barometers . ) But we have to question this .
This problem with mental health in Europe , and the projected problems , deserves attention and adequate prevention strategies in this most important area .
The rapporteur 's prognosis that the action plan is bound to fail , in all or part , is worrying , and I would like to hear reassurances from the Commission - but also from the presidency - that this will not be the case .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur on her comprehensive and cohesive report , which objectively assesses the progress made in implementing the European Action Plan 2004-2010 while at the same time taking note of shortcomings and new data .
Let me point out some issues relating to indoor air quality and its impact on human health , especially for the most vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly .
Bearing in mind that we spend 90 % of our time indoors , the European Commission must proceed immediately to the drafting of a strategy for this , focusing on both establishing guidelines and protecting citizens who are exposed to multiple sources of biological and chemical pollution .
It is essential that a suitable framework is established to reduce exposure to chemicals .
Particular emphasis must be placed on the condition of public buildings , offices and schools , so that we can protect the most vulnerable .
( PL ) Madam President , the link between health and the environment is obvious , as is the link between the environment and agriculture , because sensible and rational farming helps to protect the environment .
We are unfortunately faced with certain developments in agriculture that are detrimental to the environment .
Small family farms are disappearing , and European agriculture is becoming more and more industrialised , which is damaging to the environment .
Agricultural policy should do more to protect smaller family farms , because they are run in a more environmentally-friendly manner .
GMO technology represents a further threat . It continues to spread despite the many serious concerns about the negative effects of GMO crops on the environment and on human and animal health .
The European Union should act with caution regarding GMOs .
I support the report by Mrs Ries who deserves to be congratulated on her excellent work .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my sincerest thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Ries , for her excellent work .
Unfortunately , I have to agree with the criticism which many here have made about the programme itself .
It relies on existing measures and not on showing the way forward .
Time and again the precautionary principle is ignored when people get excited about new discoveries .
This is also apparent now with regard to nanomaterials and electromagnetic fields .
Nanomaterials are becoming a more common phenomenon , even in consumer products , but the legislation is lagging behind , although researchers warn that nanomaterials could become a health problem on the scale of asbestos unless we take the risks seriously .
The same goes for electromagnetic fields , to which hundreds of millions of people are exposed , even though we know very little about their effects .
In some countries , such as Italy , there is a 500 metre safety zone between base stations and schools , while in Finland there are base stations even on the roofs of schools .
New European norms which take account of scientific findings are urgently needed for this .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with Mrs Ries 's assessment of the environment and health action plan .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that the plan is impossible to interpret and is doomed to failure .
Some of its objectives such as the prevention of suicide or a communication strategy on the impact of climate change on human health are astonishing .
The plan is ill-founded , both financially and in particular from an organisational perspective .
The actions to be implemented are vague and give rise to doubts and questions rather than providing answers .
The document also duplicates the World Health Organisation 's similar plan .
The European Environment and Health Action Plan is unfortunately just another subject for justified criticism as a waste of taxpayers ' money and pointless bureaucracy in Brussels .
I believe that the Commission should immediately terminate the implementation of this plan , cooperate more closely with the World Health Organisation and definitely not announce a further phase of the health plan at European level .
( PT ) I want to start by congratulating Mrs Ries on her work .
The relationship between a poor environment and health risks is now clear .
There are now more diseases associated with environmental factors and climate change , such as respiratory diseases , allergies and cancers .
Global warming is at the root of new pandemics .
Studies show that droughts and floods kill more people than any other natural disaster .
Poor air quality in schools and health establishments also causes serious problems .
Increasing numbers of people are falling ill due to air pollution in the big cities and inside buildings , due to the pollution of water and even groundwater , due to contamination of agricultural land with plant protection products and due to a lack of treatment of wastewater and urban waste .
Measures need to be taken to prevent future problems .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Ries is absolutely beyond reproach , especially since the rapporteur monitors the implementation of the Commission 's planned actions with close , unstinting attention , as well as by asking questions , and demands further efforts in the hoped-for preventive strategy which must characterise European policy action .
I likewise applaud the request for the Commission to publish a Green Paper on indoor air quality , and I would draw attention to the sensitivity shown by the rapporteur as concerns the effect that electromagnetic fields have on human health .
All in all , I can endorse everything said by Mrs Ries , and I hope this report will garner the widest possible support from Parliament .
( RO ) Climate change influences human health considerably , by the proliferation of certain infectious and parasitic diseases , mainly caused by the increase in temperature .
The frequency of heat waves , floods and fires on uncultivated land may lead to the occurrence of other diseases , to inadequate hygiene conditions and deaths .
In summers , Romania has increasingly dealt with periods of hot weather , floods and storms .
This summer 's floods have left thousands of Romanian citizens without a shelter and hygiene conditions .
I request the Commission to provide Romania with adequate financial support in order to reduce the effects of these natural disasters .
The reduction of emissions generated by transport , which is responsible for 70 % of the urban pollution , shall contribute to the air quality improvement .
Directives such as on fuel quality , reduction of road vehicle emissions , and promotion of ecological vehicles for urban transport , shall contribute to the reduction of environmental pollution .
Nevertheless , it is important to monitor their implementation and the results achieved .
( RO ) The international " BioInitiative ” report on electromagnetic fields and their effects on human health raises concerns and finds that the existing limit values as regards the protection against non-ionizing radiations are out-of-date and immediate actions are required in order to reduce people 's exposure to the radiations generated by the equipment used by the mobile telephone operators .
Scientific studies have shown that these radiations generate health problems , such as sleep disorder , child leukaemia , significant increase in stress and the use of a mobile phone for ten years doubles the risk of brain cancer .
The new action and health plan has to take into consideration these threats that are increasing due to the occurrence of new technologies and are gaining ground in rural areas and developing countries .
We need to continue the research in this field and the fields related to mental health , such as stress and depression , in order to determine if they can be truly associated with non-ionising radiations .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report on this subject , which is of such importance for all of us Europeans .
I wish to focus on one particular issue and highlight the importance of bio monitoring . This is the procedure whereby the relationship between environmental pollution and the health of Europeans is measured .
We should not skimp on resources for this strategy .
We should invest in research , and then implement its findings .
In addition , we should not merely pay lip service to the precautionary principle . We should apply this principle if we are ever uncertain as to the possible negative impact of a specific environmental issue on our health .
The precautionary principle also prevents the spread of illnesses .
It will prevent the spread of allergies and improve the way Europeans live and operate .
I believe that the European Union must do more in the area of environmental diseases and take more effective action in the interests of the citizen .
I expect the Commission to do so too .
( SK ) I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Ries , on her report , which describes the extent of implementation of the Action Plan and puts forward many recommendations for the next stage .
I welcome the measures introduced by the European Commission with the aim of improving the environment in indoor spaces .
As a doctor , I consider this step to be very important .
In offices , schools and homes we all spend the overwhelming majority of our time in enclosed spaces .
High levels of pollution may result in asthmatic diseases , allergies and even cancer .
I therefore support the proposal to publish a Green Paper and to adopt a proper European strategy on this topic .
I also consider it important to draw our attention to electromagnetic radiation .
Technical progress may , when used incorrectly or excessively , represent a definite health risk , whether in the form of irregular sleep patterns , Alzheimer 's disease , leukaemia or other disorders .
The European Community must therefore become more actively engaged and adopt a position with respect to this modern threat as well as taking practical steps .
( RO ) I would like to add the fact that the Union 's population is ageing and I consider that the European Environment and Health Plan should deal with the problems that old people have .
Nevertheless , the perspective of the year 2010 is not very near .
I think a long-term perspective and an adequate strategy are required .
We should also not forget that the birth rate has decreased in recent years .
In some Member States , the rate of child mortality is high .
The Union 's economic sustainability is based upon a young and healthy European population and , consequently , the Union needs to come up with a concrete action plan in order to ensure the natural growth the community needs .
I end by reminding you of the need to conduct epidemiological studies , under the Commission 's care , in order to determine the effect of electromagnetic radiation on human health .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to highlight the fact that many of the Members who have spoken in this debate have chosen to tie in other environmental problems and it seems to me that they are right to do so , and that this being the case you are in fact calling on us to apply greater coordination and greater integration between the different environmental policies .
I have taken note , for example , of the reference to climate change made by Mrs Ek , by Mrs Ţicǎu and even by Mr Kuźmiuk , even though his intervention was focused in a different direction , and of the reference to agricultural problems made by Mr Wojciechowski , along with the reference to the Urban Waste Water Directive made by Mrs Estrela .
All these subjects are interlinked and this apparent complexity must provide us with the additional motivation needed to improve our knowledge of environmental health issues .
Yes , Mrs Doyle , the presidency is totally motivated in this direction .
This will be achieved by way of the directives that we are working on at the present time , namely the IPPC Directive , the proposal for a soils directive and the energy-climate package , as I am reminded of the link with climate change .
Through these directives we are in a way addressing subjects and establishing links with various recognised pathologies such as cancer , which has already been referred to by Mrs Belohorská .
However many new problems are also arising and these have been touched on by a number of today 's speakers .
The problem of electromagnetic waves has already been researched in some detail , and here I am thinking especially of the Interphone study , but there are also new technologies coming on to the market all the time and these will in any case compel us to take an extremely long-term approach .
I am also thinking of indoor air quality , a subject mentioned by many of you , which is something that should not be regarded as an emergent issue since it has always existed . However , it is much less researched than that of outdoor air quality , even though we spend 90 % of our time indoors .
Mrs Ferreira wanted to know if there was a link , for example , at national level in France between the environmental Grenelle and the European Action Plan .
Within the context of the environmental Grenelle we have done a lot of work on environmental health issues and have come up against the same problems as those that you have been commenting on in one way or another .
First of all we have the recognised pathologies , those areas that are well documented and where further progress needs to be made , including the question of cancers linked to environmental causes .
Then we have all the new concerns where our actions can go much further .
In the environmental Grenelle , for example , we have made provision for classifying all nanoparticles , for setting up a compulsory declaration process for those nanoparticles that are being put on the market , for providing a better regulation and monitoring system for indoor air and for introducing better controls for all interior equipment and furnishings , some of which present problems for indoor air quality .
Mrs Ferreira , you asked about coordination and whether there was in fact any degree of coordination between the national environmental-health schemes and the European Action Plan .
Clearly any link of this kind will present problems .
We are currently in a phase in which each Member State is drawing up its own plan based on its own particular problem areas .
Having said this , it seems to me that a measure of coordination could be introduced once this initial phase has been completed and this would provide the basis for the next stage of the process .
Finally , if you would permit me , Madam President , I would like to allude to the fact that - while not wishing to offend those male Members who are also present and indeed I would thank them for their contributions - it has mainly been the female Members of this House who have spoken this morning and I see in this situation not a problem but rather an opportunity and perhaps also a sign of hope .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you for the constructive discussion we have had on the important issue of the relationship between the environment and health .
I think this discussion has been a very useful opportunity to exchange views on the progress that has been made and the research carried out in key areas , with the aim of determining whether the exposure limit values set out in the Council recommendation need to be revised .
The Commission recently asked its scientific committee for the emerging and most recently identified health risks , with a view to revising its opinion to take account of the most recent information in the report .
The latest developments and the initiatives taken by the Commission on the specific issues of the environment-health relationship are very significant ; they show that alongside the cooperation developing on a mid- to long-term basis between the environment , health and research sectors , it is possible to take immediate measures to further incorporate the health dimension into environment policy , with benefits to both the environment and health .
Now to the coordination that one of the speakers mentioned .
Coordination between the various national environment and health action plans is achieved firstly through the Forum on Environment and Health under the auspices of the European Commission , and secondly through the WHO , in whose relevant activities the Commission actively participates .
As regards nanomaterials , six weeks ago , on 17 June 2008 , the Commission adopted a communication on the scope of application of EU legislation to nanomaterials , which underlines the importance of applying the prevention principle in this area .
EU legislation may not refer directly to the term ' nanomaterials ' , but it should be accepted that EU legislation does to a large extent cover the risks associated with nanomaterials .
The Commission has of course concluded that enforcement of the existing legislation must be stepped up and that the relevant texts , such as specifications and technical instructions , must be revised so that they can be better applied in the case of nanomaterials .
The Commission will also continue , of course , to support the relevant research to fill the existing gaps in knowledge .
The relationship between climate change and health is clearly one of the increasingly important issues , according to the interim assessment , and I am glad it has been highlighted by many speakers today .
This topic is to be covered in the White Paper on adaptation to climate change , which is to be approved soon .
As for the comment by our Polish fellow Member , which is not directly relevant to the topic under discussion but is very significant in the context of the energy and climate change package , I must make it absolutely clear that any increase in electricity prices in Poland and other countries where electricity prices are regulated will not be due to the introduction of auctioning into the European system of greenhouse gas emission rights .
The increase will be due to the need for further investment in the energy sector , as there will be no investors if there is no corresponding prospect of profit from their investments in the energy sector .
The increases will also come about because of liberalisation in the energy sector and the unification of the EU energy market .
Participating in the CO2 trading scheme to combat climate change will account for about 15 % , and it should be noted - and I must underline this , because I have recently read statements by Polish officials in many newspapers to the effect that it will create an economic problem in Poland etc . - indeed , I must make it absolutely clear that whatever money is needed for the purchase of CO2 emission rights , that money will stay in the country concerned , such as Poland , for example .

Not only that , but Poland will have the additional advantage of about EUR 1 billion coming from the redistribution which will result from the auctioning of rights in the EU countries whose income per head is above the EU average .
These worries are therefore unfounded .
Poland can only gain from the system and the package to be discussed in the European Parliament and in the Commission .
The Action Plan is an effective means of marshalling all the agents involved in the sectors of the environment , health and research at Member State and Community level , with a view to taking the environment-health relationship into account even more effectively when formulating environmental policy .
This objective must be pursued even more intensively , with the cooperation of all interested parties and the support of the European Parliament .
Once again , let me stress that I am happy with the cooperation we have and with the support of the French Presidency .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate every single one of the Members here present for the high quality of today 's debate .
I find that this area is central to the concerns of Europeans and is one that lies at the heart of the ' People 's Europe ' .
This is essential .
I want to thank every one of my colleagues and fellow Members for their views and assessments and also for the proposals they have put forward , most of which have been very ambitious indeed .
I am not going to summarise them all here , for that has already been done by the Secretary of State and Commissioner Dimas .
I would just like to return specifically to the question of electromagnetic fields .
Mrs Kosciusko-Morizet mentioned the Interphone study , but we are very focused on this problem : the findings from this study have not been published in full precisely because some consider them to be contradictory , whereas a number of experts who have been involved in it and are working in Israel have now highlighted the link between exposure to GSM waves and the emergence of cancer of the parotid gland .
We are therefore essentially awaiting proof before acting .
As I said before , when scientific uncertainty persists it is up to the politicians to make a decision .
I would conclude by mentioning our Amendment 1 , as presented in plenary , and would call on you to support it , as it has been put forward by most of the parliamentary groups .
It effectively confirms that when technologies evolve and change , as is the case in this particular area , the exposure thresholds should also be amended ; otherwise we are doing nothing to help those consumers who might be at risk .
I fervently hope that the French Presidency will support this proposal for an amendment of the 1999 recommendation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The Ries report relates to important questions about the mid-term review of the European environment and health action plan .
Within this brief scope , I would like to address the freshwater question .
In Hungary and many other Union countries , global climate change basically means extreme distribution of rainfall .
Floods alternate with dry months , and this calls for a new water management strategy .
We must manage every drop of freshwater responsibly .
This can only be achieved through collaboration at Union level , and considerable Community resources must be made available for water management during the budget period starting in 2013 , at the latest .
Ensuring healthy drinking water throughout the territory of the Union , and using medicinal waters and geothermal energy as sources of heat , are related to this .
Several tens of thousands of European citizens have died in urban heatwaves , and alleviating these also requires water .
By using the water projects of the developing world , our outstanding experts can also provide help within the framework of Union projects .
Let us not forget that freshwater is perhaps the most important treasure of the twenty-first century !
in writing . - ( RO ) I consider opportune the inclusion in the report of a reference to the Commission 's and Member States ' obligation to support the Children 's Environment and Health Action Plan in Europe .
The issue of the European child health needs to receive all the attention due , taking into consideration the serious problems that all Member States are dealing with .
I would like to inform you about worrying statistics recorded this year in the Romanian schools : one pupil out of four suffers from chronic diseases .
According to an official report , the main causes are inadequate nutrition , absence of physical activity and school bags that are too heavy .
The most frequent health conditions are sight problems , growth delays , spinal deformations , speech disorders and anemia .
Many pupils and children under school age are overweight and obesity has been caused by fast-food nutrition .
Besides the fact that they live in a natural environment that is increasingly dangerous for their health , it seems that the social environment in which children are developing is not the most suited either .
For this reason , I believe all of Europe should consider very seriously the children 's health problems before we arrive in the situation of wondering what Europe will look like tomorrow .
in writing . - ( PL ) Respect for human rights , democracy and the rule of law is one of the European Union 's priorities .
When necessary , the Union imposes restrictive measures known as sanctions if these are called for in order to attain the aforementioned objectives .
Sanctions should only be resorted to in cases of serious threats to security or violations of human rights , or when conciliation or diplomatic measures have proved ineffective .
Recourse to sanctions may also be justified in cases of irreversible environmental damage to the natural environment when this becomes a threat to security and thus a serious infringement of human rights .
So-called double standards are not allowed , however . By this I mean lack of consistency or equality when imposing or implementing sanctions .
The sanctions most commonly resorted to by the European Union are denial of visas and arms embargoes .
In addition , sanctions are one of the weapons used in the war on terror .
The procedure for drawing up a black list of the names of institutions and entities linked to terrorist activity is an important element of the EU 's anti-terrorist policy .
Coordinated international action is required in order to improve the effectiveness of the sanctions imposed .
The Union should continue to impose appropriately targeted smart sanctions to deal with specific problems whilst minimising the humanitarian consequences or negative effects on individuals against whom they were not aimed .
Soil protection ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council by Miroslav Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on progress in Council on the Framework Directive on Soil Protection - B6-0455 / 2008 ) .
author . - Mr President , let me just stress that in September 2006 the Commission adopted a proposal for a framework directive on soil protection with the aim of protecting soil across the European Union .
This proposal resulted in a very lively and interesting discussion in my committee - the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The rapporteur , Mrs Christina Gutiérrez-Cortines , worked hard to find a compromise .
A first-reading position was adopted by the European Parliament on 14 November 2007 .
Since then it has been unclear when the Council will be able to adopt a common position and when this will be communicated to the European Parliament .
At the beginning of June my committee , therefore , put an oral question to the Council to learn more about the progress achieved in the Council since the adoption of Parliament 's position .
On behalf of my committee , I would like to ask the Council to elaborate on the progress achieved .
Furthermore , my committee would like to know when the Council , according to current planning , will be able to communicate its common position on the framework directive on soil protection to the European Parliament .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Ouzký , the Sixth Environment Action Programme of the European Community recognises that soil is a limited resource and is a medium that is subjected to environmental constraints .
The Programme seeks to define in absolute and unambiguous terms a specific strategy for soil protection that takes into account the principles of subsidiarity and regional diversity , which everyone understands very well .
In February 2007 - and here I too am retracing history - the Council held an advisory debate on the Commission 's communication on a thematic strategy and on the proposal for a directive .
In December 2007 it examined suggestions for a compromise on the directives that had been drawn up by the Portuguese Presidency , which had undertaken an enormous amount of work on this proposal , and these proposals took into account the opinion expressed by the European Parliament at first reading .
Unfortunately , and in spite of the considerable efforts of the Portuguese Presidency , it was not possible to reach a political agreement at that particular time .
The disagreement took various forms : some Member States questioned the very validity of the initiative , in other words the need to introduce Community regulations for soil protection ; others thought that a framework directive would offer greater flexibility and would in particular help take into consideration those national policies that had already been implemented , policies that were not adequately recognised by the proposal for a directive as put forward .
Since then various Member States have had time to reflect and France wishes to reopen this debate within the Council .
The views of the European Parliament will naturally be a key component in our discussions and in the revival of the debate that we now want to see through to completion .
We are aware of the fact that you have had to find a balance between those who did not want to infringe the legitimate powers of the Member States in the area of soil protection and those who were calling for an ambitious harmonised system of Community rules .
We believe that Parliament 's opinion represents a good basis for putting together a balanced package that we can all work on .
This initiative has therefore been re-launched today , though it is too early to say whether or not it will be possible to reach an agreement within the Council , and if so when this will happen and on what basis .
It would not be fair on my part to give any indications in this regard .
All that I can promise you is that the French Presidency will do its best - and here I repeat myself - while at the same time taking account of the opinion expressed by Parliament , which has managed to adopt a balanced position of its own , and one that is therefore extremely valuable in this difficult discussion .
At the same time we are realistic , for this is a very sensitive dossier - as everyone has seen in the course of previous discussions - and even in the best-case scenario a second reading cannot in any case take place until after the EP elections next year .
We are therefore in no hurry and will take the time that is needed to reach the most consensual result possible on a subject that has in the past shown itself to be extremely complex .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to direct my comments at the Minister in particular because I believe that her intellectual capacity will allow her to understand that this is a completely new issue .
The Commission , in line with its usual practices , presented a binding and , to a certain extent , reductionist directive . However , here in Parliament we realised that such a complex system as the soil could only be tackled on a comprehensive and theoretical basis .
This is because soil affects the capture of CO2 , it is the setting for human life , and it affects the productive system , agriculture , natural disasters and the creation of infrastructures . In short it affects everything and we understood that , in the case of 27 countries with very long legislative experience , many of these could not apply a directive based on simplistic criteria and extensive comitology .
As a result , for the first time in the history of this Parliament , we developed a directive that was open , flexible , based on systematic criteria of self-organisation and aimed at a new development of Article 249 of the Treaty , which establishes that the Member States must have the same objectives and must meet these objectives , but allows them freedom in their application .
In this directive , existing legislation , existing catalogues and the bureaucracies of each country are respected . There is no obligation for the countries to do anything new if they can prove that the objectives of the directive have been met .
Many of these countries have already fully met all these objectives .
However , many Members have not understood this interaction between freedom and complexity , that order is possible within an open system and that open and flexible systems can exist within self-organisation . They have preferred to turn their backs on this legislation which affects life and the earth .
I do not understand how governments concerned about climate change can allow themselves to oppose a directive that tackles the problems of the soil , the earth and climate change and that encourages disaster prevention , supports reforestation , agriculture and productivity , and respects all previous agreements .
I repeat that we must understand what freedom is , as many do not know how to live with this .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all the important natural resources and environments , such as water , air and species and habitats of flora and fauna , are covered by specific Community legislation , whereas the soil , which is non-renewable and a scarce resource , as the Minister has just said , does not have this protection .
This omission must therefore be urgently rectified as we all suffer as a result of it , particularly at times of food scares or debates on fundamental economic and energy alternatives which are essentially based on the soil .
Filling this gap in Community legislation would serve to highlight the measures that we advocate in the fight against climate change , including aspects such as combating increasing erosion and desertification , and not forgetting the serious problem of soil contamination or the sealing of this soil as a result of rapid and unsustainable development which is not only at the root of the current economic crisis , but also devours such a fundamental resource as the soil .
In addition , including this issue within the European institutional legislative system would act as a stimulus to improve what is happening in the legislative process , by placing it within a coherent framework based on regulation and possibly on European funding which we could also link with the resources committed to the fight against climate change .
We should not forget that the risks threatening this finite and non-renewable resource affect , to a greater or lesser extent , the whole territory of all the Member States of the European Union , including significant cross-border effects .
There are various Member States - as my fellow Member has just said - which are not particularly inclined to standardise soil protection at European level .
They should remember that what this Parliament previously adopted is not only a flexible , adaptable and ambitious legal instrument but also one which is not excessively prescriptive .
It is an instrument that could help in making the fight against climate change more rigorous and effective .
Soil also has a very important function as a reserve of raw materials and as a carbon reserve , not to mention the CO2 storage proposals that are currently being debated or the effects that may be indicated in the legislation on the scarcity of water .
This proposal for a directive has been blocked in the Council since November 2007 . This is unacceptable .
Nearly a year has passed since this Chamber gave its opinion and I therefore consider that everything must be done to reverse this situation .
In this way , the Member States would have a specific regulation to protect the soil , not only with the aim of protecting the environment , but also to fight against climate change and the deforestation and desertification that are occurring .
It would also create new areas for research , innovation and the application of technologies , lead to the creation of jobs and social opportunities and , in particular , improve the quality of life of European citizens .
I want to end by encouraging the Council Presidency to pursue its efforts to get this vital directive adopted .
Do not be disheartened , Mrs Kosciusko-Morizet .
We all know that there have been encouraging changes in the positions within the Council but you should be aware that we will not allow this directive to be stripped of its content .
Mrs Kosciusko-Morizet , your President often demonstrates great courage and great ambition on certain issues and challenges that are important : soil protection must be one of them .
Mr President , one of the points mentioned in the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council on this subject was that it is a highly sensitive issue .
I agree with that completely .
I will go further than that : I am , I believe , the first speaker up to now who can say in no uncertain terms that he does not see the need for a directive like this .
I do not see why Europe has to have another directive .
Why do I think that ?
In the first place , we already have many directives relating to the soil that affect the health of the soil and the soil environment .
Just think of the Water Directive , the Groundwater Directive , the Nitrates Directive , the 18 Directives relating to cross-compliance .
All of these have an influence on the health of the soil .
In Europe - and this is true in France and everywhere else - we are weighed down by too many administrative rules .
The average farmer needs more time to fill in forms about all manner of things than he has to do his normal work on the farm .
If there were to be yet another directive on top of all that , then that would be too much of a good thing .
We should first of all wait to see the results of the directives we already have : whether they are not enough and whether they do not make an adequate contribution to restoring the soil to a healthy condition .
The Groundwater Directive will only come into operation in 2009 , and so it is completely unnecessary to introduce a new directive before then .
The Commission has produced a proposal and has calculated what the benefits will be .
What I did not see anywhere in the calculation is what the administrative burden of implementing all this will be for those concerned .
I will say it again : too much time is being wasted on administrative tasks , on filling in forms , on meetings and I do not know what else .
What could be done at this point in time ?
The Commission could play a very important role in the exchange of experience .
There are certain countries that have already gone a very long way in restoring the soil to a healthy condition and there are other countries that have not .
The countries that have already done this have done it without any help from Europe .
Why not use those good examples for the countries that still have a problem ?
Once again , I think that we have too much red tape at the moment and that Europe and the European Union in general will certainly not make itself more popular with the citizens by piling one regulation on top of another and then saying to them ' just get on with it ' .
No , let us reduce it as much as possible and follow the example of the Member States that could serve as examples for the other countries .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Ouzký for the question he posed , as I too am concerned about how long it is taking to complete our legislative work on soil protection .
The food crisis is increasingly making itself felt and the world population is growing whilst less and less land is being used for agriculture and the options for intensifying agricultural production are running out .
In view of this state of affairs , sensible soil protection is especially necessary .
The very best way of protecting the soil is through sound agriculture and farming .
Soil that is not used for agricultural purposes soon becomes degraded .
We are all aware that a substantial amount of agricultural land is not being cultivated and is becoming degraded .
This ought to change .
The European Union 's agricultural policy should ensure that it is profitable to cultivate agricultural land and legislation should encourage cultivation of the land .
Those are the thoughts I would like to share with you in the course of this debate .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Council representative said that there is considerable controversy in the Council on this issue , and that exists in the European Parliament as well .
The background to this controversy is as follows . It all depends on our definition of soil : is it a treasure hoard of fertility , whose purpose is to provide a source of nutrition for our crops and which forms the basis of life in an ecologically sound farming system , with a high level of CO2 capture ?
Or is it simply a substance which supports plants in a system of agro-industrial production which involves the use of oil , chemical and genetic technology and has extremely hazardous climate impacts ?
These are the two trends which exist , including in the European Union .
We also have soils which have been taken out of agricultural production .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted an opinion which triggered a certain amount of controversy because the rapporteur who was appointed wanted to reject a directive .
The majority in committee then delivered an opinion which accorded with a sensible approach to soil management , and this has been taken on board in the report .
From an agricultural perspective , it would be extremely beneficial if this directive were adopted .
I cannot understand , let alone support , the opposition from the traditional farmers ' associations .
In my view , they are shooting themselves in the foot , because farming created our cultural landscapes during the course of history and is in a position to maintain them now .
I cannot endorse the view that it would create too much red tape .
Mr Mulder , you said that this is already happening in some countries , one of them being Germany .
We do not want excessive red tape .
Why should these examples which you have cited not be incorporated into a framework directive with a clear principle of subsidiarity , taking account of regional , cultural , social and climatic conditions , so that decisions can be made at grassroots level as to what is necessary and what is not ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , we know that this is a very sensitive area because protection of the soil , which is a scarce and non-renewable resource , is vital given that agriculture and the protection of biodiversity depend on this and because it forms a platform for human activities , not just for cities and infrastructures , but also for nature and the countryside .
As a result , its protection is crucial to preserve our heritage , natural resources , surface water and groundwater quality , health and human life .
As a very dynamic system which performs many functions and delivers services vital to human activities and to the survival of ecosystems , soil protection is a collective imperative in our common lives and in the defence of future generations .
This means that it must not be subject to competition rules .
However , soil is also subject to a great deal of abuse , to property speculation , and to degradation and contamination , including in border areas , which means that there must be better cooperation between Member States and the definition of common objectives in line with the subsidiarity principle and the social function of the earth .
There are various Community policies which have implications for the soil and which may endanger its protection .
That is why we need to further study the risks and various perspectives of soil in order to identify appropriate measures which can protect the soil .
One very important contribution would be a change in the common agricultural policy to provide greater support for family-based agriculture and small and medium-sized farmers .
It is in this context that we need to know the Council 's position and also monitor its development .
( FR ) Mr President , my first reaction to the discussion that has taken place on this proposal for a framework directive was to ask myself whether we really needed such a text and whether such a solution was really appropriate .
We already have a raft of regulations on soil protection , waste , pesticides , the protection of the natural environment , groundwater and so on .
Moreover , in the context of ' better regulation ' , which is something we in Parliament have been working on for some time , I realise that it is important not to give the impression that we are once again just putting things through the Commission mill and accumulating one regulation after another .
I was also thinking about our local representatives and about our municipal mayors who will have even more on their plate with this framework directive .
There is another reality , however .
The fact is that human practices have failed completely to treat our soil with respect and that efforts have been systematically made to engage in intensive production methods and in so doing to impoverish the soil and to adopt urban practices that have led to its degradation .
I believe that Mrs Gutiérrez , whose work I would describe as remarkable , has presented us with very acceptable proposals in an effort to bring the different sides closer together - because indeed we see that there really is quite marked opposition within Parliament , just as there is within the Council - and that by listening to Parliament she has finally succeeded in putting forward proposals that appear to be as consensual as possible .
She has produced a set of balanced positions that respect the subsidiarity principle , particularly in the choice of methods that the Member States are required to adopt in order to put the soil regulations into practice .
She has avoided any increase in the administrative burden by urging us to make up for the errors of the past by way of our agricultural , industrial and urban practices , which until now have failed to respect the soil .
I now address the Council : when the Council Presidency tells us that we need not hurry , this means that they are going to put the dossier on hold .
They are going to put it on hold when there is in fact a real need , given the disparity that exists between the Member States , to take up positions that while respecting the subsidiarity principle are clearly aimed at preserving and protecting our soil .
( PT ) Mr President , as the Minister said , this is a sensitive and highly complex issue on which it is not easy to achieve consensus among 27 Member States or even in this Parliament , as has been seen .
As my colleague Inés Ayala said , soil is a non-renewable resource that is connected with natural disasters and agricultural production and that encompasses such delicate and demanding issues as soil use , development and nature conservation .
Many interests are at stake and many fellow Members question whether this directive is necessary .
Others question its flexibility .
A very rigid legal framework is not always the best way to achieve the objectives sought , bearing in mind the different situations .
In my opinion , this directive is important and necessary to maintain the balance of the ecosystems .
Mr President , can I say to the President-in-Office that it is very nice of her to put the ball rolling onto the playing field , but can I suggest that she take it back and put it in the box ?
Because , in my view , we really do not need this directive .
I think the previous Council had it absolutely right when they said they did not want it .
I echo very much the words of Jan Mulder that we do already have the Nitrates Directive and the Groundwater Directive .
All these things are beginning to take action on the soil and making sure we are cleaning up our soils throughout the European Union .
I agree with Graefe zu Baringdorf that the farmers are indeed the custodians of the soil and that soil is so important for everything we grow , but do we actually need a soil directive ?
The problem with this soil directive is that it has been far too all-encompassing .
We are trying to deal with industrial land and industrial pollution ; we are talking about urban development and then about agricultural land and agricultural soils .
It is just nonsense to actually bring in legislation like this at this stage .
I think one of the problems we have here in the European Union - and I think we do it out of the very best of intentions - is that if we need to do something , we immediately legislate .
I do not think so .
I think we have to pause for a moment and reflect .
I think the Council got it right .
I suggest that it is not time to bring this back .
I would suggest that it goes back to a new Commission and the new Council in the next parliamentary session .
They can look again to see what is happening .
I would encourage Member States that do not have controls over the use of industrial land and over pollution from industry to actually put those in place at the national level .
Let us not interfere from the European level because I do not believe we need it .
I think we want to make sure that we do not have the level of bureaucracy that we are getting .
People are absolutely fed up to their back teeth with further bureaucracy .
So I would say to the President-in-Office : please do not set the ball rolling ; take it back again .
Mr President , firstly I would like to remind colleagues and the French presidency that , at Parliament 's first reading on 14 November 2007 , a considerable number of MEPs - 295 in fact - voted against this directive .
There is no doubt that there are significant concerns about the cost of the proposed directive , especially those sections on contaminated land and national inventories .
Subsidiarity is a key question here , given that soil has limited cross-border effects , unlike air and water which , of course , are mobile .
The proposed directive would force too many Member States with already-effective domestic measures to dismantle them , as they would be incompatible with the directive .
The point is not that we do not need any EU action on soil protection - indeed , the thematic strategy contains many good suggestions - but that any new EU strategy on soil protection should add value to and complement , not replace , Member States ' existing domestic policies .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , soil protection is an extremely important task for ensuring a healthy farming environment for future generations .
I would underscore everything that has been said in that connection so far .
However , none of these arguments means that soil protection should be a European task .
Not every problem in Europe is necessarily a problem for Europe .
Soil is a local , a localised medium .
As a rule , soil contamination has no cross-border impacts , so there is no reason for soil protection to be a task for the European Union ; nor , indeed , does it have any European added value .
Many of the European countries already have soil protection regulations which work very well , and there is not the slightest reason to impose a European regulation on those that do not .
Or do you believe , Commissioner - quite seriously - that wherever Member States are not taking action within their own sphere of competence , the Commission should fill the gap ?
That would be absurd .
For reasons of subsidiarity , soil protection is a task for the Member States , and they are quite capable of dealing with it .
That being the case , the Council - including your own country , Madam Secretary of State - provisionally halted this initiative .
I very much hope that the French Republic will stick to this position .
I have no doubt that it could be useful to draft a European soil protection strategy , and I would also have no problem with Europe making a financial contribution wherever optimum soil protection has not yet been achieved .
However , I am firmly opposed to having harmonised soil protection legislation imposed upon all of us , funded by the Community , simply because there is no soil protection legislation in some countries .
That is not what Europe is supposed to be about .
It would be a piece of completely superfluous bureaucracy of the type which sends citizens running for cover , before expressing their opinions in elections and referenda .
It has to be stopped .

( HU ) However right Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is in saying that farmers protect the soil , there has indeed been a very considerable loss of soil cleanliness in recent decades as a consequence of intensive farming and the great use of fertilisers and chemicals .
This previously applied to both the old and the new Member States .
In the last twenty years , the new Member States have not really had the money for fertilisers or chemicals and so , for example , four times less fertiliser per hectare is used in Hungary than in The Netherlands .
The real solution to the question is therefore a farming matter , namely that in future we will have to use methods that protect the biosphere and the soil and that reduce this burden on the soil , so brand new methods and new approaches are needed in order to protect the soil , since this is in the interests of all European farmers .
There are a huge number of irrational things in this system , for example crops are not planted after the harvest and energy is lost .
Compostable crops could be planted and , for example , the fertiliser burden could thus be reduced . Thank you for your attention .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , we all agree on this , and we all want to see the land protected .
It is the land that feeds the population , and we want it to continue giving us food , above all healthy food .
The land , we all agree , is the environment , and we want to protect it , but I am seriously afraid we are destroying it .
The Soil Protection Directive makes a clear distinction between pollution caused by agriculture and pollution from industry .
As regards pollution caused by agriculture , we see many efforts being made under the common agricultural policy , and many efforts within the scope of the Health Check ; and recently we had the report on a significant reduction in the use of agricultural chemicals .
All these efforts are being made in terms of agriculture .
However , the major concern is what is being done about industrial pollution .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are concerned by the impact intensifying soil contamination is having on our agricultural produce and on the environment .
This pollution is reflected in the soil and water , and it is therefore advisable to adopt indicators and assessment thresholds before we reach the point of no return .
Therefore , I urgently request that we monitor air pollution very frequently - we happen to do this thoroughly - and also monitor soil pollution .
We should do this particularly in highly industrialised areas .
I am optimistic that the French Presidency will take account of the Member States ' positions and will find a mutually acceptable solution on this issue .
( PL ) Mr President , a year has gone by since we adopted our stance at first reading concerning the directive on soil protection .
Nonetheless , the Council has so far been unable to secure agreement .
A few Member States still persist in acting as a blocking minority . There is now hope of achieving a compromise under the French Presidency .
The presentation by the representative of France indicated that such hope did exist .
We have heard much criticism of the project , alleging that it will increase bureaucracy or duplicate existing national and Community legislation .
I believe the opposite is the case .
Such a directive is needed , because it will result in unification of legislation in this area and will bring together at Union level all the efforts being made to protect the soil .
In addition to local and regional efforts , action at Union level is required if we are to halt soil degradation .
The soil is an asset common to us all .
Common principles and objectives must therefore be established , and the relevant action taken .
It is important for all Union citizens to become aware of the important part the soil plays in the ecosystem and also in our daily lives and in the economy .
Unfortunately , dangerous substances are still to be found on the territory of many Member States . I refer to landfill sites and chemical weapons left behind by the Soviet army present there in the past .
Certain countries are not in a position to deal with these issues on their own .
Appropriate encouragement and aid for Member States to assist such countries with the removal of such material is therefore needed .
There is an urgent need for relevant provisions that will allow degraded land to be put back into use and will also limit soil degradation and ensure that the soil is exploited in a sustainable manner .
All this would certainly be a step in the right direction in terms of protection of the natural environment and in terms of preserving the soil which is such a valuable natural resource .
In this respect , the directive should prove very helpful to us .
The legislative work ought therefore to continue . In addition , independent experts must be consulted and we should take their opinions into account .
Mr President , I spoke to a farmer this morning , unfortunately a farmer who is sitting looking at sodden fields because certainly in Ireland and in other parts of northern Europe we are having a really bad harvest .
I think we should bear them in mind this morning .
This young farmer - and she is trained - has read the soils directive and has a real concern that for someone like her who is using minimum cultivation , doing the right think for the soil , this directive will penalise her , particularly in unseasonable weather conditions .
She knows what she is talking about .
I believe we do not need a directive to have good soils : we need Member States to take responsibility and most of all we need good farm advice backed up with good national research on what is best for soils .
I think one of the big problems we face , and we face it certainly in Ireland , is very bad planning , which has created huge problems of flooding and the ancillary difficulties that leads to .
Let us leave this to the Member States .
Let us give them direction , but not another directive to add to the 18 that farmers already have to comply with .
Mr President , I would say to the Commission and the Council to take all the time they need for this directive .
In fact , as far as I am concerned , they can take it away forever .
From my point of view , I believe we neither need nor require this directive .
Farmers suffer enough red tape and bureaucracy at present and they see this all emanating from Brussels .
This could well be the straw that breaks the camel 's back .
It is true that soil is very important and must be protected , but I have never yet met a farmer who will not protect the soil on his land - their future depends on it .
The needs from the different parts of Europe are very different .
Soils require different support from the north to the south , from the east to the west .
This is a sensitive issue .
Please take it away and bury this directive .
As Mr Mulder said , we already have sufficient directives .
The intention may be good , but we do not need this good intention .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union should act within the scope of its competences in those areas where it can genuinely create European added value with its own rules .
In this particular case , I do not see any added value being created .
What I do see are certain countries which are not taking their responsibilities in the domestic arena seriously , or at least have not done so to date , or simply believe that they can access European money in this way .
I cannot identify any added value at all ; what I do see , however , are additional costs and more red tape , especially for those countries which have fulfilled their commitments at home and have taken reasonable soil protection measures .
Mr President , soil protection is of course necessary , but what is not necessary is another EU directive .
As Mr Mulder said , we already have a plethora of directives and legions of rules on cross-compliance .
This is a Member State issue .
What nation is going to let its soil erode away and degrade ?
Indeed , what farmer needs Brussels to tell him not to allow his assets to degrade ?
It is ludicrous .
More Brussels nannying will only add to the already intolerable administrative burden on farmers , whose time looking after their land is being constantly diminished by the time taken to fill in foolish forms .
The Parliament and Commission should break the habit of a lifetime and forget about it .
Mr President , I totally endorse what my colleagues in the ' catch-the-eye ' process have been talking about .
If the Commission would like to come and look at my farm , it has been farmed for 3 000 years before Christ was born , and continues to be farmed .
The soil is in some of the best hearts .
In fact this year we are producing four and a half tonnes of wheat to the acre , which is over 10 tonnes of wheat per hectare - if we can combine it , of course .
We look after and manage the soil .
Leave it to those people who know about it .
Do not bring in any more bureaucracy from Brussels because all you do is give everybody here a bad name , and we do some good work .
Keep up and do the good work , but leave it to the Member State .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly let me say that I want no more uncertainty on this point .
The Presidency is very much motivated by this directive and is convinced of the need for having such a directive on this issue .
I would also repeat that this position has been steadily held , that it does not just date from the current presidency , and I cannot accept some of the insinuations that have been made in this regard .
In December 2007 , when the first debate was held in the Council , certain Member States - and there is an echo of this in today 's discussion - were formally opposed to the principle of a directive .
Other Member States were already involved in drawing up national policies in this area and were of the view that while a directive was a good idea the proposal being put forward did not adequately respect the subsidiarity principle and did not take sufficient account of the efforts that had already been made , including points of a highly technical nature .
At that time France was one of this group of states .
Today , as we hold the presidency and once again remain faithful to this position , we are very much motivated and keen to find agreement on a directive for soil protection .
For all that , we have all seen today that there are sharp disagreements and that these are a fairly true reflection of what has been happening within the European Council .
We are striving to reach an agreement that may perhaps , as we hope , yield success during the current French Presidency .
However , as we can all see , this is going to be far from simple .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to contribute to this debate arising from the oral question from Parliament to the Council .
Let me state that the Commission reaffirms its commitment to reaching an agreement on the soil protection directive , and will do its utmost to achieve that aim .
The Commission made its proposal on the basis of Parliament and Council resolutions calling for a comprehensive European Union approach to soil protection .
I remember very clearly , Mr Nassauer , that in late spring 2006 I received a letter from the German Government with the majority - if not all - the Länder in Germany calling for a soil directive .
We welcome Parliament 's strong support for a soil directive , albeit introducing modifications to the Commission proposal .
I hope we can achieve the sufficient level of complexity indicated by Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines
We regret that the Council was not able to reach a political agreement in December , in spite of the enormous work done by the Portuguese presidency , the support of 22 Member States and the flexibility shown by the Commission .
I stress that , while this political impasse remains , soil degradation is continuing , as has been made very clear by the scientific community , for instance at a high-level conference on soil and climate change recently organised by the Commission .
I therefore welcome France 's commitment to restarting the work , and look forward to working constructively with France and the other Member States to make sure that we reach a political agreement in the Council securing a high level of soil protection as early as possible .
However , the Commission has to ensure that the final text can be implemented and that it represents added value compared to current levels of soil protection .
I assure you that I remain committed to that task .
The debate is closed .
Corrigendum ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes

Mr President , on a point of order , yesterday , before the vote on the motion for a resolution on Georgia , our colleague Mr Schulz - officially , before the whole of Europe - accused President Saakashvili of triggering the whole conflict .
This is Russian propaganda , similar to the one according to which Polish soldiers were murdered by Germans in Katyn , which prevailed for 50 years .
I think that Mr Schulz and the whole group have much to learn about Russian methods , Russian intrigues and Russian propaganda .
( Sustained applause from the right )
Ladies and gentlemen , we have a lengthy vote ahead of us today .

Since Mr Schulz is affected by what Mr Zaleski said , he will be given the floor , but after that , we want to move on to the vote .
We held the debate about Georgia yesterday and we have drawn up a resolution , so we do not need to reiterate everything today .
We want to get on with the vote , but as Mr Schulz was the subject of the remark , he has the floor .
( DE ) Mr President , perhaps Mr Zaleski did not listen properly to what I said yesterday .
I did not accuse any nation .
It is not my intention to lay the blame on any particular nation .
As to the crimes against humanity committed by Germans in the Second World War , I have on more than one occasion voiced my shame about my nation in whose name these crimes were committed .
I would like to reiterate that here and now .
I am one of those Germans who want to ensure that it never happens again .
Nonetheless , one thing is true : every responsible politician , every man or woman who is leading a government and wants to solve problems on his or her own country 's territory through force of arms places themselves outside international law , and that applies to Mr Saakashvili .

( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , that is an issue which greatly concerns us all .
I do not want to describe the speech I gave to the European Council as a successful attempt to combine all the different positions but I would recommend that you read that speech and I think that most people here in the House will find their position reflected in it .

( DE ) Mr President , perhaps it has escaped my notice as well , but I would be pleased to hear officially at last - in other words , from you - whether the many rumours circulating in the House are true and what is happening about Strasbourg in the coming weeks .
I was going to make a statement about that at the end of the sitting , because I would like to avoid having a debate about it now .
( Applause )
Can we agree that I will make a statement at the end on what has been decided , so that we really can get on with the vote just now ?
There is also a communication about this matter which you will be receiving .
I would ask you to check your emails .
However , I will be making a statement at the end , when you will all still be here .
1 .
Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems (
- Before the vote :
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I speak on behalf of the ALDE Group , with regard to the Kirkhope report .
Pursuant to Rule 168 , the ALDE Group would like to make a request for referral back to committee .
To be clear , there is no intention of breaking up the compromise package with the Council as such , but my group does believe that a more extensive debate on the definition of a parent carrier should take place .
The Commission is working on a formal notice , which is most welcome .
However , that does not give us the 100 % clarity we need at this very moment .
A proper debate should be allowed for , as well as decent consultation of our legal services .
There is no rush to put this matter to the vote at this very moment .
Mr President , I am happy to speak in favour of the ALDE Group motion to refer this back to committee .
In my long years in this Parliament I cannot recall , within the transport area , a report that has caused so much confusion and uncertainty as this one .
We are making law here , and with that comes a responsibility to act with full knowledge and understanding of the text that honourable Members will be asked to vote on .
Yet many Members are unsure .
Many Members are struggling to comprehend and understand this complex piece of legislation , made even more complex by the intervention of the Council .
There is great uncertainty , great unease across a wide spectrum of this Chamber , which is why I believe we need to reassess , re-evaluate and examine more carefully the implications of these proposals back in the Committee on Transport .
It is about getting it right , not about doing it quickly .
By doing this , we will not be creating problems ; we will be acting responsibly as legislators , defending Parliament 's right to work at its pace , not at a pace dictated to it by industry lobbyists and the Council of Ministers .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what Mr Simpson has just said is really quite abstruse ; indeed , he turns the whole matter on its head .
There are certain industries which attempt to block legislation in the interests of their companies .
May I say this : with this code of conduct , our intention is to improve consumers ' rights .
We need to strengthen consumer rights so that we get fair offers from the computerised systems .
We vigorously reject these delaying tactics on the part of the Socialists , who are attempting to wreck the compromise with the French Government and bring about its collapse during this legislative term .
I would urge you to reject the referral back to committee .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I urge us not to refer this back to the committee .
I think this is an unnecessary , and a potentially damaging , delaying tactic in the interests of the consumers of Europe , whom we represent .
The first-reading agreement was struck in June with Council and Commission , after comprehensive debate and support in my - Transport - Committee .
My shadow rapporteurs were fully involved with the process throughout and , as far as I am concerned , agreed the outcome .
Two presidencies - the Slovenian and French - have both cooperated fully with me in this matter , and I do not understand why more time is now needed to debate or scrutinise this vital measure .
The fairest and most democratic way to proceed is to vote now on the agreement .
Many of the people who are now protesting did not bother to come to the debate last night when Commissioner Mandelson , at my request , clarified to Parliament the assurances that a formal notice will be published in the Official Journal before the entry into force of this regulation , giving a clear interpretation of the regulation from the Commission 's point of view and very concrete and strict criteria ( which happens on competition issues ) to enforce these measures , in the interests of the consumers of Europe .
I do not think that the consumers will understand these protests if we do not proceed to bring this measure forward .
I therefore ask you , sincerely - all of you - to support me and the hard work that all of us have done across political groups to bring this matter through as quickly as possible .
( Parliament rejected the motion for referral back to committee )
2 .
Eligibility of Central Asian countries under Council Decision 2006 / 1016 / EC (
3 .
Palestinian prisoners in Israel ( vote )
4 .
Evaluation of EU sanctions as part of the EU 's actions and policies in the area of human rights (
- Before the vote on Amendment 10 :
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , the amendment has been withdrawn and does not have to be put to a vote .
5 .
Maternal health ( vote )
- After the vote on paragraph 6 :
( PL ) My voting mechanism failed to work on five occasions during the roll-call vote .
I realised this and tried to ask for the floor but was not permitted to speak .
That was not right .
In addition , there was no interpretation into Polish for a certain time , and that was not dealt with either .
I would ask that we cease to be treated in this way .
Mrs Tomaszewska , I am terribly sorry that your vote was not counted .
I hope that this will not happen again .
Please submit your vote here , and then it will be correctly registered , and your view will go on record for posterity .
6 .
Trade in services (
7 .
European ports policy (
8 .
Freight transport in Europe (
9 .
Mid-term review of the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 (
The vote is closed .
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , that brings me to the statement on Strasbourg .
The Bureau considered the matter yesterday .
Various repairs are still being carried out in Strasbourg .
The Bureau adopted a unanimous decision yesterday evening - also at Mr Fazakas 's suggestion - which we intend to publish now that the Conference of Presidents has been informed , as is the case : thus the September II part-session will take place here in Brussels as well .
( Applause )
I do not want your delight to be premature : we have found that there are several places in this building as well where the rain is coming in , and we are looking into that .
We want to have the same safety standards here in Brussels as we have in Strasbourg , and I can assure you that safety will always be paramount .
As things stand at present , the final inspection by the experts will take place on 22 September .
That allows enough time for a decision on the October part-session to be taken .
I would like to wish you a safe and pleasant stay here in Brussels , and as lunchtime is approaching , let me also wish you bon appétit !
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Coup in Mauritania
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the coup in Mauritania .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we can regard the coup d 'état that has taken place in Mauritania as a real tragedy .
Just as it has invested in many other countries , the European Union has invested enormously in the democratisation of Mauritania ; more than this , and even more importantly I would say , the Mauritanian people have contributed significantly and those responsible for the relatively recent overthrow of the dictator Taya succeeded in arousing huge hopes among the population of that country , while at the same time honouring each of their commitments from the organisation of the constitutional referendum in June 2006 to the presidential elections in March 2007 , including the holding of local and general elections in 2006 .
This long process gave everyone an opportunity to have their say : trade unions , civil society and , of course , politicians .
After just one year this coup has shattered everything and there is huge disappointment among the ranks of the democrats .
This catastrophe for democracy and for the people of Mauritania clearly reminds us of the extreme fragility of all young democracies and also of the special attention that has to be paid to them .
It is now vital for us to condemn the new Mauritanian regime without equivocation .
If the elected President had committed mistakes or blunders it was up to the Mauritanian people , to its parliament and to the country 's elected representatives to react , to criticise and to impose sanctions .
It was not in any way whatsoever the right of the army , the gendarmerie or any other police force to involve itself in what is exclusively a political matter .
We are therefore calling on the new ' strong men ' of Mauritania to restore to the people of Mauritania the powers that they have stolen from them .
We demand that they allow the elected President to resume his political functions as soon as possible , even if this means suffering all the criticisms , provided that these are expressed in a democratic manner and with respect for the aspirations of the Mauritanian people who have once more been taken hostage by the wishes of a minority .
Moreover , I would add , Mr President , that I had the honour of leading Parliament 's observation mission to Mauritania and I am naturally deeply affected by what has happened .
I will finish there and allow Mrs Isler Béguin , who led the European Union 's election observation mission , to take the floor .
We very much regret these events because what we witnessed in Mauritania was a real desire on the part of the entire population , a desire that has been expressed throughout the past year , and what has happened now is a tragedy .
author . - Mr President , this poor African nation has been suffering from political instability and turmoil for a number of years now .
A reflection of this is the fact that two military coups occurred in the country in the last three years .
The second of these took place on 6 August 2008 .
A general seized power in violation of constitutional legality and placed the President , the Prime Minister , other members of the Government and many civilians under arrest .
Oddly enough , two thirds of Mauritania 's parliamentarians have signed a declaration of support for the coup leadership .
Notwithstanding the possible involvement of fear of persecution , it is an affront to democracy and a sorry state of affairs when elected parliamentary representatives resort to admitting to the failure of the democratic process and declare approval of a military dictatorship .
We call upon all political forces in Mauritania to put their people 's interests first , and with common-sense maturity to work jointly on restoring the constitutional order in their country .
To this end , we urge and expect the EU , the UN and the African Union to offer all necessary support .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , the coup by the military junta in Mauritania has been widely condemned , with good reason .
According to international observers in the country , the elections in 2006 and 2007 were conducted in accordance with the rules and there is no doubt as to the legitimacy of Mauritania 's ousted government .
Mauritania has had more than 10 coups or attempted coups since it gained independence from French colonial rule .
The previous one was only three years ago .
At the time the upper ranks of the army visibly took part , as they have now again .
The development could hardly be described as stable or democratic .
The disputes between the democratically elected President and the generals in Mauritania in their attitude to extremist Islamism contributed to the coup . This is a huge challenge for others who are trying to bring peace and stability to the region .
The draft resolution quite rightly observes that the restoration of the legal and democratically elected government is a precondition for Mauritania 's stable , democratic development .
It is therefore not an acceptable solution to hold new elections , as that would entitle the military junta to use force .
What is precarious about the situation is that , if the country remains isolated , this will nourish extremist opinions and activity , which will sidetrack democratic development .
For this reason , we have to support a UN-led solution that is as prompt and peaceful as possible .
Our group supports the draft resolution on the situation in Mauritania .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it was thanks to you that I was able to head the election observation mission to Mauritania .
We were very proud of the results , because the great success was that after 24 years the military was handing over power to the people .
I was in Mauritania for eight days last week and what did I hear there ?
I heard a people who , having previously been so happy to have a civilian government , were once again pleased that the military had come back to ' readjust democracy ' , as they put it .
Of course we call that a coup d 'état .
It is a coup d 'état .
We denounce it and we have denounced it .
However , I think that we really need to go and see what is happening there and I would advise you , my fellow Members , to send a delegation to find out .
The representative from the African Union , Mr Ping , is calling it ' an atypical situation ' .
Mr Djinnit of the United Nations calls it ' a reversal situation ' and both are saying that today we have to be creative .
Indeed , when they say that there is deadlock it is quite true that there is institutional deadlock , but this institutional deadlock does not come from the coup ; it is the result of a process of degradation that dates back to April and that culminated in June or July with a motion of censure that could not be voted on , with extraordinary sittings of the parliament that were not adopted , that were not granted and , indeed , with a resounding majority of two thirds , if not three quarters in favour of the President , which found itself overturned , with the call for him to resign .
This truly was a reversal and for those who are not following things it is difficult to comprehend .
I would ask you , fellow Members , to go and see the situation as it really is and would call on you to support the democratic legacy that the country managed to acquire at the last elections .
It should also be remembered that institutions such as the Senate , the parliament and the municipal councils are still functioning and I really believe that these bodies are acting as custodians of the people 's power .
I therefore think that it is up to them to find a solution .
I believe that we have to trust in our parliamentary colleagues to propose a roadmap to this military junta , which we have rejected , and that it is really up to the representatives of the people , just as we are the representatives of our citizens , to decide what to do now .
I think that we can give them this credibility and show some trust in them : if they fail to come up with solutions that are lawful and institutionally legitimate then we can intervene forcefully , but I believe that today these representatives of the people , who have legitimacy on their side , should put forward proposals and we should give them our support as colleagues .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , anyone with an interest in Mauritania is aware of the current situation in that country .
So too are the Members who had the honour of representing the European Parliament in that country . I was part of that group .
Mrs Isler Béguin has a great deal of relevant experience . I believe that she is right to advocate that for our part , we should increase resources so that the European Parliament can make an effective contribution to the situation , as it has already done in the case of other countries .
This should not involve stating what is right , what ought to happen , or referring to certain standards .
It should instead involve providing genuine assistance to people who are fighting for citizens ' rights and democratic values in areas where these are far more difficult to attain than in the European Union .
That is why it is proposed to distribute the resources in such a way that really effective use can be made of them .
author . - I intend to propose an oral amendment before the vote .
The recent coup in Mauritania is disappointing .
For a country which has made much progress towards democracy in recent years , this coup is a setback to such advancements .
The importance of a democratic Mauritania cannot be underestimated in this fragile subregion of Africa , so a return to democracy and civil rule is paramount .
To overthrow a democratically elected government is simple unacceptable , as is the continued house arrest of the President and the Prime Minister of this country .
However , it must also be noted that two thirds of the members of Mauritania 's Parliament signed a declaration of support for the coup leader and his fellow generals .
Last Sunday , the generals constituted their own government which , in my view , must be regarded as illegitimate .
While not recognising this self-appointed interim administration , I would nevertheless encourage the military junta to set a timetable for dates for new presidential elections as soon as possible so that civilian ministers can once again be appointed instead of military personalities .
The junta must commit to electoral neutrality as they did after the last coup in 2005 .
If such moves cannot be achieved in the very near future , the European Union must consider harsher measures , such as the suspension of aid of a non-humanitarian nature .
The Commission must give serious consideration to the reactivation of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , which could lead to the freezing of assets of members of the junta as well as the suspension of aid .
Finally , I urge the European Union to collaborate closely with the African Union on a resolution of this political crisis .
It is deplorable , but Mauritania 's generals have committed yet another coup d 'état which , regretfully , will affect the people of that country very badly .
The fact that in the wake of a military coup , in a deteriorating economic and social situation , the World Bank has reached the decision to suspend payments to this country has made the situation even worse and the people will soon feel the effects of this .
The only possible opinion on this situation is that we condemn the perpetrators of the coup and demand that constitutional and civil order be restored in this country as soon as possible .
We demand the immediate release of President Sidi Mohamed Cheikh Abdallahi and the establishment of normal working conditions for government officials .
A military coup is not a way out of a crisis .
Only political discussions and free and fair elections can lead any country out of a constitutional crisis .
The European Union 's duty is to help overcome the crisis in the most efficient way , rendering aid to people made vulnerable in the throes of an economic and food crisis .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Mauritania is a poor country .
It is also an untypical Islamic country and the victim of many bloodless coups d 'état .
It is a country that recognises Israel and one that supports the United States in its war against Al-Qaeda .
Mauritania has a democratic constitution .
It is afflicted by many natural disasters . Slavery is still the custom there , which means people are deprived of their cultural and religious identity and their personality .
However , this is a long-standing custom in the country .
It is believed that Mauritania is making relatively good use of the assistance provided to it for the development of infrastructure and education .
The latest coup has been accompanied by a declaration of holy war on the part of Al-Qaeda . This may well destabilise the country , increase starvation and negate the progress made .
It may also result in the death of many people and in the introduction of the inhuman methods of radical Islam into the country .
In view of these dangers , it is essential for the European Union and for the organisations of African countries to act swiftly in order to prevent such a tragedy .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , just yesterday we were talking about the inconsistency and ineffectiveness that sometimes characterises the European Union 's sanctions policy .
It is clear that Mauritania is an obvious example of this . The coup that occurred in that country this summer must be condemned , which is what we are doing in this resolution .
However , we also call for the political tensions to be eased within the relevant institutions , which are the ones that still have the capacity to do so at the moment .
Aside from that , the international response should not castigate those who do not merit this , particularly the Mauritanian people , who are already suffering enough from the economic and food crises .
We therefore call on the European Commission not to cancel the funding of support projects for civil society provided for under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) and also to reconsider the freezing of the Fisheries Agreement .
We also call on the Commission to engage in a political dialogue , pursuant to Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement , with a view to restoring constitutional legality . If that dialogue should not succeed , it should then reactivate Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , which could lead to the freezing of aid , excluding food and humanitarian assistance .
- ( NL ) Mr President , fragile democratic regimes in Africa which are overthrown by a military coup : it is a never-ending story , a saga that goes on and on .
I am not exaggerating when I say that this House has probably expressed its condemnation of all kinds of coups in Africa dozens of times in the past .
In the majority of African countries unjust rule remains and the same rulers have often been in power for decades .
Billions of development aid has not changed that .
The despots often remain in power and we roll out the red carpet for them far too often .
This is cause for pessimism .
The elections that this Parliament helped to monitor were conducted fairly : that has already been established here .
However , the events this summer in Mauritania provide further evidence that elections alone will not be enough to get democratic values accepted on a permanent basis in Africa .
The lesson that we have to learn today is that Europe needs to have the courage to make economic support and development aid dependent on good governance and democracy , since at the end of the day it will be the Africans themselves who will benefit from that .
However , the EU has not had the courage to adopt this position up to now .
A verbal condemnation of the coup in Mauritania is not enough if the European Union does not take concrete sanctions at the same time to isolate the junta .
( PL ) Mr President , it is most regrettable that we find ourselves debating Mauritania today .
Last year , the first free elections were held in Mauritania . They were recognised as fair and transparent by the international community , including the European Parliament 's Observation Mission .
Mauritania had made significant progress in relation to issues of vital importance to its democratisation , stability and future development .
I have in mind penalising slavery , liberalising the media and the return of refugees .
Mauritania has now taken a step backwards , cancelling the results of the democratic elections and demonstrating a lack of respect for the rule of law .
There may well be varying interpretations and assessments of President Abdallah 's conduct , but one thing is certain . A president elected in universal , democratic and free elections can never be replaced through a coup d 'état .
Such a move is unacceptable in a country that is developing its democracy , which is what Mauritania was doing until recently .
The European Union should cooperate with the government of Mauritania and with the African Union in order to resolve the situation .
( FI ) Mr President , as we heard at the beginning of August , the first democratically elected President in Mauritania has been deposed and imprisoned along with the country 's Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs as a result of a military coup .
Mauritania is one of the world 's poorest countries and one of its newest oil producers .
If its democratic development is under threat , cooperation on a broad scale with the country must be called into question .
As the World Bank froze USD 175 million in financial assistance and as the EU is considering freezing EUR 156 million , there are several development projects in danger of being ditched .
A softly-softly approach will not , however , pay off in a situation like this in the long term .
Taking a hard line obviously does not mean depriving the Mauritanians of food and humanitarian aid .
The ruling military junta , however , needs to be reminded of the Cotonou Agreement and that , if no dialogue on restoring democratic order is achieved , EU cash will once again be cut off .
Mr President , I would echo what has been said by a large number of colleagues here this afternoon : a democratic Mauritania represents a pole of stability in the subregion .
Barely 12 months after the European Union 's election observation mission declared that the elections had integrity , there was a second coup in two years by the generals in Mauritania .
We call for the immediate release of the President and Prime Minister and believe that the solution to this is through dialogue .
We welcome the involvement of the African Union in the process , but we urge the Commission to engage in this dialogue to try to find a peaceful and democratic solution to the current crisis and to use , if necessary , the threat that we will cut off all aid - apart from food and humanitarian aid - to Mauritania if we do not find a satisfactory solution in the coming months .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to endorse the comments made by Mr Kaczmarek .
A coup d 'état in Africa and more precisely in Mauritania can come as no surprise .
If we consider the situation on that continent we are bound to come to the conclusion that although thankfully the process of democratisation has begun in many areas and is still continuing , it remains very weak .
That is a fact .
Our role is to do all we can to assist democratisation .
That involves our activities in the course of our missions to monitor parliamentary or presidential elections .
It also involves financial assistance .
Our presence on the ground , raising awareness amongst the people as to what democracy is all about and explaining how they can now play their part in it after a difficult period of preparation is surely a venture worth investing in , as we are indeed doing .
I do not think we should skimp on this .
On the contrary , we need to be generous .
Africa 's future is at stake .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , for several months Mauritania has been experiencing a tense political situation , opposing a large section of the Parliament to the President of Mauritania .
On 6 August 2008 , following the dismissal by President Adallahi of several army chiefs , the military reacted by carrying out a swift and bloodless coup d 'état .
At present , the elected President remains imprisoned in a guest villa .
It should be noted that the Prime Minister has also been arrested , while other institutions , such as the elected Parliament , have not been affected .
Three years ago , on 3 August 2005 , these same generals - at the time colonels - had carried out a similar take-over against the 20-year-old regime of Colonel Ould Taya , himself in power following a coup .
The recent take-over , nevertheless , is radically different from the one in 2005 that brought to an end a dictatorial regime and resulted in an exemplary transition to democracy strongly supported , politically and financially , by the European Union .
This transition , through a series of free and fair elections , had brought into power the first democratically elected institutions in Mauritania , whose functioning must still be improved .
From the first day of the coup , our position has been clear .
Commissioner Michel firmly condemned the coup and requested the release and reinstatement of President Abdallahi , as well as a quick return to constitutional rule .
The whole international community followed with a very similar stance .
The latest decisions taken by the military junta - the self-proclaimed ' High Council of State ' - to formalise the take-over and nominate a new prime minister and government are now a series of steps in the wrong direction , going against the demands of the international community .
This coup , I think , represents a serious and evident breach of the essential elements of the Cotonou Agreement regarding democratic principles and the rule of law .
Therefore , on 2 September 2008 , the Commission adopted a Communication to the Council on the opening of consultations with Mauritania under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
On the basis of the results of the consultations , appropriate measures will be proposed .
However , considering the potential negative impact that measures could have on the population , we still hope that an acceptable solution will be found without the necessity to isolate such a strategically important country , as many of you have said .
Meanwhile , we will continue to follow developments in Mauritania , while fully supporting the efforts of the African Union to re-establish constitutional rule in the country .
Now , let me comment briefly on two questions .
It is too early at this stage to go into any details of appropriate actions to be taken on particular projects or areas of cooperation .
I think we should wait for the results of the Cotonou Article 96 consultations , and it would also be good , Ms Isler Béguin , to wait for a delegation to go there .
The Cotonou Article 96 consultations have to be started first .
Finally , there are two important projects : one is a European Development Fund project that is ongoing ( value : EUR 4.5 million ) for civil society support , and the other is planned support for democracy and human rights investment ( value : EUR 300 000 ) .
These would probably be continued in the case of a partial freeze of cooperation .
So , at the moment , we are at the stage where we think that the Cotonou Agreement must be invoked and ' 96 ' consultations have to be taken , and then we will see .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Unfortunately , the subject of the respect for human rights in African countries has been eternally present .
For many Europeans , the respect for human rights is a gift they were born with .
I come from a country that experienced the hardest communism in Europe , where human rights were not very high on its leaders ' agenda .
I could not say that the 18 years of democracy have led to the complete disappearance of the cases of infringement of human rights but the situation is much better than during the years of communism .
The fragile African continent , whose centuries-old history has seriously marked the mentality of its inhabitants , is now also facing the threat of destabilization of an entire region following the coup d 'état of the military leaders of Mauritania .
They actually annulled the 2007 democratic decision of the Mauritanian people , which had elected its first president in a democratic manner .
Compliance with the rule of law is the first , fundamental requirement for democracy .
The new regime in Mauritania does not have the people 's support and represents the exclusive wish of a limited group of people .
The international community has the duty to make sure that things do not degenerate in this country , both for the safety of its inhabitants and for the stability of the entire region , where terrorism is a real threat .
2 .
Hangings in Iran
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on hangings in Iran .
author . - ( PT ) This year is the 20th anniversary of the mass execution of thousands of political prisoners in Tehran jails .
This was one of the greatest crimes against humanity committed since the Second World War .
The number of executions in Iran is currently totally out of control : according to official communications from the Iranian authorities , 29 hangings took place in one day at Evin prison in Tehran .
The regime does not respect minors or anyone 's rights and we are now facing the possibility , announced by the US authorities , of the handover of Camp Ashraf , where almost 4 000 Iranians are being protected under the Fourth Geneva Convention , in accordance with the status that was granted by the US authorities themselves .
Despite having been officially recognised as protected by the US authorities , we are witnessing negotiations for their handover to the Iranian authorities at this time and under these conditions .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is absolutely impossible for us to allow such a thing ; otherwise we will be collaborating with the worst crime against humanity .
This would make us accomplices .
We cannot under any circumstances allow this .
I must tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that this is much worse than Guantanamo and we have to make the US authorities clearly understand this .
We cannot allow such a thing as it would signify the total breakdown of our civilising values .
author . - Mr President , the brutal theocratic regime in Tehran seems to take a perverse pleasure in shocking the world and defying the civilised standards that characterise most other countries .
Iran is notorious not only for the sheer volume of executions , but the regular and merciless executions of juveniles and young adults who committed crimes as children .
Whereas most countries that still impose the death penalty against adults do so exclusively for aggravated murder , Iran 's interpretation of capital crimes is extremely wide and includes homosexuality and adultery .
The courts often impose such a sentence for what to us in Europe are misdemeanours or not an offence at all .
In the past , teenage girls found to be sexually active outside marriage have been executed for so-called ' crimes of sexual chastity ' .
As a Union , we should be unwavering in our condemnation of Iran 's appalling human rights record , just as we are of its efforts to enrich uranium for nuclear weapons .
We appeal here in this House for the Iranian President to show clemency , but I have to say I am not very hopeful .
author . - Mr President , despite past resolutions of this Parliament and of the United Nations General Assembly , and contrary to basic moral and ethical considerations , the theocratic , totalitarian regime in charge of Iran continues to subject its citizens to - amongst other evils - the death penalty .
However , it must be said that executions by the dreaded and most barbaric method of stoning appear , thankfully , to be coming to an end .
That is without doubt a step in the right direction .
Nevertheless , the fairness of many trials taking place in Iran leaves much to be desired .
In many cases , the standards of administration of justice are far from those expected in the 21st century .
In addition , persecutions on political and / or theological grounds continue to occur frequently .
Such practices are a further stigma of shame on the governing authorities in Tehran .
Furthermore , the execution of juvenile offenders continues , despite the international outcry .
With this new resolution today , it is very much to be hoped that the leaders of the regime in Iran will at last listen to reason and common sense , and will proceed speedily to bringing their country into line with internationally-accepted norms of rational behaviour .
The Iranian people deserve much better than to suffer the barbarism of blinkered political or religious fanaticism imposed by severely short-sighted and grossly cruel leaders .
The time for liberal change in Iran is long overdue .
Let us hope that it happens soon .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , once again , it is necessary for us to talk about human rights violations in Iran , and it is no time at all since we last spoke about it .
Just three months ago , we drafted a resolution in this House on the executions in Iran .
Unfortunately , there has been no change for the better since then .
On the contrary : in the shadow of the nuclear crisis , the murdering by the Mullah regime continues unabated .
Only a week ago , an 18-year-old man , Behnam Saree , was executed in public .
The week before , a 20-year-old man was hanged for a crime he had committed at the age of 15 .
The procedure is always the same : the young man has to climb onto a stool , the noose is placed around his neck , and when the executioner kicks away the stool , the noose pulls tight . There is no mercy in this method .
Faced with this type of barbaric act , even greater barbarism is hard to imagine .
I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , could it get any worse ?
Yet I have to say to you : yes , it can ! What is even worse is the execution of minors .
The death sentences imposed and carried out on young people who have not yet attained their majority is a severe breach of the Islamic Republic 's international obligations and commitments .
Iran is party to a number of international conventions which commit it to refrain from executing under-age offenders .
It is macabre - indeed , it is verging on the tasteless - when Iranian Government representatives respond to criticism of this practice by claiming that the execution is suspended until the person has attained their majority .
Iran is the country which carries out the most executions of minors and thus occupies a deeply shameful position at the top of the league .
Since 1990 , according to Amnesty International , no other country anywhere in the world has executed so many minors .
In 2007 and 2008 alone , 15 young people were executed , and the situation of under-age offenders who face execution has reached an unacceptable , indeed a critical level in Iran .
At least 132 under-age offenders are currently being held in death cells , and the real figure may well be much higher .
The situation in Iran 's prisons is critical as well : since 25 August , several hundred Kurdish political prisoners have been on hunger strike in Iranian prisons .
They are protesting against the inhumane conditions , against torture and abuse , and against the death penalty .
The international community must take urgent action here .
We must continue to campaign tirelessly and insist on Iran 's obligation to respect human rights .
The situation is far too precarious to brook any delay in tackling this issue .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , at the beginning of August we received magnificent news from Iran .
The Iranian judiciary had decided to suspend the use of stoning as a means of execution .
The immediate consequence was that at least 10 women would not be executed by this brutal method .
However , the satisfaction was short-lived because , in the penal code reform proposal currently under consideration by the Iranian Parliament , death by stoning for certain forms of adultery is retained .
However , our issue with Iran is not just about stoning , but about the very existence of the death penalty because the number of people executed in Iran is still one of the highest in the world .
It has already been said , and I will repeat it , that 191 people have been executed this year and 317 people were executed in 2007 . Only China can beat this record .
In general terms , we openly condemn the persecution , imprisonment and frequent execution of those people who engage in the defence and promotion of human rights , those who defend sexual freedom and those who are campaigning against the death penalty . All these people are frequently charged in Iran with carrying out activities against national security .
There are many cases that we should mention here , but please allow me to talk about at least one : that of the activist and defender of minority rights , Yaghoub Mehrnehad , an ethnic Baluchi and executive director of the ' Voice of Justice ' Youth Association , who was executed on 4 August after having publicly confronted local officials about their attitude .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today debating crimes perpetrated by Iran against its own citizens .
This issue differs somewhat from others we are often called upon to debate , because Iran is not at war with anyone .
It is not therefore subject to intense pressures that might provoke various kinds of criminal action .
The Iranian regime was elected in a fairly democratic manner .
That is another reason why there should not be any political pressure .
In addition , there are no tensions between the different national groups within Iran .
Nonetheless , at least one person is executed every day in Iran .
Older people are executed for offences committed when they were 13 or 14 years old , and minors are executed too .
The international community should draw the appropriate conclusions .
It should exclude Iran from all the international organisations it can .
Action of this nature can bring results . The best example of this is the fact that stoning has been suspended .
I also appeal for the inmates of Camp Ashraf not to be handed over to Iran , because they would be in danger of being handed over to the executioner .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , it is really urgent to demonstrate to the Iranian regime our strong condemnation of the increased number of executions there and also our support for democratic change in that country .
But we are also concerned about the fate of almost 4 000 members of the Iranian opposition who are residing in Camp Ashraf in Iraq .
We strongly call , therefore , on the Iraqi and also the US authorities not to forcibly return to Iran any Iranian refugees , but instead to find a long-term satisfactory solution for those located in Camp Ashraf who have the status of protected persons under the Fourth Geneva Convention .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , it seems to me that , whenever a religion of any kind gains absolute power anywhere in the world , it is just as brutal and intolerant as any secular dictatorship .
In Iran , homosexuality is a capital offence , adultery is a capital offence , espionage , armed robbery , drug trafficking and , of course , apostasy are all capital offences : you will be hung if you do not toe the line .
According to opposition sources , political activists have been charged with criminal offences and executed .
An Iranian man has been hanged for rape , despite his alleged victim withdrawing her accusations and a judicial review being ordered into the sentence .
Mobile cranes and truck jibs are used for public hangings and , as there is no drop , this subjects the person being executed to a slow , painful death by asphyxiation .
It is essential that we press the Iranian authorities to systematically commute all death penalties for juvenile offenders at the very least , and to halt the execution of the four young boys who are awaiting execution at this moment .
I would welcome the ending of the stoning of women - hopefully it will be followed through .
However , as the resolution points out , it is worrying that there is new legislation seeking to retain it for adultery .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when looking at Iran as a global and nuclear threat , strong political and diplomatic action would require that we involve Russia , for example .
Furthermore , Iran provides the clearest evidence ever that the issue of human rights ought to be an integral part of our international and common security policy , because lying at the root of Iran as a nuclear threat there is the day-to-day violence being carried out against Iranian citizens by that regime , to which we must turn our attention .
I hope the Commissioner can tell us more about the use being made of the funds for the promotion of democracy and the rule of law .
We know how very difficult it is to contact the democratic opposition in Iran .
There is in addition the general question of the death penalty , on which the UN has voted .
This House pushed hard for a moratorium , a global suspension .
Now is the time to reinforce that attitude and propose that the UN appoint a special envoy of the Secretary General on the death penalty .
I am proposing this in an oral amendment , and I hope the political groups will see fit to endorse it .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I believe that everyone in this Chamber will agree with me that , when reading about the individual cases of violation of human rights reported in this resolution , you feel that it cannot be referring to events taking place in this century .
But this is the deplorable truth about the situation in a country that has fallen back to medieval , primitive brutality in the attempt to suppress its own people - a people that longs for democracy , liberty and reform .
We , the western democracies , cannot negotiate for ever with the criminal regime in Tehran in the naive hope that our weak negotiators could ever obtain anything from a regime that does not understand and respect the modern world and its values and that apparently hates its own people as much as it hates us .
Let this resolution be a last call for justice and human rights .
I would also mention - and with deep regret - that the EU is still holding the democratic Iranian opposition movement , the PMOI , on its list of terrorists , despite decisions by both the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg and the highest British court that this is unjustified .
Finally , I support the oral amendments by Mr Kelam concerning the Ashraf camp and the oral amendment by Mr Hutchinson .
These amendments will improve the resolution .
- ( NL ) Mr President , we must be under no illusions .
The theocracy in Teheran clearly has nothing but contempt for democracy in Europe .
All the same , it is good that Parliament has again condemned the executions in Iran in no uncertain terms .
The execution of minors is not only contrary to international law , it is absolutely barbaric and it says everything about the merciless nature of the regime that has held sway in Teheran for decades .
It should also be a warning to the naive people who think Iran can be handled with kid gloves .
Yet there is something that this resolution fails to say .
It notes rightly that more people are executed in Iran than in any other country apart from China .
However , what should have been added is that since January 2005 , the only countries to sentence minors to death and execute them have been Saudi Arabia , Sudan , Yemen and Pakistan .
It is no coincidence that these are Islamic countries where sharia is applied to the spirit and the letter .
It may be politically incorrect to say so but the facts speak for themselves .
These practices provide further evidence that this Islam , which has not yet had an enlightenment , is incompatible with our Western values .
( DE ) Mr President , a fellow Member on the left of the House has just used the tragic issue of the death penalty in Iran and the dreadful crimes being committed there as a pretext to launch an assault on religion per se .
He has attributed these actions to the religious nature of the regime .
In my view , that is absurd .
This is a perfectly ordinary totalitarian regime which simply exploits Islam for its own ends .
That is the problem , and we must vigorously condemn the regime itself , not Islam or religion per se .
Incidentally , the most heinous regimes in the world 's history were those which invoked National or International Socialism , as China continues to do today .
We should therefore be clear on one point : this House is not the place for ideological disputes , even on the issue of Iran .
It is not about ideology ; it is about the universality of human rights .
This universality of human rights transcends ideological differences .
There are no Asian human rights , and there are no Islamic human rights which give people less security and might condone the death penalty in one form or another .
We are radically opposed to the death penalty , whether it is practised in the US , China , or Iran , but we do not view these countries as the same .
We must be very clear about one thing : the Iranian regime is a totalitarian regime , and we would like to see it come to an end .
( PL ) Mr President , international law is crystal clear .
The death penalty may not be imposed on individuals who were under the age of 18 when they committed an offence .
Iran is violating that international legislation .
I should like to emphasise that as a state , Iran is party to international conventions .
It has signed undertakings of such a nature .
In July of this year , 24 organisations for the protection of human rights from all over the world called on Iran to suspend use of the death penalty for minors and also to suspend all use of the death penalty on its territory .
Six minors have been executed in Iran so far this year : that brings the total since 2005 to 26 .
Mr President , Commissioner , the House has already held several debates on the cruel way in which the law is implemented in Iran .
We cannot allow the people currently in Camp Ashraf to be handed over to Iran , as the rule of law does not apply in that country .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation regarding human rights in Iran is not improving .
Two people were hung yesterday , in Arak and in Boujerd , and many more are waiting for their sentences to be carried out .
Several thousand opponents of the Ayatollahs ' regime are currently held in Camp Ashraf .
They are members of the People 's Mujahadeen , and they are threatened with expulsion from Iraq .
For many of them , this would mean certain death .
The US forces have been providing security for the camp 's inmates , pursuant to the IVth Geneva Convention .
The planned change in the status of these forces means that as stated in the motion for a resolution , a long-term solution for the Iranian refugees resident in that camp must be found as soon as possible .
While I have the floor I should like to remind the House once again of the need for court rulings to be properly implemented and the Mujahideen removed from the list of terrorist organisations .
( PL ) Mr President , the number of public executions in Iran is increasing .
According to Amnesty International data , every year some 200 individuals are put to death in this way before audiences of thousands .
In Iran the death penalty applies in cases of blasphemy , apostasy , adultery and prostitution , amongst others .
The very severe penalties for immorality and apostasy have led to justified protests by defenders of human rights outside Iran and by reformist politicians inside the country .
The West cannot simply be a passive observer of such macabre acts .
The European Parliament should unequivocally condemn the actions of the Iranian regime .
At the same time , Parliament should support the peaceful and reformist aspirations of the opposition , represented by the People 's Mujahadeen .
The logical outcome of the democratic transformation of the aforementioned organisation , led by Mrs Maryam Radjavi , would be for it to be removed from the European Union 's list of terrorist organisations .
( RO ) Regarding things from the psychological point of view , it has been proved that tough punishments have never had a corrective role , but they generate hatred , violence , and a wish for revenge against fellow people and authorities .
I do not militate in favour of not punishing guilty people , but not by using the death penalty .
Let 's not forget that people can be recovered by re-education and social reintegration programmes .
Let 's not forget that , in Iran , young people under the age of 18 years are subject to the death penalty , although the international rights , acknowledged under signature by Iranians , do not allow such atrocities .
At a given moment , we found out about a terrible situation , when a group of young people from Isfahan were punished for dancing forbiddenly close , a few centimetres from each other .
As a teacher , I would like to remind that positive results in education cannot be obtained by fear , constraint and physical punishment .
Mr President , I would like to draw colleagues ' attention to the fact that in Iran hundreds of people are being executed every year .
That is the result of the failed policy our Union has been conducting with Iran in recent years .
We ought to know that only strong internal opposition in Iran is capable of changing that situation .
My question today is why does the EU continue to keep the Iranian opposition movement on a black list , despite the fact that the British courts ordered it to be removed from that list ?
Is it not time for the Council , under the current presidency , to live up to its obligation of respect for the rule of law and to remove opposition movements from the black list once and for all ?
I believe that Mrs Ferrero-Waldner could take the necessary steps .
( PL ) Mr President , condemning a ten-year-old child to death is simply inhuman .
Using cranes as gallows is a crime , and a misuse of technology .
In addition , public executions encourage aggressive behaviour amongst the population .
We have already debated the situation in Iran on many occasions . Iran is cynically violating the international commitments to which it signed up .
Our resolutions are proving ineffective .
I trust the European Commission will consider the possibility of imposing sanctions in view of the crimes committed by Iran 's rulers against their own nation .
( PL ) Mr President , the current totalitarian regime in Iran can best be described as having undertaken a reductio ad absurdum of the law , and resorted to the psychology of terror .
The law works when people know what can be penalised , but things need to be kept in proportion .
There is a relevant historical example .
There was no law at all in Soviet Russia , simply the will of a single all-knowing individual and of his department , namely the KGB .
The situation in Iran is absurd because the death penalty can be imposed for anything and everything .
In Iran there are no courts , no logic and no proper trials .
That is why I support the call for no political refugees such as the ones in Iraq mentioned earlier to be returned to Iran , especially no minors , because they would simply be slaughtered without trial .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this is certainly one of the saddest questions of human rights violations , namely the death sentence - and particularly the death sentence carried out on young people .
I think we all share the same profound , serious and urgent need to do something .
There was a debate in June on the same issue , and yet between June and now the situation has unfortunately not improved but deteriorated .
The extent and the severity of our concern is reflected in the growing number of statements published also by the European Union since the June debate - eight more to date .
You mentioned many cases and I also would like to mention a few .
Last week , for instance , the day after the EU deplored the hanging of Mr Hejazi , a minor , yet another juvenile execution took place .
On 26 August Mr Zaree was put to death at the prison in Shiraz .
This was despite specific calls for mercy emanating not only from the European Union , but also from all over the world , notably from the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights .
Mr Zaree 's execution has brought the number of juvenile executions - as you have said - since the beginning of this year to the very high number of six .
Information suggests that there are over a hundred minors on death row in Iran .
Unfortunately the death toll keeps rising .
As we speak , yet another minor , Mr Soleimanian , faces imminent execution .
The moratorium on youth executions , decreed by Iran 's Chief Judiciary , is blatantly and repeatedly violated by his own judges .
Regarding the question of Camp Ashraf , the Geneva Conventions should of course apply as for anyone else .
In the case of forceful deportation to Iran of Camp Ashraf residents , necessary representations towards the Government of Iran will have to be made .
We have tried on many occasions either to speak up openly or to try discreet diplomacy .
I , myself , on every occasion when either the Foreign Minister or the President of the Parliament came to see me on other issues - on nuclear issues - always made the case very strongly .
We were only successful in one case and that was the stoning of women .
I have always spoken out against that but , as you can imagine , I am also totally against what is happening to young people and of course , to the death sentence in general .
However the Iranian authorities ' ears are largely deaf to our calls . We sometimes , therefore , have no choice but to resort to the so-called ' megaphone diplomacy ' that Tehran claims to abhor and reject .
Iran must face up to its own responsibilities .
Its behaviour can only cast a shadow over its already tainted international reputation .
Without a concrete improvement in the human rights situation , our common objective of developing the relationship between the European Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran cannot proceed properly , even if the nuclear issue were to be solved .
I trust that the European Parliament and all EU partners will agree to this line and act accordingly .
Today I call once more on the authorities of the Islamic Republic of Iran to fully abide by the international conventions to which it is party . I call on Iran to spare the lives of all minors still languishing on death row .
The whole human rights situation is indeed very difficult .
As you know , we had a human rights dialogue , but unfortunately this did not work .
We tried to work on public diplomacy and we are working closely with EU Member States to pursue a well-coordinated public diplomacy .
We have allocated EUR 3 million for a TV news service in Farsi .
We are also trying to work with civil society in Iran , but many obstacles are being put in our way .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - This Parliament supports the total abolition of the death penalty around the world .
Unfortunately there is a long way to go .
Therefore we have to try to make what progress we can .
We welcome the suspension of the use of stoning as a means of execution for women in Iran .
We urge the Majlis to urgently amend legislation in order to ensure that no one is executed for crimes committed when less than 18 years of age .
We should also condemn the imprisonment and persecution of Iranian citizens who campaign for human rights and the abolition of the death penalty .
In the present circumstances we call on Iraqi and US authorities not to forcibly return to Iran refugees and asylum-seekers and to work to find a long-term solution to the situation facing those people currently in limbo in Camp Ashraf .
3 .
Albino killings in Tanzania
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on albino killings in Tanzania .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in the 21st century people are being murdered simply because they are albinos .
This is happening in Tanzania , a country where over a third of the population is living below the poverty threshold .
In recent times , 173 individuals have been arrested on suspicion of killing or injuring albinos . This indicates the scale of the problem .
Twenty-five people have been killed or injured because they were albinos during the last six months .
There is a sizeable population of albinos in the world .
In fact , 50 out of every million persons are albinos .
It is only in Tanzania , however , that they are treated so cruelly .
In that country , the blood and body parts of albinos are traded . The responsibility for this lies with animist witch doctors and the gangs they employ .
It should be noted that the police also bear a share of the blame as they tend to turn a blind eye .
As I conclude , I should like to point out that we will only be able to consider that our protest here today has been effective if and when medical care , education and the opportunity to integrate into society are made available to albinos in Tanzania .
Today we are discussing a case of discrimination against a minority .
The minority in question are albinos , who are being killed and mutilated in Tanzania , including small children .
This is a serious problem throughout sub-Saharan Africa .
I would like to remind you that albinism affects one in 20 000 people worldwide .
As mentioned in the previous speech , witch-doctors in Tanzania sell severed body parts and blood from albinos to miners and fishermen , who naively believe that they can bring them luck , health and fortune .
Our position is very clear - the killing of albinos and discrimination against them is totally unacceptable and should not be tolerated .
The Tanzanian Government must take consistent measures to end this dreadful situation .
The Government and President of Tanzania have already started to implement measures , which we appreciate , but it is not enough .
The court case in which 173 people suspected of albino killings are to be tried will be a litmus test that will reveal the disposition of those in power in Tanzania , and the guilty must be punished .
However , the best way to solve the problem would be through better education and adequate health care that is accessible to all the citizens of this country , including albinos .
The international community as well as the European Union should render assistance in overcoming these problems .
Most people with albinism die of skin cancer before they reach age 30 .
author . - Mr President , people with the genetic defect of albinism , apart from serious health-care problems , suffer various degrees of discrimination internationally .
But recently in sub-Saharan Africa , and especially in Tanzania , albinos have , in addition , suffered unprecedented barbaric attacks of mutilation , with their body parts being used by witchcraft doctors as ingredients in the production of potions that are promised to make people rich .
Such a state of affairs , apart from its obvious criminality , points towards a seriously backward society in which sickeningly brutal witchcraft practices are still operating .
The government of Tanzania has an obligation to act swiftly and decisively in the following aspects : firstly , to protect all albinos from further attacks ; secondly , to investigate fully all crimes against albinos and bring those responsible to justice ; thirdly , to educate their citizens sufficiently , so as to rid them from the curse of witchcraft and superstition and , fourthly , to make sure that people with albinism are offered the best possible medical and social assistance they need in order to lead near-normal , safe and peaceful lives .
Mr President , what is going on in Tanzania is not violence perpetrated by the State .
The discrimination and violence are practices which have survived from the time before the Judeo-Christian-Islamic civilisations , a time when there was no assumption of the equality of all persons .
Tanzania has 150 000 inhabitants who , due to a shortage of the colour pigment melanin , have red eyes , pale skin and fair hair .
They are seen as products of witchcraft .
Many of these people are murdered , after which their skin is stripped off and their skin and other body parts are used in magic rituals .
Because of its large number of albinos , Tanzania is the largest supplier of human body parts for the whole of Africa .
It will not be possible to put an end to these horrific practices without actively educating ordinary people in Tanzania and throughout Africa , providing better medical care and ensuring better access for albinos to prominent jobs .
The Tanzanian Government is taking measures , including a register of all albinos , with a view to being able to protect them .
Without changing attitudes on the position of albinos , this register could be misused in future to track down these people and exterminate them .
We had bad experiences in Europe in the 1940s with the registration of threatened population groups .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the plight of albino people in Tanzania seems barely credible in today 's age .
When I first heard about this issue , it seemed like something straight out of Joseph Conrad 's novel Heart of Darkness .
I would like to believe in the renaissance and potential of Africa , as so many other colleagues in this House seem to , but the murder of albino people for their body parts does nothing to improve the image of the continent internationally .
Sadly , the suffering of albino people is not limited to Tanzania but occurs all over Africa .
Quite apart from the medical consequences of albinism in the tropics , including a high risk of terrible skin cancers , the long-suffering albino people are at best traditionally considered as freaks or curiosities , and at worst they are murdered to satisfy demand for traditional medicine that is more akin to medieval sorcery .
The EU should not hesitate to campaign on the issue and bring pressure to bear on countries like Tanzania , where , apparently , such scant regard for human rights and dignity is common .
However , I am heartened that the Tanzanian President has appealed to his people to change their traditional ways .
Let us hope that other leaders throughout Africa repeat this important message .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in March of this year over 25 albinos living in the vicinity of Lake Victoria , were brutally murdered or maimed .
The victims included children .
People alleged to have supernatural characteristics had been the subject of attacks in that area in the past .
It should be recalled that 36 % of Tanzania 's population lives below the poverty threshold . To all intents and purposes these people have no access to health care .
Normal practice is to turn to local witch doctors for help .
The low level of education of the local population contributes to its belief in supernatural characteristics .
A large number of albinos live in the territory of sub-Saharan Africa and they have become the victims of open discrimination because they are different .
Not only are albinos denied the right to health care , but they are also denied the right to social and legal assistance .
It is standard practice to discriminate against albinos in daily life , in schools , in public institutions and on the labour market .
Albinos feel that they are being constantly humiliated and treated like second-class citizens .
The current intolerance could be countered and the number of attacks against albinos reduced in future by penalising those guilty of murder whilst at the same time undertaking fundamental awareness-raising work within Tanzanian society .
It is essential to support the initiatives taken by the Tanzanian Government in this regard .
Such initiatives include special protection for albino children along with cooperation with civil society and non-governmental organisations .
Actions should be focused first and foremost on rural areas , where social awareness is at its lowest .
In addition , the Commission and the Member States should give strong support to the emergency actions undertaken by the Tanzania Albino Society .
Longer-term measures should aim at ensuring that the albino population enjoys full rights in terms of access to education , the labour market and also to social and health protection .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , since March of this year 25 albinos have been murdered in Tanzania .
These murders are connected with the superstitious practices current in the area and are based on the belief that albino body parts such as the feet , hands , hair and blood will make a person healthy , wealthy and rich .
The latest victim was a seven-year-old child .
Last year too , 25 albinos lost their lives .
These occult practices take place along the shores of Lake Victoria , in farming areas and also amongst fishermen and miners .
Albinos are often the victims of discrimination and persecution .
President Kikwete has been using the police to try and locate albinos in hiding .
The President has promised to provide albinos with protection , but the albinos remain mistrustful , because some police officers are also involved in occult practices .
Witch doctors ' gangs are responsible for organising the murder of albinos .
One hundred and seventy-eight local people have been arrested on suspicion of involvement in the murders .
The President of Tanzania has been instrumental in the appointment of Mrs Kway-Geer as the country 's first albino Member of Parliament in recognition of her fight against discrimination .
We welcome this appointment as a step in the right direction .
We support the activities of the Tanzania Albino Society and trust that the Commission will offer it genuine support .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today discussing breaches of human rights in Tanzania .
The latter is a subtropical country where albinos are discriminated against , as is the case in many other African countries .
Albinos are murdered in a particularly brutal fashion in Tanzania , however . Last year more than 25 individuals lost their lives in this way .
There are 39 million Tanzanians , 270 thousand of which suffer from a genetic defect caused by the presence of a recessive gene which means their skin lacks pigment .
Consequently , albinos can suffer from sight problems , sunburn , cancer and premature death .
Both parents have to be carriers of the gene for the condition to become apparent in their children .
Women who give birth to albino babies are forced into divorce . The children are considered to be a curse on their family .
They are thought to be possessed by unclean spirits and are treated as animals . On the other hand , however , witch doctors spread tales of the magical properties of albinos ' white skin , which allegedly helps to bring luck and wealth .
This leads to the killing of albinos who are then brutally quartered and their body parts used in the production of potions .
It is hard to understand what the reason for such cruelty might be and what purpose it could serve . Perhaps it is an attempt to eliminate sick people who have a genetic defect .
In recent times , the government has condemned the use of force against white-skinned Africans and run educational campaigns . An albino member of parliament has even been appointed .
Nonetheless , the tragedy affecting these people still continues . In addition , there is a lack of funding for protective clothing and other assistance for this marginalised sector of the population which is discriminated against and denied work and education .
Protests and appeals by the international community , together with educational and financial help would help to counter extreme discrimination of this type . Bringing legal proceedings against the 173 would-be witch doctors arrested and accused of murderous activity , incitement to murder and trade in human organs would also help .
Mr President , I would just like to add my voice of support to that of colleagues on all sides of this House about the appalling story of the treatment of albinos in Tanzania .
I know it happens in other parts of Africa but there is a concentration in Tanzania - we have heard the number of 270 000 albinos - who are discriminated against , who are marginalised , brutalised and murdered for their body parts due to superstition , witchcraft and various occult practices .
By raising this issue here ( and I commend all my colleagues who have raised it and those who put this item on the agenda ) , we add our voice in the European Parliament to the international voice of protest , and hopefully the Tanzanian Government - and indeed others - will listen .
It is a question mainly of education but , above all , we need protection for albinos within their own communities ; we need full investigation .
The fact that some of the police force are part of the problem and cannot be trusted to be part of the solution is extremely worrying .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we share Parliament 's outrage at the increasing number of attacks in Tanzania against the albino population and at the abhorrent and illegal trade in albino body parts linked to traditional medicine , to superstition and to the practices of witch doctors .
In particular , we share the concerns recently reported by the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women that , for instance , albino women and girls have been targeted very specifically in ritual killings .
We condemn all forms of discrimination and victimisation , and we are committed to supporting policies and actions aimed at eradicating them .
The Government of Tanzania , too , it must be said , is committed to stamping out these practices and raising awareness of the plight of the albino population .
Therefore , we welcome the nomination of an albino Member of Parliament , the recent arrests of some witch doctors , and the President 's commitment , as has been mentioned , to bringing those responsible to justice .
We also closely monitor the human rights situation in general in Tanzania , together with Member States and other development partners .
Several Member States and other partners are supporting organisations , such as the Legal and Human Rights Centre , which regularly monitor possible human rights violations .
As a member of the Donor Group on Governance , the Commission will continue to coordinate donor responses to addressing the problem , including the Albino Association .
The Commission will also , with Member States in Tanzania , raise the problem in its political dialogue with the Tanzanian authorities .
The EUR 3 million EDF-funded Civil Society Programme will help to create awareness : workshops are being organised to highlight the albino situation and a new sensitisation campaign is shortly to be implemented in the Mwanza region of Northern Tanzania .
So , in general , we use our regular dialogues to refer to this issue .
These questions are , of course , also being raised in our ongoing exercise concerning public funds and the health , education and employment sectors .
We believe that an independent and functioning judicial system is vital .
Therefore , we , the Commission , in our contacts with the authorities , will underline the importance of appropriate legal action being taken against the perpetrators of these horrible acts .
We will also contact the honourable Kway-Geer , the first Albino Member of Parliament in Tanzania ( she has already been mentioned ) , and discuss possible actions with her , because she can tell us even better what can be done .
Finally , together with the presidency in Tanzania , we will discuss this issue at the 60th anniversary of the signature of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights planned in Tanzania on 10 December 2008 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately after the debates .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Coup in Mauritania ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Mr President , my apologies for being late for the debate earlier on .
This was due to the fact that we were trying to agree the terms of an oral amendment relating to paragraph 8 .
This is the oral amendment as agreed : ' Notes the announcement of new presidential elections by the junta , but deplores the failure - contrary to the position of the 2005-2007 junta - of a commitment to neutrality ; calls on the military in power to commit themselves forthwith to a timetable for the restoration of the democratic institutions , in cooperation with the political forces ' .
In relation to paragraph 10 , there is a typographical correction to be made which was agreed in the discussions .
The last line of paragraph 10 should read ' which could lead to the freezing of aid , excluding food and humanitarian assistance ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
2 .
Hangings in Iran ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I propose putting these amendments at the end of the resolution .
I apologise for doing so at the last moment , but it has to do with the UN moratorium on the death penalty , on which Parliament has already expressed a view on three occasions .
That is why I believe a purely oral amendment to be acceptable .
The two paragraphs I am proposing are as follows . I shall read them out very slowly in English :
' Calls for the presentation of a resolution , at the next UN General Assembly , with a request to all countries who retain the death penalty to make available to the UN Secretary-General and to public opinion all information on capital punishment and executions , so as to overcome the state secret on the death penalty , which is also a direct cause of a greater number of executions ' .
The second paragraph is as follows :
' Calls for the new resolution to foresee the figure of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General , with the task of monitoring the situation , ensuring maximum transparency in the capital punishment system and favouring an internal process directed at the implementation of the United Nations resolution on the moratorium on executions ' .
( IT ) I realise that this is , let us say , an additional subject on the issue of Iran , but it is also an issue on which rapid action is needed .
I therefore ask you to accept this addition to our resolution .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
author . - Mr President , the two amendments relate firstly to Article 9 .
We have a specific request from the UNHCR that it not be mentioned in the resolution .
I think that this is absolutely acceptable and , according to this amendment , I ask for the words ' starting to notably work together with the UNHCR and others ' to be deleted .
Please note that in this amendment we also include Mr Hutchinson 's oral amendment , in which he also asked for the opposition members to be included .
Concerning recital K , we also had the same request in connection with the same principle that I have already mentioned .
Here the words that we ask to be deleted from the resolution are ' under Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention ' .
It should also be noted here that we are also including Mr Kelam 's oral amendment .
Given the fact that this is a specific request from the UNHCR , I insist that we should take them into consideration .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I believe that what has just been said should be corrected .
I can guarantee to this House that the United Nations High Commissioner has not at any time suggested this nor is he in agreement with what has just been said by our fellow Member .
I therefore call on the House not to vote for what is being proposed .
This would call into question the most important point , as underlined by the Commissioner , which is the protection offered by the Geneva Convention to prisoners in Camp Ashraf .
We should therefore not accept this amendment as tabled .
I must also point out that this would be in total contradiction to what was proposed by my colleague , Mr Hutchinson , and also our fellow Member from the Group of the European People 's Party .
I therefore vehemently reject this oral amendment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to say that our Group is also opposed to this oral amendment and is of the opinion that the Convention should continue to be mentioned , which is what was negotiated at the beginning of the week .
Mr President , I am really against joining , in recital K , my oral amendment , which is to re