Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 28 January 1999 .
Statement by the President
I should like to inform the House that I have addressed a telegram to the Jordanian royal family and to the President of the Jordanian Parliament , expressing the European Parliament 's condolences on the death of King Hussein .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday , 28 January 1999 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on a point of order .
I wrote to you last week drawing your attention to a letter which was addressed to you , dated 28 October , from President Santer of the Commission .
Although it was addressed to you , the letter was in fact in response to a letter from me .
I wrote to President Santer on 28 October ; his reply , addressed to you , came on 7 January .
I rise not about the substance of the letter but to ask whether it is normal practice for the Commission to respond to letters from Members in this way and whether it is acceptable that there should be a ten-week delay .
Perhaps I should add that the correspondence was to do with matters that were very much under debate during the last part-session .
I would ask for your view of the conduct of the Commission in this regard .
Mr Chichester , as you will appreciate , this is a question that only the Commission can answer , especially as regards the delay .
Perhaps you could put the question to the Commission in the normal way .
In any case , when I meet President Santer , which happens very often now , I will raise the question with him .
Mr President , my name is not on the attendance register in the Minutes .
As there is proof of my attendance in the form of various comments and in the roll-call votes , I would ask you to add my name to the register .
Thank you , Mr Malangré .
We shall make the necessary checks .
Mr President , I am shown as voting for Amendment No 6 to Mr Garot 's report .
I do not know if that was my fault , but in any case I intended to reject this very important amendment .
I wanted to vote against it .
That will be corrected .
Mr President , I should like to point out that I was in fact present at the last sitting on 28 January .
I apologise for not signing the attendance register .
The vote took so long and I was so tired by the time I left that I forgot to sign .
Please note that I was present on that occasion .
Thank you , Mrs García Arias .
That will be noted .
The Minutes were approved
I give the floor to Mr Spencer .
Mr President , I wish to make a short personal statement of apology to the House .
The greatest of Conservative prime ministers is supposed to have advised parliamentarians : ' never apologise , never explain ' .
I intend to disregard half of Benjamin Disraeli 's words of wisdom .
The act which brought my private life to public attention was one of extraordinary foolishness .
I broke the law of England , Her Majesty 's customs officers treated me fairly , and I paid the penalty .
While I believe that my personal life has always been , and continues to be , rooted in love , I accept that it may cause genuine offence to my colleagues .
I wish , therefore , to offer a personal apology to anyone who is offended , to every Member of this House .
I love this House and I love this Chamber .
I was here at the hour of our democratic birth in 1979 and I was here for the censure debate , when we came of age .
I believe in Parliament , and I believe in Europe , and future historians will understand that the spirit of Europe lives here .
I wish , therefore , to make it clear to those who would use my stupidity and hubris to attack Europe and its Parliament , that the fault is mine and mine alone .
I offer my apology to Parliament .
Applause
I should like to thank Mr Spencer for his statement .
He has addressed the House with dignity and indeed with courage .
He and his family have paid a heavy price for what is a personal matter .
We in this Parliament must respect the dividing-line between private issues and public and political matters .
Applause
The House has expressed its sentiments on the question and , pursuant to Rule 108 , no debate is necessary .
Applause
Membership of Parliament
The Spanish authorities have informed me that Mr Carlos María Bru Purón has been appointed to replace Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza with effect from 4 February 1999 .
I am unable to welcome Mr Bru to the Chamber at present , because he experienced the same problems as I did - fewer means of transport - and travelled on an aircraft from Paris which arrived over two hours late .
I should like to say , however , how very much I regret Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza 's resignation , and especially the reasons for it .
Those of us who are aware of the situation are all very saddened .
Applause
Mr President , thank you for your comments . I would be grateful if you could send an appropriate telegram to Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza .
Applause
I shall certainly convey the message , and also Parliament 's sympathy .
Mr President , you have just explained that our colleague Carmen Díez de Rivera has resigned from Parliament .
We are all aware of her reasons for doing so .
As a member of the Spanish Socialist delegation Carmen was part of , I would like to speak for the whole delegation and say how very much we regret her departure . We shall miss her strong campaigning in favour of the environment and in favour of European integration .
Please note her colleagues ' appreciation in the Minutes .
Applause
Mr President , I would like to add my voice to Mrs García Arias ' . I am sure that not only will the Spanish Socialists regret Mrs Díez de Rivera 's departure , but that she will be sorely missed by all Members of this House , whatever their nationality .
We all pay tribute to our fellow Member 's work .
We are aware that she resigned for health reasons , and hope she will recover and be able to return to the House .
She will be constantly in our thoughts . We recognise the significance of her work and pay tribute to her unfailingly friendly and approachable manner in her dealings with all Members , regardless of their political affiliation .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to say that we , too , very much regret that Carmen Díez de Rivera is unable to continue her work in the House .
We worked together for many long hours , and came to know her as a friend . We valued the personal dignity , common sense and spirit of solidarity that always characterised her work and are very sorry that events should have taken such a turn .
Carmen will always be in our thoughts .
Mr President , lest it be thought that it is only the Spanish Members who appreciate Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza I , as one of her friends in this group , would like to say how concerned we are for her health and how deeply we regret that she will not be with us for a while .
Hopefully she will come back .
She is much loved throughout Europe .
She knows my country very well , and there will be great distress when they hear she is ill and unable to continue her work here in Parliament .
Mr President , on behalf of the Spanish Socialist delegation , I should like to express my appreciation for the tributes paid to my colleague today by so many Members of the House , not all of them Socialists . I shall pass on their kind words to Carmen Díez de Rivera myself .
She is certainly much loved here and , as Alonso Puerta said , let us hope she makes a speedy recovery .
Mr President , I have been here longer than any other Member , and ever since Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza came we have been close personal friends .
I admired her in every respect , as a friend , as a politician and as a loyal Member of this Chamber .
I would like my words to be added to the tributes she has had .
Mr President , I had the good fortune to serve alongside Mrs Díez de Rivera Icaza on the Environment Committee from 1984 to 1989 .
She really had a great fighting spirit , but at the same time she was flexible and ever cheerful .
She and I , and also Beate Weber , worked together very successfully during that period .
On behalf of our entire group I would like to wish her a speedy recovery and a good future .
I shall pass on these unanimous sentiments to Mrs Díez de Rivera .
Monitoring mechanism for greenhouse gas emissions
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0052 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 8829 / 98 - C4-0542 / 98-96 / 0192 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Decision amending Decision 93 / 389 / EEC for a monitoring mechanism of Community CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions ( Rapporteur : Mr Fitzsimons ) .
I give the floor to Mr Hyland , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Mr President , I should firstly like to apologise on behalf of my colleague Mr Fitzsimons who is unavoidably absent and has asked me to present this report in his place .
In 1993 a decision was adopted establishing a monitoring mechanism for the Community 's anthropogenic CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions .
Having a monitoring mechanism for greenhouse gas emissions in place has always made sense as part of an overall coherent strategy to limit greenhouse gas emissions and improve energy efficiency .
This monitoring mechanism serves a double purpose .
It could monitor progress towards the stabilisation of CO2 emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000 in the Community and it could monitor the fulfilment of the Community 's commitments under the United Nations framework convention on climate change which entered into force in 1994 .
The Kyoto Protocol adopted in December 1997 established principles and introduced legally-binding targets and timetables for Annex 1 countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions .
At COP IV in Buenos Aires in November last year some further progress was made .
For the first time parties agreed to the adoption of a single plan of action .
The Buenos Aires plan of action contains an important list of commitments with timetables on a range of key issues which will help to achieve the Kyoto objectives .
A monitoring mechanism is all the more necessary now .
Many assessments would indicate that CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions are likely to increase significantly .
At the same time the Community has signed up to the Kyoto Protocol and has committed itself to a reduction in its emissions of carbon dioxide and a group of other gases of 8 % below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012 , that is 5.2 % in the case of Kyoto Protocol parties as a whole .
It is as simple as this .
We need a reliable efficient system for measuring and monitoring our emissions .
This draft recommendation is the outcome of Parliament 's and Council 's consideration of the Commission 's updating proposal of 1996 .
Parliament held its first reading of this proposal in September 1997 .
The Council 's common position was received by Parliament in October 1998 .
In the meantime , of course , the 1996 / 97 proposal and report have been largely superseded by the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol .
The common position has done a workman-like job of updating the mechanism to make it consistent with the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol .
It has also incorporated several of Parliament 's amendments .
However , while the rapporteur is on the whole satisfied with these aspects of the common position , he has retabled some of Parliament 's amendments from the first reading which he feels will strengthen the text .
Other amendments have been added to lend further coherence to the new elements introduced into the common position by the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol .
Most of the amendments are self-explanatory , but Mr Fitzsimons would like to draw your attention to two compromise amendments that he has tabled .
One of the amendments is a compromise reached between Mr Fitzsimons and Mrs Pollack : it strengthens the text and is in line with two requirements of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol .
The second amendment is a compromise between the rapporteur , Mr Fitzsimons , and the Commission : it deals with the evaluation of progress and draws attention to the absence or incompleteness of newly reported data from Member States .
If the proposal does not provide for sanctions , the compromise text on Article 6 by Mr Fitzsimons and the Commission is , in his view , the best way forward .
Mr Fitzsimons hopes that Members will be able to support these compromise amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , any agreement on CO2 emissions is of course meaningless without a sensible monitoring mechanism .
We have to be able to check compliance with what has been agreed .
Otherwise , we can agree or negotiate whatever we like , but without a monitoring mechanism it means nothing .
That is why we need to get to work as quickly as possible on creating a consistent monitoring mechanism for the European Union .
The Commission submitted its proposal on 4 September 1996 , so we have been discussing this for nearly three years .
I think this is disgraceful when you think of all the developments since then and the urgent need to make progress on climate protection .
That is why I am anxious that there should not be any further delay , and that we should be in a position to implement this directive as quickly as possible .
Nevertheless , I do have a few reservations , especially because subsequent developments have meant that some aspects of the international negotiations on CO2 reduction have not been taken into account yet .
Nowadays , we are no longer negotiating about whether and by how many percent CO2 emissions should be reduced .
No-one is disputing that any more .
The negotiations are now about whether emissions can be traded and in what framework .
That has not been included here yet , so to that extent this legislation needs to be developed further .
And of course to do that we also need a framework guaranteeing the democratic rights of Parliament .
The Council 's amendment of Article 8 is arguably so substantial that we ought to consider , in accordance with Rule 62 of our Rules of Procedure , whether this debate should continue at all .
I believe that we should finally get this sorted out here and now , so that we at least have an instrument that would enable us to make progress and set up a monitoring system .
So I do not advocate going down that particular road .
However , in view of developments in the CO2 debate , and given the issue of Parliament 's democratic participation , I would like to put two questions to you here in the House , Commissioner , and I would also ask you to reply to these two questions in the House .
The first question is about comitology .
Article 8 provides for a specific regulatory committee . However , even if our amendment is accepted , the Commission alone will bear responsibility for further development .
So my first question is whether the Commission can assure us that Parliament will be kept informed about agreements reached in this committee and about further development , both promptly and in detail .
Secondly , in view of the need for further development of monitoring systems , can the Commission assure us that a new amendment to this directive will be brought forward , and that in particular flexible mechanisms for emissions trading will be covered in this new version ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lange has just mentioned that if we want to achieve objectives , we also need to produce proof .
It is intended that in order to counteract the greenhouse effect the level of emissions recorded in 1990 should not be exceeded .
It is of course because of carbon dioxide , that is CO2 , and other greenhouse gases that , as the experts have it , warming is occurring .
Admittedly , looking outside , it does not seem to be getting warmer , quite the opposite .
Nevertheless , you know that the seasons vary quite dramatically and that overall there will probably be a warming effect here .
That is why there has been a call at global level for each region to make its own contribution .
I can only say that this version of the directive as it stands in the common position also fully reflects the wishes of my group .
Various amendments proposed by Parliament have already been accepted , but now there are more .
I would like to ask Commissioner Bjerregaard if she is able to accept the committee 's amendments .
This is important for us , because we believe that our amendments make for greater precision .
However , I would like to repeat that we believe this system gives us a reliable basis for preparing further legislative action , as without this overview we are really fishing in the dark .
We will only be able to ensure that we have reliable data once effective measuring and monitoring systems come into force .
Important decisions have been taken at international level since the first reading , and these have been picked up in the common position .
For example , the European Union 's greenhouse gas monitoring system has been adapted to the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol .
This legislation therefore has an important part to play in implementing European climate protection policy .
I believe that Europe is really well ahead of other parts of the world in this field .
This also applies to the reporting requirements of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , which stipulate that a body of data is required and that we cannot examine results until we have this data .
So I must say that the work done by Parliament in conjunction with the Commission and the Council has been a success .
I hope that we will be able to complete it as soon as possible , and that there will be no more delays , as it is important for Europe to set a good example .
Mr President , Mr Fitzsimons has done a good job on his report .
Monitoring CO2 emissions is very important in ensuring that the commitments given in the Kyoto Protocol are met .
It serves a dual purpose , evaluating progress made in reducing greenhouse gases and also in fulfilling commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change .
I support the European Commission 's proposal to extend the monitoring of emissions beyond the year 2000 .
It is also useful to extend the monitoring system to include anthropogenic emissions and reductions .
Nevertheless , it will remain very difficult to monitor greenhouse gases , where a staggering number of factors are involved in determining emissions and concentrations .
This system for monitoring CO2 emissions is therefore very much a first attempt and we should have no illusions about this .
I very much support the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the debate on reducing greenhouse gases is like a never-ending story .
Everyone talks about it , and everyone is convinced that it must happen , but when it comes to actually implementing it the picture is not so rosy .
Both reports are helpful steps in the right direction , but we need to be clear about what is fundamentally at stake here .
The amount of CO2 emitted every day world-wide is equivalent to the total amount for the 3 000 years before the industrial revolution .
If we extrapolate this figure to a whole year , we find that this corresponds to a period of 1 million years for every year .
In other words , every year we are releasing as much CO2 as was previously released in a million years of the world 's history .
And these are scientific results .
No one can predict precisely how long the earth 's atmosphere can sustain this , or what the long-term consequences will be .
No one disputes that the effects are already perceptible now .
The important thing is for the reduction targets to be met as quickly as possible .
In this context , the amendments to the Hautala report tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection are crucial .
Technically speaking , it is certainly quite feasible to bring the measures forward by two to four years .
People often recommend switching from oil and coal to natural gas as a way of achieving the Kyoto objectives , but this is not a real solution .
It is true that compared with oil and coal , less CO2 is released during direct combustion of natural gas , but large quantities of methane escape at the exploration stage .
At the same time , an enormous amount of power is consumed in transporting energy from Siberia or Algeria to Europe .
The former Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs and current President of Georgia , Edvard Shevardnadze , has admitted that up to 50 % of methane gas transported escapes into the atmosphere .
These considerations also need to be taken into account if total greenhouse gases are to be correctly calculated .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 in the Fitzsimons report , which delete the words ' as far as possible ' , are particularly important .
Those Member States with no particular interest in reducing greenhouse gases could use these three words to avoid meeting their obligations in full .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I do not have very much to add to the previous speakers ' remarks .
I would like to ask Mr Hyland to convey my congratulations to Mr Fitzsimons on his report , particularly because of the way he has highlighted essential points and cut out irrelevant detail .
I would just like to add one further point about measurement being necessary if we are to establish precisely where reductions in emissions need to be made first and in what way , and how we can then check whether objectives are being achieved . Once we have adopted this legislation , applicant countries will have to adopt it as common legislation during their preparations for accession , enabling them to bring their strategy more into line with EU strategy at an early stage and to use the same measurement techniques as the existing Member States .
This means that on accession they can be assimilated seamlessly into the European emission reduction strategy for achieving the Kyoto objectives .
This is something I attach great importance to .
I also believe that we cannot achieve everything we are now discussing about flexible mechanisms without precise measurement both within the European Union and world-wide .
In this context I would like to remind you that the flexible mechanism most successfully implemented so far , both for the environment and for industry , namely the reduction in CO2 emissions by US industry , has worked because penalties applied if obligations entered into were not met within the relevant time frame .
I wonder if we should not consider something like this in the European Union , especially given that Member States do not always report their figures , data and reductions to the Commission on time , so that the Commission 's reports to the Parliament are delayed and it is not clear why this is happening .
I think we would all very much welcome it if it were possible to monitor from the outset what measurements are being taken , what efforts Member States are making and what needs to be done to coordinate those efforts in order to achieve the Kyoto objectives .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the Environment Committee and Mr Hyland , who spoke on behalf of the rapporteur , Mr Fitzsimons .
I would like to thank Parliament for the work that has been done , and for the attention that has been devoted to this proposal .
We all know that , after the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol , it is extremely important to have a clear and effective monitoring mechanism for CO2 and other greenhouse gases .
There is an obvious link between such a mechanism and the Protocol .
Compliance with the Kyoto obligations is of course the most important aspect , if we want to show that our action has a real effect in moderating climate change .
Having said that , I recognise that the present proposal for an amendment to Decision No 389 / 93 on a monitoring mechanism does not cover all the elements in the Kyoto Protocol . Several speakers have drawn attention to this .
There are for example no provisions on how the mechanisms are to be monitored .
There are good reasons for that .
To begin with , it must be remembered that the Commission presented its original proposal to the Council in September 1996 , in other words a long time before the Kyoto summit , and it is true , as Mr Lange said , that much has happened since then .
Secondly - and this is perhaps more important - the principles , rules and guidelines that govern these mechanisms have not yet been laid down at international level .
If we look at the Buenos Aires Plan of Action , they must be laid down within two years from now at COP VI .
The Commission 's stance has always been clear in this respect .
As soon as we have greater clarity on how these flexible arrangements are to operate , we will present a new decision on monitoring which will cover this key aspect of the Protocol , and it is clear that we will continue to be active in this matter .
As far as the amendments are concerned , let me say that the Commission can support all those which have been tabled .
Mr Lange put one or two specific questions to me .
One was about further proposals . Certainly there will be some .
I expect to have a new communication ready in the spring , which was also mentioned at the recent part-session in Brussels .
And as regards contact with Parliament , quite clearly that is important .
It was important in connection with the progress which we made in Kyoto and Buenos Aires .
In Brussels we spoke about the need to improve cooperation with the European Parliament , not least in connection with the forthcoming COP negotiations . Whatever happens , I will certainly play my part in ensuring that Parliament is actively involved in our continued work .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Reduction of sulphur content of liquid fuels
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0002 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 10577 / 98 - C4-0564 / 98-97 / 0105 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive relating to a reduction of the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels and amending Directive 93 / 12 / EEC ( Rapporteur : Mrs Hautala ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal concerns the view that emissions that acidify the atmosphere should be reduced to a minimum .
The Union has a strategy for acidification , and this proposal relates to legislation to limit the sulphur content of liquid fuel oils .
As we know , sulphur falls to the earth , acidifies the soil and does harm to nature .
It also causes damage to buildings .
It thus has many kinds of adverse effects .
If we look at the common position of the Council of Ministers we could say the European Parliament has already in fact convinced the Council , in certain respects , of the justification for our views .
The Council has acted as we hoped it would : the Council and the Commission have , for example , jointly decided to start fixing limits for the sulphur content of fuel oils used on ships .
This is undoubtedly to be seen as a step forward .
The Council has also approved in principle the view of Parliament that the sulphur content of light fuel oil should be limited far more drastically than was originally intended .
This is also highly satisfactory .
The problem remains , however , that the Council 's common position , which is a unanimous compromise , will mean this reduction in the sulphur content of light fuel oil will not take place until the start of 2008 , and that can hardly be regarded at this stage as a hugely radical move .
We really are talking about very long transition periods if we start to enact laws now that will not come into force until the year 2008 .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection therefore proposes a compromise of sorts , which is that this stricter sulphur content limit for light fuel oil should come into force by the year 2004 .
Then there is the very important question of how the sulphur content of heavy fuel oil should be limited .
The difference of opinion that still exists between the Council of Ministers and Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , when the common position is examined , lies in the fact that the Council is only prepared to apply a limit to the sulphur content of heavy fuel oil as from the start of 2003 .
Now the Committee is suggesting that we should reach a reasonable compromise here too , with an amendment to come into force by the start of the year 2001 .
There is a certain aspect of this report that is perhaps sometimes forgotten : Finland , Sweden and Austria , when they joined the Union , gained the right to maintain tighter environmental requirements over a four-year term , which ended at the end of last year .
This proposal was originally intended to guarantee that the strict sulphur content limits for light fuel oil which apply in Austria would be adopted throughout the Union .
This is not exactly what has happened .
Member States have not had the courage to go as far as to introduce the sorts of provisions that currently apply in Austria .
This is directly relevant to the view of the Council of Ministers , which is that we cannot achieve the Austrian levels until the year 2008 .
As I said , this really is a long transition period .
On the other hand , it has to be said that the nightmare scenario of Austria giving up its stricter limit values is now not going to happen .
Things have been organised in such a way that the legal basis of the proposal is Article 130s . It is thus a minimum requirement , which enables Austria to maintain its own stricter limit values .
We could say that , at least as far as this is concerned , the worst has not happened .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , and I have been very firm in our dealings with the Council about the Auto-Oil programme .
We also went into battle over the reduction in the sulphur content of fuels and really thought that the fight was going to go to a second round .
But it has now turned out that this is not really necessary .
Which is just as well , as the problem of acidification is of course vital for the northern Member States , and we are therefore delighted that the Council has taken almost all Parliament 's requests on board , which means that we finally have a really good piece of legislation .
I cannot help thinking of the words of a German pop song called ' Miracles keep on happening ' .
I must say that in this case the Council has shown that this is true , and that it can sometimes simply accept the proposals made to it by Parliament - well-founded proposals of course .
I would like to highlight one particular point , and that is the inclusion of bunker oil for ships and the need to make progress with negotiations at international level to ensure that the fuel used in ships is as low in sulphur as possible . I say this because potential emissions from this source are now far greater than from power stations on dry land .
Of course there is also a little link with the Auto-Oil programme here : if you demand that oil with a relatively low sulphur content should be supplied for use in cars , it is quite conceivable that the refining industry will hit upon the idea of offering the rest , the mucky stuff , to ships .
In the interests of consistency , identical or at least similar legislation must also apply in this field .
That is why I particularly welcome the inclusion of bunker oil in the directive and I recommend that we should press for regulation at international level .
I have just one very small request relating to Amendment No 1 , which is about the sulphur content of heavy oils .
This is the only thing it will take to make me perfectly happy with this legislation .
In this case the Environment Committee proposes bringing forward the relevant date by two years , from 2003 to 2001 .
This is not an unprincipled suggestion , but really just a reinstatement of your own proposal , Commissioner .
I would therefore urge you to accept at least this one amendment and make my day !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we all agree on the objectives we are trying to achieve as regards acidification .
We are all extremely aware of the problems this causes and we can be content with the common position that included most of the amendments that the European Parliament had adopted at first reading .
As far as heavy fuel oils are concerned , some people are questioning the date set by the Council , which is 1 January 2003 .
I believe that this date is perhaps more sensible as , if we wish to achieve our environmental objectives , we must also take account of one another 's problems . Such problems are not always the same in northern Europe as they are in southern Europe .
As regards gas oil , the Council provides for two stages in reducing sulphur content .
I am always in favour of a gradual reduction rather than setting objectives that , if achieved in a single stage , may sometimes be rather restrictive .
The Council has set an initial deadline of the year 2000 - which is just around the corner - for limiting sulphur content to 0.20 % . It has then set a second deadline of 2008 for limiting this content to 0.10 % .
It also provides for derogations but limits their duration to a five year period from 2008 onwards on the understanding that this derogation period is non-renewable .
We can , I believe , be pleased with the fact that the Council , in its common position , has not covered bunker fuel as this accounts for only 2 % of total sulphur emissions .
However , I believe it is important to remain extremely vigilant in the case of particularly sensitive areas that must be protected , such as the North Sea and the Baltic Sea in particular .
Here , it would be appropriate to take action within the framework of the MARPOL Convention .
I believe it is important to stress this and to be extremely vigilant .
Therefore , we must insist that some areas that are particularly sensitive to sulphur emissions from bunker fuel , such as the areas I have just mentioned , be declared special protection areas .
Lastly , I believe that it is good that aviation fuel , which only accounts for approximately 0.2 % of sulphur emissions , is not included and is not deemed a priority .
In conclusion , there were some difficult negotiations in the Council over this common position and I believe we should bear this in mind .
On the whole , the content is along the lines of what we had hoped to see at first reading .
I believe this is a balanced common position , as it lets us delay until 2003 the entry into force of the limit value for sulphur content in heavy fuels . It also gives stricter guidelines for the exceptions that can be made .
In view of these conditions , the Group of the European People 's Party refuses to systematically try to outdo the Council .
We will vote against the three amendments that have been tabled .
In effect , if the European Parliament adopts a single amendment at second reading , a unanimous or a qualified majority vote is required in the Council , depending on whether or not the Commission accepts the amendment . This will be impossible given the differences of opinion that exist between the northern and southern countries , and given that the oil coming from the Persian Gulf has a higher sulphur content .
Mr President , a dynamic approach to acidifying emissions is required if we are to protect human health , plants and sensitive ecosystems , as well as buildings .
The proposal we have before us is just a part of this approach .
The most effective way of combating acidification is through large furnaces , as these are responsible for 63 % of SO2 emissions in the European Union .
Nevertheless , we are pleased with the Council 's common position on the reduction of the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels .
Thanks to Mrs Hautala 's excellent proposals , the common position now looks a lot better than the original Commission proposal .
I can also wholeheartedly support the few amendments the rapporteur proposes at second reading .
The prospects of meeting the various demands are fair .
The crude oil from Norway , Libya and Russia contains less than 0.5 % sulphur and there are good techniques for desulphurizing the crude oil from the Middle East with its high sulphur content .
Another point is that the heavy fuel oil used by furnaces and cement factories should also contain less sulphur .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the Environment Committee and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , for the valuable work that has been done on this proposal .
I would also like to thank Mrs Hautala and Mr Lange for their comments on the progress that has been made .
The proposal provides for a reduction in total emissions of sulphur dioxide of about 1 million tonnes , of the 3 million tonnes required by the acidification strategy .
The average cost of EUR 700 per tonne of pollution reduction will be far outweighed by the benefits , in particular to public health , which are put - and we have figures for that too - at about EUR 4 000 per tonne .
These figures for costs and effects say something about how important this proposal is .
Most of the 27 amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading have already been incorporated into the common position .
The aim of the common position was to perform the difficult act of striking a balance between what specifications for the sulphur content of a fuel will be necessary to reduce acidification damage and what we think European industry can achieve .
The Commission therefore supported the common position in its communication to the European Parliament .
I will now comment on the three new amendments .
Mr Lange and Mrs Hautala asked directly about Amendment No 1 , which brings the deadline for implementation of the new 1 % limit for sulphur in fuel oil forward from the year 2003 to 2001 .
As Mr Lange also noted , the Commission had originally proposed 2000 , and we regretted in the communication on the common position that the Council had deferred that deadline .
The Commission therefore considers that the Council should take up the matter again .
Hence it follows that we can accept Amendment No 1 and , if that satisfies Mr Lange into the bargain , then that is another plus .
However , as I said before , the common position sought to strike a very careful balance , and we may in the end have to accept that it is not possible to get the Council to change its mind . But at least we shall try .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 and 3 .
Amendment No 2 provides for a different upper limit for sulphur content in fuel oil in conjunction with a possible dispensation from the 1 % requirement .
The Commission wishes to discuss dispensation applications individually on the basis of the criteria laid down in the directive , so in that context the precise upper limit is not so critical .
It should be pointed out that in the common position , the Council has tightened up the conditions for the granting of dispensations by introducing the ' critical load ' concept , which I think we can all find acceptable .
Amendment No 3 seeks to bring forward introduction of the 0.1 % limit for sulphur content in gas oil from the year 2008 to 2004 .
In its communication on the common position , the Commission was favourable towards a tightening-up of the requirements for sulphur content in gas oil from the year 2008 .
The reason why the Commission did not originally propose that tougher standard , however , was that it is not cost-effective throughout Europe .
There is still no justification now for bringing forward the deadline for implementation throughout Europe .
I would therefore emphasise - as the rapporteur , Mrs Hautala , also has - that we are talking about minimum requirements , which was also a key element in the Commission 's original proposal . This means that the Member States are free to introduce the more stringent limit earlier than the year 2008 .
Let me end there , Mr President .
The proposal as it stands will already improve the environment from next year .
It is therefore a good start on the concrete implementation of the acidification strategy .
Thank you for your time and your attention .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Shipments of waste to non-OECD countries
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0001 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 5474 / 98 - C4-0538 / 98-95 / 0029 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Regulation establishing common rules and procedures to apply to shipments to certain non-OECD countries of certain types of waste ( Rapporteur : Mr Virgin ) .
I give the floor to Mrs Jackson , who is deputising for the rapporteur .
Mr President , as the more observant amongst you will have noticed , I am not Mr Virgin .
Mr Virgin is stuck in the snow somewhere between here and Sweden .
He may have got as far as Brussels and is probably now trying to come cross-country with huskies .
I apologise that I am not Mr Virgin , but I am presenting the report in his name .
It is particularly sad that he is not here , because this is an important report which he has worked very hard on over the last few years .
I have only a few remarks to make in relation to it and one very important question to ask the Commissioner , a question which I hope she will be able to answer .
The amendments look extremely technical and they are so .
In particular , Mr Virgin , on behalf of the committee , considers that the new Annex C proposed by the Council should be deleted , as the ban on exports of the types of waste listed are already covered by lists of waste in the Basle Convention , and yet another list further complicates what is already very complex legislation .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could comment on the individual amendments as she goes through them and on their acceptability to the Commission .
The general point I want to make is one that has been raised by a number of Members of the European Parliament , particularly from the United Kingdom .
There is a scare in my country , and possibly other countries as well , that the net effect of this legislation would be to make it much more difficult to export used clothing of the types that are collected by charities to countries that have not replied to the Commission 's questionnaire on the acceptability of exports of waste to them .
Perhaps this sounds complicated , but it does not necessarily have to be .
The trouble is that - perhaps they were not well brought up or something - a number of countries have simply not replied to the questionnaire sent to them by the Commission .
The suspicion has grown amongst Members of the European Parliament that one of the consequences of this is that it would then be extremely difficult to continue to export used clothing to these countries .
The problem is , as we have understood in the course of the debates as it were , off-stage , on Mr Virgin 's report , that used clothing , when collected by organisations belonging to the churches , Oxfam , or whatever , ceases to be a waste once it is sorted and that sorted used clothing does not actually come within the orbit of this directive at all .
Therefore there would be no difficulty for charities and others that export such used clothing .
I spoke this afternoon to the BIR - the Bureau of International Recycling - and was told : ' Yes , that is our understanding , but there is legal uncertainty on this point ' .
My question to the Commissioner - she may not be able to answer now but could perhaps write to us to let us know exactly what her position is - is as follows : is it true , therefore , that there is absolutely nothing flowing from this legislation to prevent charities from our countries exporting quite freely , with no bureaucracy about it , used clothing to those countries - predominantly , I suspect , in Africa - which import them at the moment ?
If it is true , then can we make sure that there is legal certainty on this point ?
If we need legal certainty , does that mean that we therefore need to have some adjustment to this regulation ?
I am sorry to labour this point but it is one which has emerged in what is otherwise a rather technical regulation as a point that people can understand and about which many people are worried .
I would be grateful for the Commissioner 's reply .
Mr President , Commissioner , any economic activity in developed countries unfortunately results in damage both to the environment and to public health .
Waste is an unavoidable side-effect of such activity .
Both toxic and non-toxic waste cause huge problems in all countries in relation to reprocessing and storage .
The export of waste from producing countries to recipient countries , either for reprocessing or for final storage , is a ' solution ' which is fraught with dangers , both for the environment and for the health of EU citizens .
It is very important , therefore , that the entire process should be governed by strict rules and procedures .
The European Union is fully aware of this need and has put forward a number of measures and rules for the transportation of waste .
One such regulation , which is contained in the document before the House , relates to the implementation of common procedures which are to apply to the transportation of waste of certain kinds intended for countries which are not members of the OECD .
This regulation must set limits and respect the decisions of the countries involved , without , in so doing , causing major problems .
It is a well-known fact that , in third countries , cheap labour , poor environmental legislation and a relatively free import system provide favourable conditions for waste to continue to be exported to them as recipient countries .
Environmental organisations have set in motion information campaigns about the problem , both in developed countries and in those countries which accept waste for economic reasons .
We must realise that waste is not just another exportable commodity .
It is a great pity that Mr Virgin is not here today to outline his report to the House , but we certainly agree with most of the points which he expresses .
There is just one point on which our group does not agree and that is on Amendment No 2 .
We believe that the monitoring mechanism contained in Article 15 of Regulation ( EC ) No 259 / 93 should remain in Article 2 because a simplification of the procedure would lead to major pitfalls .
Can I also make the point that there is another important question : the question of monitoring compliance with this regulation .
The European Union must put in place stiff penalties for Member States which are in breach of this regulation , and it must make available procedures to prevent the illegal exportation of waste which , as we know , is going on .
The final point I wish to make has to do with the addition of a new annex , Annex 5 , to Regulation ( EC ) No 259 / 93 .
I believe that amalgamating the lists of waste in the Basle Convention will simplify the implementation of the legislation .
I would like to thank Mr Virgin - albeit in his absence - for his report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to point out that we have with us in the official gallery a delegation from the Conseil régional d 'Alsace and from the Conseil général du Haut-Rhin , brought here by their president , Mr Constant Goerg .
Thank you , Mr Striby .
We therefore welcome them to the House .
Mr President , the issue of waste shipments to non-OECD countries brings us back to some rather delicate and difficult problems that all come at a price .
One such problem is that of public health and , as a result , our ability to help protect the most vulnerable populations , who are mainly children .
There is the problem of our ability to help protect those we call street children , who often live in these non-OECD countries .
Then there is the risk of environmental dumping that leads to some countries being transformed into rubbish tips , particularly so-called developing countries . This is because these countries are often forced to agree to all manner of deals to bring in the revenue required to finance their needs , particularly in terms of public facilities .
There is also the problem of sovereignty , and of restricting the possible choices in some activities .
In other words , we are forced to try to strike a balance .
On the one hand , we must be extremely strict , and this means introducing the highest possible requirements for waste shipments .
On the other hand , we must leave these countries the flexibility they need to be able to choose the possibility of recycling . Recycling would then help these countries to establish industrial or semi-industrial activities that would , as a result , help them generate income .
When we consider the idea of drawing up lists , namely the green list and the red list , it is clear that such industrial opportunities mainly affect products on the green list .
In effect , we should keep to the principle that the danger level is linked to the product and not to the difficulty some countries have in responding .
We are fully aware that all countries are not equal as regards administrative controls and techniques for the import , storage and processing of such waste .
We should support them but firstly we should suggest the principle of transparency . We should consider the issue of extending the waste producers ' responsibility .
Perhaps we should finally take a good look at the volume of waste we produce . In other words , we should look at the risks that our consumerism poses to our common heritage , and also at the drawing rights we have awarded ourselves on the common heritage of the planet and , as a result , on the protection of the environment .
Mr President , I also wish to thank Parliament for the report , although Mr Virgin is not here , and for the active work done by Members on it .
As Mrs Jackson remarked , there has been much disruption due to the weather today , so we must get by without Mr Virgin .
The proposed regulation deals with the shipment of waste on the so-called green list for recovery to certain non-OECD countries .
Waste on the green list is waste whose transfer is generally not considered to pose any risk to the environment .
Waste on the green list for recovery is traded as merchandise within the OECD and in the EU .
I would also make it quite clear that the export of hazardous waste to non-OECD countries is prohibited under current EC legislation .
In 1994 , the Commission asked all non-OECD countries what control procedures , if any , they wanted to be applied to the shipment of waste on the green list .
The proposed regulation is only concerned with countries which replied that they did not wish to receive items from the green list or certain of those items , and with countries which did not respond to the Commission 's survey .
Mrs Jackson asked me specifically to comment on the eight amendments which have been tabled , and I will say something about them now .
The Commission can accept six of these , five in their entirety and one with a minor change , and the Commission can accept one amendment in part .
There is only one that is not acceptable to the Commission .
According to Amendment No 1 , the Commission must inform the countries which are covered by the regulation on changes to Annexes A and B on a regular basis .
The Commission can accept this , and we shall of course make sure that it happens .
Amendment No 2 implies that the shipment of waste on the green list to countries which have not replied to the questionnaire can take place under the procedure for the orange list , which only requires tacit consent from the importing country .
I am pleased to note that Parliament is no longer , as at first reading , demanding a ban on such exports , because that would be against WTO rules .
But your proposal to follow the procedure for the orange list , i.e. based on tacit consent , goes in the opposite direction .
The control procedures which you are now demanding will mean that the shipment is permitted if there is no answer from the importing country within 30 days , in other words you take silence to mean ' yes ' .
In July 1997 , I heard it said in this House that it is unacceptable for the Commission to assume the right to interpret non-response on the part of a country to its own advantage .
The Commission agrees with that statement , and it is therefore more appropriate , where we have not had a reaction from a country , to apply a procedure based on express written consent .
In this way we can make sure , prior to any shipment , that the destination country is really aware of the implications of the waste import in question .
I would appreciate it if this comment could be duly noted .
Thus the Commission still prefers the red list procedure , whereby the shipment can proceed after express written consent .
This procedure takes account of both the exporter 's and importer 's interests in a transparent manner .
In its common position , the Council has requested application of the procedure under Article 15 of Council Regulation No 259 / 93 , according to which written consent but also a longer time-limit are required .
The Commission thinks that the solution applying the red list procedure strikes the best balance between Parliament 's and the Council 's proposals and therefore cannot accept Amendment No 2 .
Then there are Amendments Nos 3 , 5 and 8 dealing with waste which , according to Article 39 of the Fourth Lomé Convention , may not be exported to ACP countries .
These are useful proposals , since recital 9 in the preamble is clear enough and yet another annex with yet another list of waste may give rise to confusion .
The Commission can therefore support these three amendments .
Also , Amendment No 4 is acceptable to the Commission since the wording corresponds to that of Article 17 ( 3 ) of Council Regulation No 259 / 93 .

Finally , the Commission can support a change in the time-limit for periodic review under Amendment No 6 , but cannot agree to consultation of Parliament in this connection , since the Commission considers that the regulation falls within the common commercial policy and that Article 113 forms the only legal basis .
The Commission can support Amendment No 7 , provided that Commission Regulation No 2048 / 98 is explicitly mentioned along with Council Regulation No 120 / 97 .
The Commission Regulation of 6 November 1998 involves an amendment to Annex V to the Council Regulation .
I would come back now to the very important question of the shipment of used clothing , which Mrs Jackson had a good deal to say about in her speech and which I myself have raised on a number of occasions .
It is quite clear that charitable organisations have been very concerned over how the proposal we are dealing with today might be interpreted .
I know that three amendments were presented at the meeting in January of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , but they were not followed up for procedural reasons .
Certain misunderstandings have arisen in that connection .
It is also clear that many representations have been made and there is widespread concern over the matter .
It is true , as Mrs Jackson mentioned , that people are afraid that the export of used clothing for recycling will be prevented .
I would therefore like to place on record the Commission 's view that used clothing , when it is sorted , cleaned and repaired prior to export , cannot be regarded as waste but can be treated as products .
Since the proposed regulation only applies to waste items , this regulation will not apply to used clothing and , with the debate that has taken place here today , we should be able to dispel completely the concerns which have been voiced by charitable organisations .
I think in fact that it will give them much reassurance .
Mr President , would the Commissioner agree , in the light of what she has just said , that she would actually need to move an amendment to the text here to clarify that it does not apply to secondhand clothing which has been sorted and disinfected ?
Mr President , let me say to Mrs Jackson that we do not think there is any need for an amendment because we think that the text is in fact clear enough .
But I agree with Mrs Jackson to the extent that , because of the many misunderstandings which have arisen , we should at least find some way of ensuring that the charitable organisations know what rules apply .
We shall try to find an appropriate way of overcoming this problem .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Landfill of waste
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0028 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 6919 / 98 - C4-0539 / 98-97 / 0085 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Directive on the landfill of waste ( Rapporteur : Mrs Jackson ) .
Mr President , I hope somebody somewhere is taking notice of the fact that Mrs Bjerregaard and I and other Members are spending this evening doing very unglamorous things such as debating landfill and the export of used cardigans .
The landfill directive is one of the most important environmental directives the European Parliament has dealt with in recent years .
It marks the beginning of a major shift in waste management practice in Europe .
For the public this is the end of an era in which many people in many countries have had to give very little thought to what happens to the waste they produce .
Seven countries currently landfill more than half of the municipal waste they produce .
These are Austria , Finland , Greece , Ireland , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom .
For these countries in particular , this directive marks the end of what one might call the throwaway society .
It also marks the beginning of an intensive period of innovation of waste management restructuring and , above all , of expenditure on other means of disposal by taxpayers .
I represent part of the south-west of England and a recent study that I did of the local authorities in the south-west of England led me to the conclusion that most of them were thinking very hard about schemes for recycling and reuse and recovery of waste .
However , none of them had actually been able to move near the kind of demands which this directive is going to make on them within the next five to ten years .
The three key features of the directive are firstly the promotion of the move away from landfill to what are considered more environmentally acceptable alternatives .
I use the words ' what are considered more environmentally acceptable alternatives ' advisedly since I personally do not have much faith in the hierarchy of waste management alternatives .
Secondly , the directive calls for the establishment of European Union wide standards for proper management of landfills ; thirdly , it should result in the discouragement of the transport of waste across frontiers - waste tourism we call it - by removing the disparities between the practices and prices relating to landfill in the 15 Member States so that waste simply searches for the cheapest hole .
The Environment Committee , while welcoming the directive as amended by the Council , still wanted to insist on further amendments and it is these amendments which I move tonight since this is the second reading of this directive which is coming forward under the cooperation procedure so we will not , I regret to say , see it again .
First , as regards the timetable for implementation ; at its maximum we will have to wait until the year 2020 before those Member States with more than an 80 % dependence on landfill , which are Greece , Ireland , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom , have to reduce the volume of waste going to landfill to 35 % of the total in 1995 .
That is a very big switch indeed .
But that is looking a very long way into the future .
Think about it .
Four Parliaments hence at least .
We MEPs have therefore altered this grace period to two years and set the figure to be attained at 25 % .
What we are saying is that at its maximum this directive should mean that by the latest 2018 , all European Union Member States should only be sending to landfill 25 % of their 1995 totals .
Make no mistake about it , this directive does not rule out landfill as an option .
Landfill will still be a very important option but it will be diminished from its present importance .
This is going to be very difficult to achieve and we feel that the totals and timescales set out in the directive tend to represent , as so often in this House , the triumph of hope over experience .
We have therefore submitted two amendments to Article No 5 ( 2 ) .
The first would ensure that Parliament is involved in monitoring , over the next 20 years , what progress the directive is actually making .
In Amendment No 10 to Article 5 we try to ensure that the directive does not become the kind of legislative Titanic sailing on into the iceberg of non-compliance .
Since the timetable set out for compliance is in three stages , we should surely monitor along the way whether compliance is satisfactory throughout Europe .
If it is not , then we may need to take practical steps to make sure that in practice we get the high level of protection the directive demands .
In the past the Commission has been reluctant to go along with the quite elaborate mechanism of reporting to it and to the European Parliament from the Member States which we would like to see .
We believe that this system of reporting is our best hope of ensuring that this directive itself does not join other directives in , to change my metaphor , the landfill of non-compliance .
Our Amendments Nos 14 and 16 represent the committee 's concern that there are two important loopholes in the directive .
First existing landfills below a certain size on islands would be exempt from considerable proportions of the directive altogether .
We think that these should not be allowed to continue to operate without full public access to the record of what is dumped there .
Secondly , we insist that Member States shall close any existing landfill sites which have not been granted a permit under the waste framework directive .
It is a bad omen that such sites are still operating at all .
The siting of landfills is extremely controversial .
It is no part of our responsibilities to interfere in local planning matters but the committee agreed that we should set out our guideline in the annex for the desirable minimum distance between new landfills and residential areas .
As rapporteur , I must present the report on behalf of the committee , although personally I am not in favour of some of the committee amendments , notably the refusal to place a time limit on liability for damage occasioned by land filling .
I would be grateful if the Commission could comment on Amendment No 15 and its workability .
In conclusion , I commend this directive to Parliament .
Once it is adopted , however , the work begins , especially in my country .
Once we accept the directive 's targets , we must put in place recycling and composting schemes - and we hope that we will get a composting directive before the end of this year - that will work and have good markets for what they produce .
We must reduce the amount of waste we produce .
We must make a bold assessment of the part that energy from waste incinerators can play in dealing with the waste that we must divert from landfill and take the necessary decisions , if we decide to take that route , to build such incinerators in the full knowledge that public opinion at the moment will have to be won around .
This evening and tomorrow when we vote , we pass the baton now to Members of Parliament and , above all , to local councillors in our various countries , some of whom may be here in the gallery tonight .
I cannot think of a directive that better illustrates the partnerships that must exist between legislators at the European , national and local levels .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Jackson for her work .
I want to reassure her that people are interested in the environment but they are not interested in paying for the improvements we all want to see .
I was a member of a local council for many years and I did not think it would take so long for the various Member States to coordinate action in this area .
It is amazing that so little progress has been made .
I represent one of the countries that has been mentioned among the guilty parties with regard to landfill .
Therefore I have studied the report very carefully .
What I find most disappointing is the Council 's attitude to this legislation .
The Member States have placed the concerns of industry and their own cost concerns ahead of the interests of our citizens .
I note in particular that the Council has failed to include minimum distances from residential areas for landfills which contain either hazardous or non-hazardous waste .
This is certainly a very contentious issue in my own area of Dublin .
The Council has instead persisted with its vague commitment to consider the matter when the location of future landfills is chosen . I also oppose the Council 's position that Member States should be given eight years , rather than the five years proposed by Parliament , to ensure that existing landfill sites comply with the terms laid out in this directive .
I welcome the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection 's support for the polluter pays principle and the proposal for a tax on waste going into the landfill sites .
I find it very ironic that Ireland has supported this common position .
In a recent policy paper the Irish Government committed itself to reducing landfill and increasing the use of more sustainable means of waste disposal .
As has been said , Ireland relies very heavily on landfill - I think only Greece is more reliant .
So we have to wonder just how committed the Irish Government is to tackling the problem if it continues to support the Council 's very watered-down amendments .
I would hope that the Commissioner present today will fight the case for consumers and for citizens who want to see the whole waste disposal and landfill issue dealt with in an environmentally friendly way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy indeed to support the report presented by Mrs Jackson , because I believe this represents a great step forward in environmental matters for the whole of Europe .
Although it will involve some tightening up in Austria , I have to say that a number of provisions already apply in Austria which it would have been impossible to gain acceptance for throughout Europe .
I certainly tried to emphasise this by the way I voted in committee .
I would like to illustrate this point with a single example - Article 6 , the classification of waste according to categories of waste .
It is to be permissible to deposit certain types of solid non-reactive hazardous waste on landfill sites for non-hazardous waste .
This relates to waste which is categorised as hazardous because of handling issues , that is to say where there is a risk of inappropriate handling , but which can in fact be deposited with other non-reactive waste without any risk to the environment .
This implies waste with low leachability .
Such waste cannot be deposited in Austria unless it can be scientifically proven that it is not dangerous in landfill conditions .
We have also developed a model for providing this proof .
This chiefly relates to vitrified or solidified hazardous waste .
I believe that this is a very important point which we will have to reflect on again in the future .
Nevertheless , this directive represents a great step forward for Europe and I am therefore really pleased to give it my approval .
Mr President , first of all may I thank Mrs Jackson and congratulate her on her report .
I would like , President , to make a few comments .
Listening to this debate I feel as though I am from a different planet , living as I do in a country , Greece , which , as Mrs Jackson said , is one of those countries which depend heavily on landfills for the disposal of waste .
First of all , I agree with the proposal that there should be prevention , then recovery , followed by recycling , incineration and finally landfill .
But in my country , Commissioner , virtually nothing has been done about prevention and recovery , and recycling has only been talked about .
As for incineration , it has been recommended to us on many occasions , and even by the Commission itself .
Is the Commission so much in favour of incineration ?
Personally , I have my doubts about incineration . I know that cities in Belgium , including Brussels , and recently Lille in France have come out against incineration , claiming that it causes serious environmental and public health problems .
I would like a better response in relation to this issue before I cast my vote and declare that incineration is a way to solve the problem .
A second point , with which I am in full agreement , is the taxation of waste destined for landfill sites .
I find this a perfectly correct thing to do .
But who decides the level of taxation ?
Who collects the tax and what is to be done with it ?
We are talking about a long period of time - three decades .
In my own country local government does not have the power to raise taxes , which puts paid , at least for the time being , to this , in my view , perfectly reasonable solution .
A third point I would like to mention is this .
What kind of authority is to be responsible for landfill sites ?
I agree with Mrs Jackson when she says that there should be a time limit .
I would say , however , that I do not fully agree with her .
If an authority is to have responsibility for a landfill site for 30 years after its closure and be permanently liable to pay compensation , then it absolutely has to be a public authority .
I am not sure whether it should be centralised or decentralised , autonomous or independent , but it must be a public body .
No other solution can be envisaged and this has to be said otherwise how , in 30 years ' time , will I be able to find the responsible owner , who has meanwhile closed down his company or his establishment ?
Finally , I would like to make one further point , Mr President .
We have not made sufficient reference to former debates we have had in relation to the severe problems that implementation of this legislation will entail for certain regions such as small islands and isolated mountain regions .
The transportation of waste to sites which can financially justify this transportation is virtually impossible . Rather than look for loopholes in the legislation , we must find alternative subsidies to enable these regions to get rid of their waste in a hygienic and environmentally friendly way .
Mr President , I welcome the thrust of this report , which seeks to implement strict rules with regard to the operation of landfill sites within the territories of the Union .
The essence of the report includes the implementation of the following key provisions : procedures which must be met before a licence can be granted for landfill operations ; the monitoring procedure during landfill sites ' operational phase and closure ; technical conditions to be met by sites and facilities which have to serve as landfill deposits ; classifying the different sets of wastes which can be accepted in landfill sites across Europe and setting targets for the reduction of the amounts of biodegradable municipal waste being deposited in landfills .
European and Irish waste policies have to be based on a hierarchy of options , with prevention the most desirable and disposal the least desirable .
However , the stark fact is that over 90 % of municipal waste is disposed of in landfill sites in my country , and four million tonnes of waste is produced each year in the continent of Europe .
Future waste disposal in Ireland does not and cannot rely on the continued search for landfill sites by local authorities up and down the country .
I fully welcome the initiative taken by my government which has commissioned a study into the possible use of new , alternative forms of waste management and disposal .
The government is right to look boldly at new ways of disposing of residential , industrial , commercial and agricultural waste .
Only 8 % of all municipal waste in Ireland is recycled and this figure is simply too low .
We need to give consideration to all innovative options for waste minimisation so as to put in train the medium to long-term process of eliminating the use of landfill sites in the future .
This , in itself , would be a very bold objective .
The government is presently formulating its national development plan outlining our social and economic investment priorities for the years 2000-2006 .
I am very confident that , if proposals are included in this plan to deal with our waste problem in a novel manner , the European Commission will financially support alternative waste-disposal methods during the next round of EU Structural Funds .
The European Commission and European Parliament certainly want all Member States to take advantage of the cleaner new technologies which are coming on-stream to deal with the problem of waste management .
The implementation of the Waste Management Act of 1995 is also a positive step in the right direction .
Under this legislation local authorities are required to prepare waste-management plans either individually or jointly , but I believe that there must be widespread public consultation in drawing up such plans .
Finally , it is important that , as newer technologies come on stream , this process must involve the consent and widespread participation of the general public and local communities .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commission to clarify Article 14 .
Authorities in some countries , including my own , are already planning to close down a number of landfill sites over the next two years .
One of the important aspects of this legislation is after-care .
What I want it know is this : if , for example , these waste sites are closed down before the transposition into law of the directive , will they be exempt from the directive , in particular in relation to after-care ?
That is one of the major problems .
Some of the landfill sites that are being closed down pose major problems , so it is essential that these sites also come under the directive .
There seems to be a slight confusion here .
One of the most important aspects of this report that I want to raise is the whole issue of the distance of landfill sites from residential areas .
We have been very disappointed with the response of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and its members who are there to protect public health , because they are basically saying that a suggested guideline is proposed in the text .
That is unacceptable .
It is like saying we will make legislation as suggested legislation , and you can do what you want afterwards .
There have been a number of recent reports - a very important study in The Lancet last year for example - which show that babies born within three kilometres of toxic landfill sites - and potentially all landfill sites - are more likely to suffer birth defects than babies born elsewhere .
The research stated that residents within three kilometres of a landfill site were associated with a significantly higher risk of congenital anomalies and that systematic environmental health surveillance is needed for municipal landfill sites and other pollution sources .
It is extremely important that a precautionary approach is taken here .
It is clear that the proximity of residential areas to landfill sites poses a huge risk .
It is essential that this legislation makes it mandatory for local authorities and the authorities of the Member States to adhere to a minimum distance .
We know that there have been cases of toxic waste being dumped in Member States , including my own , in sites that were not geared towards toxic landfill : local authorities in my own country have been found responsible for illegally dumping toxic substances like mercury into landfill sites which were not meant for toxic waste disposal .
So there is a huge time-bomb waiting to go off , if , first of all , these landfill sites are not covered by the directive and have been closed down before it enters into effect and , secondly , if no action is taken to ensure that any landfill site is beyond a certain radius from residential areas .
It is not acceptable that public health be put at risk like this .
We will be looking for a roll-call vote on this aspect of the report tomorrow .
It is essential that the voters in the Member States know how serious the Members of this House are about protecting the health of European Union citizens .
Studies have shown that babies - the most vulnerable members of society - are at risk .
There are other aspects of the legislation which are also extremely disturbing .
In landfill sites which are geared to non-toxic waste , there will be a loophole to allow toxic waste to be added , depending on what kind of justification is given .
Although the directive is an improvement on the Commission 's proposal which we rejected in 1996 , it still does not go far enough to protect the environment and public health .
I would therefore like some clarification on Article 14 from the Commission .
The directive must make it mandatory for landfill sites to be located beyond a certain distance from residential areas .
Mr President , I have to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Jackson , on her excellent report , and backing the amendments tabled by the Environment Committee .
I agree wholeheartedly with this order of priority .
Pollution has long been a concern in Europe and we in Galicia , Spain , face a problem with waste disposal that , in our opinion , has yet to be resolved . This relates to an urban waste incineration programme .
A plant known as ( ... ) is to be started up in Vila Boa , not the best choice of site since :
firstly , it will be on the coast near the Galician river-estuaries or rias , an area known worldwide for its fish stocks and as a tourist attraction ; -secondly , it will be located in the town of Vila Boa , which is densely populated and is near Pontevedra , a town already heavily polluted because of a cellulose factory . A river running through an extremely beautiful and fertile valley has been diverted to build a railway line which has spoilt part of the historic Portuguese route to Santiago de Compostela .
A number of protests against the plant have been staged by local residents , with as many as 30 000 people marching , and messages of protest have been sent to the Environment Committee in Brussels.It is up to the Commission to control waste elimination and processing plants like this one .
Given that they are built with the aid of substantial European financial subsidies - as much as EUR 78 million in this case - there should be checks on where they are located , how they are built and how they are run .
The Commission should also make sure that these investments are not only properly planned and carried out , but also used profitably .
Madam President , there are various options for waste processing .
The solution to the waste problem must be sought in prevention , reuse and recycling .
European waste policy must ensure that progressively less waste is dumped .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur Mrs Jackson when she describes landfill as the very last choice on her list of possible waste processing methods .
Unfortunately , in the past , in other words between 1991 and 1996 , attempts to introduce effective landfill regulations failed .
The Commission proposal is a considerable improvement on the common position rejected in 1995 .
It is no longer the case that 50 % of EU territory is excluded from the directive .
Every effort must be made to process biodegradable waste into compost and biogas , rather than landfilling or incineration .
A good system of separate collection should make it possible to further reduce the 25 % norm for the dumping of such waste .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal of imposing a levy on landfill waste .
This must be based on the real operating costs , so that the taxpayer does not have to contribute .
In this respect , we are concerned at the continuing practice of transporting waste to cheaper landfill sites or incineration ovens .
There is a very large landfill site in Spain , for example , and this will not be closed until it is completely full , which will not be for some decades .
There are of course many uncertainties in regard to the protection and management of landfill sites .
The risks of soil and water pollution remain very considerable , especially in the long term .
It is my hope that the Member States will implement this directive effectively , but giving absolute priority to waste prevention , reuse and recycling .
Mr President , as Liberals we also believe it is very important to adopt a waste management strategy in connection with the landfill of waste , which must be the very last resort .
The release of dangerous substances into the soil and groundwater places an excessive burden on the environment and on public health .
This is why we attach such importance to this directive .
We find it irresponsible to further delay appropriate legislation .
We therefore believe the common position must be approved , as modified of course by the amendments proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
In this respect I believe the amendments on biodegradable waste are crucially important .
The rapporteur is right when she says that it is much kinder to the environment to produce compost and biogas from biodegradable waste than to dump it or incinerate it .
I support this view .
However , I believe the rapporteur is being too cautious by proposing no more than a guideline on the minimum distance of landfills for urban waste .
I do not believe this is a matter for subsidiarity .
In this instance we prefer the amendments tabled by the Green Group , which seek to impose a minimum distance of half a kilometre for urban waste and two kilometres for hazardous waste , the precautionary principle taking priority over that of subsidiarity .
Mr President , coming as I do from a small country which landfills 99 % of its waste , I am particularly anxious to make a few remarks about this extremely important directive .
The directive allows a 20-year period for countries which landfill more than 80 % of their waste to come into line .
But small countries like Ireland simply do not have 20 years !
We are going to have to address this problem a lot more quickly , in particular we finally have to address the extremely sensitive issue of incineration which in most countries , I believe , causes local problems when it is mooted .
Many years ago somebody asked me what I thought were the five most important environmental issues of our time .
I answered : number one is waste , number two is waste , number three is waste , number four is waste and number five is waste .
It remains perhaps one of the most intractable problems facing all of us .
I should also say that I would like to have seen the directive slightly stronger on the protection for redundant landfill sites , because resistance to landfill and also to incineration is very often directly connected to the fears of those who live near these sites that they will not be adequately maintained and protected .
We also need finally to take seriously the question of the sorting of waste into recyclable groups of waste and of course , the recycling of treated waste .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
We have relied very much on the leadership of the Commission to push this as a political issue in our country .
I am very happy to support this report .
Madam President , I believe that this directive can serve as a model because it is aimed at the citizens and affects everyday life , and also because it shows how Community regulations approved centrally by the institutions must subsequently be implemented by local authorities .
It underlines the fact that we are primarily addressing local and regional authorities .
I believe that there are three important points which warrant repetition because they should always be at the forefront of our minds : landfill must be a last resort ; all sites must be secure and monitored ; and all costs must be covered .
It is easy to state these three requirements , but fulfilling them will be rather more difficult .
Although the regions are constantly calling for the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity and for the autonomy to enable them to implement the relevant legislation , we must nevertheless appeal to those whose responsibility it is to comply with it . This legislation is very important , and yet there are thousands and thousands of unregulated sites .
Even worse , in small villages there are official sites on steep riverbanks and waste is incinerated daily . It is incredible that this should be happening in this day and age , but it is .
I believe that the European Parliament is sending a very clear and positive message , and that we should congratulate the rapporteur on reaching this overall result . The European Commission is also to be congratulated of course , as it kept this proposal alive for years despite the many difficulties it encountered , even , it has to be said , in the Council of Ministers .
Madam President , I would also like to congratulate Mrs Jackson on the substantial amount of work she has done on this .
As a Liberal Democrat I always favour measures which protect and enhance our environment and there is much in the Commission directive and in this report which does just that .
However , I believe that good legislation should be practicable .
And I am surprised that the rapporteur , coming as she does from the south-west of England , believes that Amendment No 11 which reduces the time allowed to Member States to postpone attainment of targets from four to two years and Amendment No 17 which reduces the compliance timetable by three years from eight years to five are practically achievable .
Indeed , Amendment No 17 may lead to the rapid adoption of new means of disposal which will mean less sustainability .
In the south-west of England we landfill more than 85 % of our waste .
We have a rapidly growing level of environmental consciousness leading to much composting and much landfill geared specifically to the production of biogas .
Indeed , I launched a report this morning called ' The Greening of Somerset ' in which we pointed to what Liberal Democrat authorities have done in this direction .
We are proud of our record .
We are making great strides but I will vote against Amendments Nos 11 and 18 because I believe they are almost impossible to attain , will demoralise the industry and add very substantially to the costs imposed on waste site operators and on local authorities .
In conclusion , I favour the use of legislation to push , to coax and to accelerate change but there are many ways to crack an egg . Using a sledgehammer is only one of them .
These two amendments are the sledgehammer approach .
Madam President , the Council directive is a positive step , and the amendments proposed by Mrs Jackson make an even more positive contribution .
However , although these will go some way to improving the existing situation , I fear - and I do not here wish to make a prediction - that the future situation will not be radically different .
I have listened to talk of measures stretching over 30 years , of measures which will come into force very gradually .
However , all the waste materials destined for burial , incineration and so on are multiplying at a very dangerous level and at a much faster rate than the measures put forward by the Council and the Commission and those put forward by us in this House .
We run the risk - that is , those of us who introduce such measures - of being buried along with those waste materials , because of the speed , or lack of it , with which we are moving to tackle the problem .
Madam President , I have heard the word ' prevention ' being bandied about .
What does this mean ?
Who is producing this waste ?
Who is the main source , the person responsible for the excessive production of waste ?
Is it the individual , the citizen ?
And why is it that never before have we had such a rampant increase in the amount of waste ?
The answer is clear to all : at the root of the problem lie certain industries , certain conglomerates , which produce and sell for profit , without the slightest regard for the waste generated as a consequence .
Prevention , therefore , must be carried out at source , so as to reduce the volume and the hazards of waste .
Prevention through the management of the reduced amount of waste produced either as a result of recovery or through alternative waste management methods . Only a tiny proportion of waste should be destined for landfill , in conjunction with preventive measures to ensure that such waste does not harm people 's health , the environment , or the eco-system .
I have not seen , nor have I heard talk of , such measures , and this is why I have expressed the fears that I have .
I wish to say that this hesitation on the part of the Council and the Commission owes more to their reluctance to confront those chiefly responsible for this wretched situation .
Take the bull by the horns and face up to the problem with courage .
Parliament will be right behind you and you will have public opinion on your side . Madam President , in every corner of the Community , epic battles are being waged to avoid landfill sites being opened up .
By contrast , there are numerous interests that wish to establish landfill sites in certain regions and set up incineration units etc. from which they can obtain kickbacks , rake-offs and profits .
Such are the multitude of lobbies which are milling around the issue .
Liberate yourselves from the nightmare of lobby pressure and confront this problem , which is a matter of life and death for our society .
Madam President , I too should like to join with my colleagues in welcoming the Jackson report .
As we move towards a new Millennium we are facing new problems associated with the wealth which is being created and the extra economic growth .
One of these problems is how we dispose of our waste .
For many years landfill was seen as the easiest and least expensive option .
However , the studies which have been carried out - and referred to here - on public health and , in particular , the health of children and babies , show that there is an urgent need to take action to resolve this problem .
I welcome Mrs Jackson 's report .
It is , in the main , a balanced approach to tackling this problem .
In particular , it highlights the necessity for increased use of regulation to ensure that all Member States take action at the same time .
However , it also points to the fact that some Member States are more advanced than others , I believe we should also now focus on the new opportunities and new technologies available to us .
Using waste for renewable energies , recycling some other types of waste and incineration are among those that have been mentioned .
The dangers associated with incineration in the past have generally been overcome as a result of technological progress .
Also , with new designs of landfill sites , certain of the dangers have been eliminated .
I would draw Members ' attention to Amendment No 7 where we lay down guidelines allowing non-hazardous waste and inert waste to be excluded from the scope of the directive .
However , we should not allow this amendment , if it is adopted , to be a carte blanche for those who want to abuse the directive .
It is there merely to help those Member States that are lagging behind or that cannot catch up quickly enough with regard to new technology .
I welcome the action of the Irish Government in initiating a process whereby the extra options will be looked at .
With the reform , under the Agenda 2000 proposals , of the structural and cohesion funds , perhaps an opportunity could be found to make new funding available , not only for research and development as regards how the new technologies may be best adapted but also for cooperative programmes between the local authorities and the Member States at a local , as well as a European Union , level to try and resolve some of these difficulties and problems .
My final point is that there is no simple solution to the problems of the excess waste which is now being created .
There is no one simple answer .
There are a range of multi-faceted options which can help to alleviate the problem .
The waste can also be turned to good use through the different processes .
Unless we are willing to cooperate with each other and learn from the best practices available , we cannot hope to resolve these difficulties .
I commend the bulk of this report to the House .
My group will be supporting its general tenor .
Madam President , I wish to add my voice to those Members who have criticised the Council 's common position , which apparently takes no account of the needs of either citizens or the environment .
It is particularly important to say that the approach to waste management has to be based on prevention , reuse and recycling ; incineration and dumping , both of which involve potential risks to health and the environment , ought to be the exception and not the rule .
And so it is important that we put a stop , as soon as possible , to the dumping or incineration of the organic biodegradable component of waste .
Our aim has to be the production of compost or biogas and , on that point , I hope the Commission will transmit to us the proposal for a directive on composting as soon as possible .
I should add that if a number of different measures are applied to separate out , at the start , those components of waste that can be reused and recycled , and if compost is produced , all we shall be left with is inert waste that can be managed much more easily , avoiding the need for incineration which in any case leaves us with ash that has to be dumped .
Let me end by saying that it is important that we approve the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , but it is also - and I stress this - necessary to take the steps required to establish a mandatory minimum safety distance from residential areas .
Madam President , I would like to express my sincerest thanks to the rapporteur for her subtle treatment of the directive .
The amendments comprehensively cover issues required for the landfill directive .
I would especially like to stress the importance of two points , in Amendments Nos 6 and 7 , which deal with the disposal of non-hazardous waste .
Non-hazardous waste is defined as that which has undergone no significant physical , chemical or biological change .
This includes waste produced from mining and its associated refining processes , or by-products of that industry .
By-products include surface material , quarried host rock and sand , which are stored in the area of the mine or service area and are used in mining , for example as filler for extra support and safety , or which may be processed further .
The principle of sustainable use is immensely important and is something we should all be aware of .
Let us exploit what materials we can .
It is unreasonable to classify this sort of non-biodegradable but otherwise still useful extracted material as landfill .
Further measures simply need to be taken .
Mrs Jackson has understood this very well , and included it in her proposal .
Finally , I would like to ask the Commission why it still has not made any distinction in its own report between hard , non-biodegradable , non-hazardous stone , and biodegradable materials .
Madam President , I am very glad that the European Parliament has put landfills on the agenda today , because we have been making steady progress with this proposal on waste dumping .
But also , listening to the debate today or reading the report , one can see that we are now well on the way to an important result .
It was with great interest that I read the draft report adopted by the Environment Committee , and I would take this opportunity of saying thank you to the committee , and in particular to Mrs Jackson , for the great effort which has been put into preparing this proposal .
Many views have been presented today on the significance of this report , both in relation to consumers and to the citizens of Europe in general .
But I will not dwell on that .
I share these views .
I shall concentrate on the amendments , partly because that is the way we debate these proposals , but also because the amendments are important and worthwhile and because they will make the Council 's common position more consistent and the procedures more transparent .
Overall , I can tell the House that the Commission is able to accept 12 of the 19 amendments adopted by the Environment Committee .
I will comment on them individually .
I entirely agree with Amendment No 1 , which provides a new recital indicating the Community 's prioritisation of waste management options .
The Commission can also accept Amendment No 4 , which stipulates that the costs of the financial security must be included in the price charged for the dumping of waste .
The same change features in Amendment No 12 , which can also be accepted .
Amendment No 3 as well , which indicates that taxes on waste going to landfill can help to achieve the directive 's objectives , is acceptable provided that it refers to initiatives at Member State level .
On the other hand , the Commission cannot promise to bring forward a new proposal to promote the use of economic instruments in the form of a tax on waste going to landfill , as proposed in Amendment No 13 .
Amendment No 2 calls for a proposal for a new directive on composting , which was raised by Mr Eisma in particular .
I entirely agree with Parliament that composting of biodegradable waste is an environmentally friendly solution for this type of waste .
So the Commission has already begun the preparatory work for an initiative on composting .
However , I cannot accept the way in which this call is made in the amendment and so the amendment itself must be rejected , although of course not the work which has already been set in motion .
I am pleased to see that Parliament associates itself with the desire of the Commission and the Council to reduce the dumping of biodegradable municipal waste .
I am particularly happy to see that Parliament , in Amendment No 8 , is seeking a return to the final target of 25 % , which had been in the Commission proposal .
The common position provides for reasonably long-term reduction targets for the Member States .
Mrs Jackson commented on Amendment No 11 in particular .
I agree with what she said , in other words that Member States which currently send more than 80 % of their waste to landfill should only be allowed an extension of two years to achieve the targets .
It is however crucial that the reduction targets for biodegradable waste in Article 5 remain unchanged and legally binding .
Only in this way can we ensure that the Member States have optimum chances of planning , initiating and implementing alternative procedures for the management of biodegradable waste .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments Nos 9 and 10 .
I must stress that the Commission cannot agree to more exemptions than those contained in the common position .
The common position already contains many exemptions - one could say too many - which were not in the Commission proposal , and I do not think we should make this list any longer .
I have special misgivings regarding Amendments Nos 6 and 7 , which Mr Crowley referred to in particular .
Their effect would be to exclude from the scope of the directive the use of non-hazardous waste for redevelopment and construction purposes and the dumping of non-hazardous waste from mining operations in landfills .
The Commission cannot accept these amendments .
We cannot guarantee satisfactory environmental protection if non-hazardous waste can be dumped without regard to the provisions of the directive .
Amendment No 15 specifies the site operator 's responsibility in the period subsequent to closure , and it was an amendment which Mrs Jackson was specifically concerned about .
I agree with the aim of this amendment .
The wording of the last sentence concerning liability for damage is not entirely clear , however .
The Commission can accept the amendment in principle , if the last sentence is to be understood in such a way that liability for closure and subsequent monitoring does not affect any national laws on the liability of the waste producer .
We have a serious problem with illegal landfill sites in the Community .
This emerges clearly from the many complaints and petitions which the Commission receives and , along with Parliament and as a number of speakers have pointed out this evening , we think that this situation has to change .
The Commission can therefore accept Amendment No 16 , which demands the closure of such sites .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 19 .
It is the technical committee mentioned in Article 16 of the Commission proposal which has to determine the specifications in the annexes .
The annexes are to be viewed as a whole , and the Commission cannot guarantee the necessary environmental protection if some of the parameters in the annexes are altered at this stage .
The Commission can however accept the change to Annex 1 which Amendment No 18 would involve , namely reinstatement of the requirement of a minimum distance to landfills .
I realise that the amendment does not introduce any legally binding minimum distance , as in the third Commission proposal .
Both Mrs Malone and Mrs McKenna mentioned this in their speeches .
It is instead a suggested guideline for a minimum distance to recreational areas , waterways , water bodies and other agricultural or urban sites .
As you know , the Council could not accept a binding minimum distance as contained in the Commission proposal and in Amendment No 20 .
I hope that the Council will be able to accept this looser way of securing a minimum distance to landfills . So for the moment I prefer Amendment No 18 to Amendment No 20 , but it is mainly because I believe that this will give us a better chance of getting the proposal adopted by the Council .
Finally , I will just mention briefly that the Commission can accept Amendment No 17 on the time-limit for existing landfills , Amendment No 14 on supervision of landfills which are exempt from the directive and Amendment No 5 on the definition of liquid waste .
Mrs McKenna asked me specifically about Article 14 , which provides that operating landfills must meet the requirements of the directive .
Landfills which are closed before this directive is transposed into national law are thus not covered by the requirements of the directive .
This means that , under this directive , we do not have any scope for dealing with such a situation . I naturally therefore hope that the Member States will act responsibly , but I stress that it is important to remember that existing landfills must of course comply with Article 4 of our framework directive on waste , which already now provides that landfills must be licensed and that waste must be dumped without hazard to humans and the environment .
I therefore hope that the European Parliament will adopt this text , which guarantees a high level of environmental protection .
Many of the amendments point in the right direction and tighten up the environmental requirements contained in the Council 's common position . I am therefore very pleased with this constructive support from the European Parliament .
I will do my utmost to ensure that we get an environmentally responsible directive on the landfill of waste adopted as quickly as possible .
Madam President , I have listened closely to the Commission 's views on the amendments , but I am afraid that the Commission 's position on Amendment No 19 escaped me .
Can you give an answer to that , Commissioner ?
It was on the subject of Amendment No 19 .
Yes , Mr Eisma , I think I mentioned that , because I can see that it is the amendment on the technical committee which I could not accept .
Would the Commissioner also clarify whether or not she said she would accept Amendment No 11 ?
It was not clear to me .
Yes , Madam President , I did also mention that amendment .
We can accept Amendment No 11 .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 7.35 p.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , a French weekly paper , Marianne , has just announced that the members of the Committee of Independent Experts appointed by Parliament and the Commission are to receive 29 200 euros per month , which is 191 000 French francs .
As this committee was set up under the auspices of Parliament , it is important to check that this information is correct .
If it is not accurate , what are the true figures that should be passed on to the taxpayers in the various Member States ?
Which budget article do the corresponding amounts come from ?
I should like to know whether this information is indeed accurate , particularly as regards the members of the Committee of Independent Experts who already receive an allowance from the Community budget .
I should like to know whether , in these cases , the above sum will be added to their allowance or not .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot discuss here each and every newspaper article that is published .
A decision has been taken by the Bureau .
That can be made available to you , and the matter can then be discussed at the appropriate level .
The plenary is not the right place for that , however .
Madam President , last night I wished to go through the amendments to the Philippe Martin report but they were not available in English .
Although I have a whole stack in German , I would prefer them in my own language .
As this is a very important and technical report , could you please make sure that they are available so that everybody has the chance to go through them carefully in their own language before the vote on Thursday .
Thank you for pointing that out .
We shall ensure that everything is available in good time .
Madam President , can I ask whether , in view of recent political developments in France , the Conference of Presidents will put the issue of Rule 31 on the agenda and consider , in the interests of order in the Chamber , separating Mr Mégret 's runt faction of the Front Nationale from Mr Le Pen 's ' diva ' group .

Secondly , turning to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I suspect the newspaper he is reading is very similar to the ones we have in the United Kingdom where they say the only thing you can believe is the date .
Madam President , I do apologise .
Yesterday it was my privilege and pleasure to be permitted two minutes ' speaking time in this House .
It was obviously out of excitement at this great event that I forgot to sign the register .
I was definitely present .
Yes of course , that was demonstrated by the fact that you spoke .
Madam President , I rise for the same reason as the previous speaker .
My name does not appear to be on the list , even though I was here in Parliament yesterday from 10.30 a.m.
We take note of that , and it will be checked .
Madam President , I just wish to point out that I was here yesterday .
I would therefore like to have my presence recorded , even though I forgot to sign in .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a good thing that the details of Members ' attendance are corrected .
As long as there are just one or two cases , that is all well and good , but when there are ten or twenty , things become difficult .
I would ask you to ensure that you all sign the register .
The Minutes were approved
There was clearly a misunderstanding yesterday , when it was said that the recommendation by Mr Fitzsimons would not be put to the vote until Wednesday .
That is wrong .
This item has been correctly placed on the agenda and will be put to the vote at 12 noon today .
The deadline expires today , so if we do not vote , we shall miss the opportunity to deliver our opinion .
The vote must take place today .
I simply wished to make that clear to the House .
Madam President , I quite understand and you are perfectly correct .
However , I would draw your attention to the fact that the amendments to the Fitzsimons report were not yet available this morning .
That will also have to be looked into .
We shall investigate the matter .
Taxation of energy products
The next item is the report ( A4-0015 / 99 ) by Mr Cox , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive on restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products ( COM ( 97 ) 0030 - C4-0155 / 97-97 / 0111 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , in its proposal to extend and deepen the base of energy taxation the Commission will have the support of Parliament .
The energy tax directive is timely in terms of our commitments to reduce global warming and is desirable as a means of promoting greater energy efficiency and encouraging a lower energy intensity per unit of output ; furthermore , it is necessary to explore new tax bases if we are ever to tackle successfully the structural difficulty in too many of our States of lowering non-wage labour costs in societies suffering unacceptably high rates of unemployment .
We in Parliament will say ' yes ' to new taxes but ' no ' to more taxes .
Regrettably Parliament cannot insist in law on fiscal neutrality , but it does so as a matter of political conviction .
Member States and the Council will betray the wider public purpose of this proposal if they fail to use the extra revenue from energy tax to offset excessive non-wage , tax-driven labour costs .
We insist on such a trade-off because , to reiterate the point , this Parliament wants new tax but not more tax .
The Commission proposes an extension of the excise tax regime on hydrocarbons to a much more comprehensive tax base , including sectors that have heretofore been excluded in some or all of the Member States - sectors such as coal , gas , electricity and home-heating oil .
Parliament supports this as commendable , yet no sooner is this tax base definition established in the Commission proposal , than , through a complex series of total or partial exemptions , total or partial refunds , which variously are mandatory or optional , the Commission proposes a form of tax governance based more on exceptions than on rules .
This , in our view , is a bad legislative proposal because it is too complex .
It lacks the characteristics of good tax law , which should be simple to understand , easy to collect , predictable in its statutory implications and difficult to evade .
I should say that some colleagues confuse this proposal with the CO2 tax .
This is not a CO2 tax directive .
The Commission services , and ultimately the College of Commissioners , have submitted to Parliament a proposal which , we believe , reflects too many of the priorities of the lobbyists with which they have dealt and too little concern for the wider public interest .
In first studying the proposal , I recalled the rather unkind remark about a recent presidency in the United States , which likened the behaviour of the President to a cushion which , it was reported , always bore the marks of the last arse to sit on it .
In some respects , the exceptionalism in this document appears to me to reflect that kind of logic .
This is the kind of legislative proposal that has to stop .
My report proposes radical surgery to remove the glut of exemptions but still proposes the retention of green exceptions .
On tax deepening , we believe the Commission has opted for an unnecessarily complex formula .
We propose starting with the Commission 's Year 2000 tax rate proposals and then applying an accelerator formula , subject to five-year review , but which would stay in place pending the outcome of the review .
It has the advantage of clarity and certainty and avoids the endless institutional complications of the alternative proposed to us .
There remains the outstanding difficulty about firms and sectors whose costs may dramatically increase to the point where their competitive position could be destroyed .
We do not ignore this issue : we propose a form of constrained subsidiarity , where such firms or sectors can seek relief provided there are extenuating circumstances , but where they must pass a wider EU test for objectivity so that they do not violate the rules of fair competition or the rules related to state aids .
I also propose an additional amendment at this stage that sectors where this is systematic should potentially be subject to a Commission-approved block exemption or refund .
In summary , the European Parliament will support new energy and ecotaxes , but does not support more taxes .
We demand fiscal neutrality of the states .
We insist on lowering labour taxes as the counterpart of this tax .
We want a simpler and more certain tax-based definition than that proposed by the Commission .
We want a more predictable base-deepening formula for determining the evolution of tax rates .
We want competitive handicap to be addressed where it is a genuine problem but not to be used as an excuse for going soft on necessary change .
I commend the report to the House .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy is well aware of the fact that we should be working towards tax harmonisation and that , as Mr Cox pointed out , what is needed in Europe is new tax not more tax .
It should be borne in mind , however , that we are currently implementing the directive liberalising the electricity and gas markets whose main objective is to bring down energy prices .
Progress is in fact being made .
I am most familiar with the situation in my own country , Spain , where electricity prices have fallen by 11 % .
Other countries have not moved as quickly .
The directives are being implemented and liberalisation of the electricity markets is beginning to take place .
I feel we would be trying to do too many things at once if we placed an additional tax burden on energy at the moment .
Consequently , we do agree that in the future direct taxation should be replaced by indirect taxation and that energy should be taxed , provided there is genuine fiscal neutrality and that such a move does not result in increased costs for businesses .
The current situation means that we must become more competitive .
As you are well aware , Commissioner , energy is very cheap in the United States .
In Europe , taxes constitute the major part of the cost of energy and hydrocarbons are a good example of this . In France and Belgium , for instance , taxes on transport are very high , whereas in other countries such as Spain they are considerably lower .
Within the Union , we need to legislate for all 15 countries and that is not an easy task .
We must begin to liberalise the gas and electricity markets and we must become more competitive and implement countless regulations on the environment which businesses must then comply with .
This week , for instance , we shall be considering the directive on water . Industry will be very much affected by this directive , and will have to make substantial investments .
We shall also consider directives on waste .
In our view , Commissioner , we must allow some breathing space before implementing this directive .
We do agree with the spirit of the directive , but we do not think the timing is right .
There should be no more discussion on CO2 .
It is certainly true that if the cost of energy rises , it will be used more efficiently and less will be used .
However , this calls for considerable investment . Emissions of CO2 and other pollutants will certainly be reduced .
We are not going to support Mr Cox 's report .
The directive you are proposing , Commissioner , is indeed complex and full of exceptions , but Mr Cox 's document , as approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , is far more radical and is also impossible to implement as it would do away with all grants and subsidies .
We will vote against Amendments Nos 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 and perhaps also against others .
If they are approved by the House , we will vote against the report .
What is currently consultation may in the future become codecision .
Whatever the outcome , it would be advisable to postpone this directive for a while .
Madam President , may I say what a pleasure it is to be speaking to the House on this subject .
I would also like to add that I failed , because I must have been distracted , to sign the register yesterday .
I wish to endorse absolutely what the rapporteur has said .
I want to speak on my own opinion on behalf of the Environment Committee in which the amendments were unanimously adopted by all members from all groups .
The aim of those amendments is to indicate that while Mr Monti 's proposals would be good , a green version of Mr Monti 's proposals would be better .
So our view is ' brown Monti good , green Monti very , very good ' .
However , I suspect that the Council will not have the wisdom either to take up Mr Monti 's brown proposals or even any green version of Mr Monti that we choose to recommend to it .
I believe that when you discuss harmonising taxation , you are talking not just about the technicalities of harmonising taxes but how you use them , and - it seems to me - the Council will miss a huge opportunity if it does not pick up the Monti proposals .
It should remember what it has been saying about Kyoto and Buenos Aires and use this as an opportunity to influence the way in which energy is used in our Community .
As a consequence of my own stupidity , it may be that the Spencer report on CO2 Energy Tax , for which I have been hereditary rapporteur for nearly ten years , will not reach Parliament in my time .
It is being held in committee and I strongly recommend to Parliament that it remain held in committee .
I believe that the Commission and the Council will have to come back to a CO2 Energy Tax because that is one of the ways of making a real difference .
I recommend that future Parliaments hold that report in committee and , if I might be a bit mischievous , perhaps leave the words Spencer on it , not for me but - since climate change is a long-term issue - maybe for my daughters ' time in this Parliament .
Madam President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports both the Monti proposal and the proposal in the report , because on many points the latter has some practical suggestions to make which are better geared to the aim of changing tack on tax .
In this respect , it should be emphasised that neither the original proposal for a directive , nor the proposal as amended by the European Parliament , can be anything other than a first step towards ecological tax reform , even though I have to agree with Mr Spencer that the proposal itself does not actually provide for a green energy tax .
That is why my group also supports amending the Cox report , so that we at least make it obligatory for the Member States of the European Union not to levy taxes on electricity and other products derived from renewable sources of energy .
I believe that this proposal , which rightly seeks to tax energy so that the tax burden on labour can be eased - as already foreseen in the Delors White Paper of 1993 - improves the directive in this regard , also making it greener .
I do not think that this has an adverse effect on the system ; I believe it is necessary .
I know that this directive is intended to make the internal market function more effectively , and to eliminate anything that interferes with it , including in the country of consumption , but we also need to bear in mind that in 1920 , when the former economist , Mr Pigou , first developed the whole idea of using taxes to help to save resources , he also brought about a change in the nature of our debates by choosing this approach .
It is also important for the proposal for a directive to emphasise fiscal neutrality .
In this respect , when it comes to implementation , efforts must be made in the Member States to ease the tax burden on labour so that the effects on employment really can come into play too .
The energy tax - and this needs to be emphasised - is not an ecotax .
I believe that there is actually an urgent need for us to reopen the unfortunate discussions and debates which we held at European level after Rio and Kyoto , and which yielded no results .
Since then , I believe that many Member States have gone further than the proposal for a directive does .
I also think it would be a good idea for European countries to learn from one another , and I would very much welcome any moves by companies which are heavy consumers of energy - and to whom a rebate will definitely have to be granted - to adopt a practice which has been so successful in Denmark , and to submit to an energy audit .
Madam President , this directive was devised to meet a triple objective , and is therefore difficult to analyse . Difficulties have also arisen in the drafting of Mr Cox 's report .
On the one hand , the directive aims at fiscal harmonisation to improve the operation of the market .
On the other , it seeks to meet an economic target : replacing labour taxes with energy taxes .
In addition , it also has an ecological purpose .
Combining three objectives in a single directive is bound to prove complicated .
I feel that in his report , Mr Cox , the rapporteur , has attempted to lighten this heavy burden somewhat , and to reduce the scope of the triple objective a little .
Preparing a Union-wide harmonising directive on as complex a matter as energy is certainly a complicated business .
I believe that the Commission 's initial approach was wise , because the problem calls for countless exceptions to the general rule .
There is no other way of dealing with the situation .
On this point , our group differs from Mr Cox 's approach .
The fact of the matter is that when it comes to drafting fiscal regulations , exceptions are the rule , as existing regulations will prove . I therefore find it hard to understand why in this case the exceptions we feel are essential in order to safeguard the competitiveness of the European Union 's system of production cannot be accepted .
Consequently , as Mrs Estevan Bolea has already said , if the rapporteur 's position on the deletion of a series of amendments , that is , Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 15 , remains unchanged , we will vote against the report . We earnestly believe that to deal with this issue appropriately , and in view of the difficulties involved , the whole range of exceptions envisaged by the Commission , along with others which are bound to arise , ought to be included and analysed in depth .
Madam President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to express our support for Mr Cox 's report .
This report contains a range of improvements to the Commission 's proposal for a directive and represents a timely and appropriate response at European Union level to three fundamental challenges .
The first of these involves strengthening the internal market . The proposed fiscal harmonisation aims to do away with current imbalances .
The second is to ensure that the European internal market becomes more competitive at international level .
Clearly , if better fiscal harmonisation becomes a reality , as the application of this tax sets out to achieve , it will be possible to do away with labour costs or lower them without reducing the level of fiscal income at Union and Member State level . As a result , the European Union as a whole will introduce an element of competitiveness into the cost structure on the international market .
The third challenge is also important , although I am aware that there have been some criticisms in this respect . An appropriate environmental policy will contribute to sustainable development , which is one of the European Union 's main aims .
As we see it , Mr Cox 's report will allow these three challenges to be met , whilst allowing the Member States considerable leeway to adapt this directive , provided that there are no negative consequences for the level of competitiveness nor for the achievement of the European internal market , which is one of the Union 's main aims .
Madam President , with reference to the Commission 's draft directive and Mr Cox 's report I have three comments to make .
First , nobody can disagree with the need to protect the environment from energy product emissions .
However , what we really need is positive intervention in favour of renewable forms of energy , in favour of the modernisation of plant and production methods in order to ensure that our energies are more environmentally friendly . We do not need indirect tax-raising measures which will have a serious impact on people 's incomes .
Secondly , the level of taxation of energy products of all kinds which is being proposed here will , we feel , lead in some cases to a very significant rise in prices , which could be as much as 9 % or even 11 % .
In a period of severe financial constraints within the framework of economic and monetary union , this will put increased pressure on the living standards and conditions of the public at large .
Thirdly , Madam President , we would like to express yet again our deep concern at the proposed substitution of social contributions made to the social security system , the so-called ' employment tax ' , by the so-called ' energy tax ' .
Such substitution would not only not lead to an increase in social security funds , but would actually permit governments to privatise these funds , which would have severe repercussions on the entire social security system .
Madam President , our colleague , Mr Cox , has done some excellent work on the Commission 's proposal .
I would also like to thank Tom Spencer for the work he has done for years now in this House in connection with the CO2 tax proposal .
The Green Group fully agrees with Mr Spencer that we must preserve this proposal for a CO2 tax .
We must not reject it , as it contains more elements which would influence environmental behaviour than Mr Monti 's proposal which we are now discussing .
Mr Cox really has made this proposal of Mr Monti 's ' greener ' .
It now contains clear justifications for exemptions , and these exemptions have indeed to be justified from the environmental point of view .
Furthermore , his explanation of how industry could receive energy tax relief is extremely clear .
He suggests that industry must be able to justify this relief for reasons of competitiveness , and everything should then proceed under the eye of the Commission .
Mr Cox 's report proposes taking as a starting point the tax base in the year 2000 , which would then be increased by 2 % above inflation every year for a period of five years .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is a very modest increase .
If we wish to move in the direction of environmental sustainability , we would do well to consider a slightly bolder approach .
For this reason the Green Group have made a proposal for this annual index figure to read 4 % above inflation .
The difference between Mr Cox 's proposal and ours is that over five years his proposal would increase energy taxation by some 10 % , while ours would not increase it any more than 20 % .
I therefore appeal to you all to consider this amendment by the Green Group .
Madam President , the June Movement supports minimum taxes on energy , but the money must remain in the national treasuries and not provide new revenue for the EU .
We want the right to impose higher taxes on energy so that we can make savings and promote the switch to renewable energy .
The June Movement also insists on representing those who have no voting rights , those who will come after us .
We cannot simply squander the Earth 's scarce resources .
If the border between Denmark and Germany is abolished , people will go to Germany and buy cheap petrol and heating oil .
The taxes will end up in the German Treasury instead of the Danish Treasury .
We shall then be forced to lower our taxes and duties to the German level .
There will then be less money in the public purse to finance support for education , early retirement and old age pensions .
We have greater equality between people in Denmark than in Germany and the rest of the EU .
The June Movement defends this Nordic welfare model , and that is why we vote for the highest possible minimum prices but , at the same time , we want to remain free to tax energy which is imported at lower prices , so that French nuclear power does not replace action to switch to renewable energy , solar energy and wind power .
There are only guaranteed minimum prices for wind energy in three countries : Germany , Spain and Denmark .
And it is here that we have most of the world 's windmills .
Solar energy and wind power must not be exchanged for nuclear power .
Madam President , the rapporteur has been successful in reaching a sensible compromise between the needs of the environment and the need to reduce the statutory charges on labour .
This is an accomplished balancing act between the two main thrusts of our policy , which come into conflict with each other in the most fundamental of projects .
At a time when combating the massive levels of unemployment is the main economic and social concern of European policy , and when we are all aware of the dangers of damaging the environment by using non-renewable forms of energy , the cautious but clear-cut approach outlined here seems to be the right way forward .
It is to be hoped that some of the amendments which make the report more obviously a green one , giving greater emphasis to the decisive role which renewable sources of energy will play here in the future and promoting their use , will be accepted .
On the other hand , amendments such as Amendment No 13 , which would bring huge losses for some branches of industry and cause jobs to be lost , should be rejected .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully support Mr Cox 's report .
It makes the Commission proposal clearer and ensures that it will be effective .
Nonetheless , I should like to take up two points which are mentioned in the Environment Committee 's report .
At this stage , I should also like to thank Mr Spencer , in particular , for his determined efforts on this matter and for his trusting cooperation .
The first point concerns the issue of renewable sources of energy .
I believe that if we also want this tax reform to result in a change of direction , then we need to exempt renewables from this tax , because we should not make them subject to national competition .
If one country says it will exempt them and another says it will not , then this issue will immediately be at the mercy of competition .
That is why we should send out a clear signal based on Mr Cox 's proposal - clear , efficient rules .
I say : let us exempt renewables from this tax .
The second point relates to the sector currently responsible for the greatest increases in CO2 emissions , namely aviation .
Last year , there was a 17 % increase in CO2 emissions .
This sector is completely excluded because there are certain problems with levying this tax on kerosene .
I would urge you , therefore , to accept Amendment No 29 and to say that we are bearing this in mind and that we instruct the Commission to propose an adequate solution so that this sector too can be included .
Madam President , this proposal to introduce harmonised minimum taxation of energy products is designed to please a lot of people .
It aims to improve the environment , reduce labour costs and promote the optimum operation of the single market , while all the time of course avoiding any risk of jeopardising the competitive position of our industries .
The proposal is no doubt based on good intentions , but both the proposal itself and its amended version lead me to question what its effects are likely to be in practice for labour-intensive companies , including many SMEs .
If , out of a perfectly justifiable concern for the competitive position of energy-intensive companies , they are granted an exemption , refund or reduction in energy tax , on an individual basis or otherwise , I wonder whether this does not present a real risk that it will be mainly the labour-intensive companies which will find themselves paying the CO2 tax .
If we assume that tax neutrality is not applied per operating unit but rather in a horizontal and more general manner , is there then not a real danger of shifting fiscal pressure from energy-intensive companies to labour-intensive companies ?
Would we not then , I wonder , be achieving the very opposite of what we set out to do , with small polluters paying relatively more than the large ones , and labour-intensive companies being harder hit than energy-intensive companies ?
Commissioner , the SMEs are not very happy about this .
There is not much support for this proposal in such circles , and I should like to have heard you say something to refute what I have just suggested .
I should also like to know how you view the timing .
When do you think the Council will take a decision on this ?
Madam President , a good environment tax is a tax that can be avoided .
It steers producer and consumer behaviour in a way that has a positive impact on the environment .
The prime objective cannot be a fiscal one .
But there are certain issues that cannot be avoided .
One is the northern view of this matter .
The record for cold weather in Finland was exceeded this winter : minus fifty-four degrees .
At the moment it is minus thirty in Helsinki , and more than forty degrees below zero in the north .
Furthermore , I should like to point out that distances are very great in the north , and energy is required for purposes of mobility .
My constituency measures a distance of 1 300 kilometres across .
When I consider the two issues of the need for heating and the need for mobility , we must be eligible for exemptions and these exemptions must be made available for households too , as otherwise ordinary people living in remote areas will be paying for the very tax relief which this policy wants to grant to energy-intensive industry .
It is being proposed that employers ' contributions be reduced , but in our case those reductions would result from wrong intentions .
Because the European Union is so naturally diverse , it must be able to apply differing taxation systems .
We accept a minimum standard , but EU regulation must end there .
Madam President , of course as a member of the Greens , I too - as Mr Spencer said - would have liked this to be an even greener proposal .
However , as a Green , I can say that I regard this as an important , if tentative step , in fact only a first small step forward on taxation - or at least harmonisation - in this sector .

If I may , however , I shall also make two points : I think Mr Cox was right to say that renewables should be exempted , because of course this is also about triggering a turning-point in our energy policy .
We all know that the future belongs to renewables , and that here too we need to set the right course .
I am also hoping , however , that the House will support our amendment seeking to exempt local public transport , because this too is a decisive point .
If we want to contribute towards reducing CO2 emissions , then we need to cut the damaging numbers of private cars on the roads , which is of course one of the aims of this tax on consumption .
But it is also necessary to create incentives for environmentally friendly local public transport .
We also believe that we should not continue to subsidise air traffic .
There are other possibilities , such as a tax on CO2 emissions , which might exonerate us from the principle of unanimity , and which would also be compatible with international agreements .
It is to be hoped , therefore , that the Commission will finally present an adequate proposal to us in March .
To sum up : we think that this is an important step in the right direction .
Madam President , over the last two decades labour in Europe has been taxed increasingly heavily .
If this trend is reversed , which - the exception proving the rule - is what has happened in my country since 1994 , the persistently high level of unemployment in the European Union can be substantially reduced .
It is in this context that we must view the two taxation reports - the Cox and Pérez Royo reports - submitted to us today .
The tax burden must be shifted from labour to the environment and capital income .
The Cox report deals with excise tax on energy products .
The main problem with the present legislation is that the tax base is very incomplete .
A number of energy products , such as natural gas , coal and electricity have to date been exempt from excise duty .
Other fuels which are normally taxed are granted exemption in the case of specific uses , such as kerosene for aviation or fuel for shipping or fishing .
A third problem is that the same fuels are taxed differently depending on their use .
Fuels used for transport purposes are taxed more heavily than if used for heating .
Fuels which are generally used by industry are also subject to a lower tax than fuels for consumer use .
A final problem is that although the minimum taxation rates are harmonised at European level , this is at such a low level that it virtually ceases to have any meaning .
Of course the Cox report cannot be expected to deal with all these problems at once .
This is legislation requiring a unanimous vote in the Council , which is usually a guarantee of inaction .
But what the report does recommend - and we strongly support this - is extending the tax base to include coal , natural gas and electricity , scrapping some of the mandatory use exemptions and increasing and index-linking minimum rates .
This indexing also includes the notion of an accelerator .
Every year the tax must not only keep pace with inflation but increase by 2 % above the inflation rate .
Finally , the Cox report retains optional exemptions which the Member States are at liberty to grant , while nevertheless tightening up the conditions .
All in all , this report is a major step in the right direction , not only in terms of shifting the tax burden but also in environmental terms , as many uses which were previously tax exempt will now be taxed for the first time .
It is also clear that much more remains to be done in both these respects .
The lower rates for energy products used by industry , for example , are totally indefensible from an environmental point of view as it is precisely these fuels which cause the most pollution .
Finally , the optional exemptions which the Member States can still apply are totally irrational in environmental terms .
Nevertheless , this report is still very much needed , and it sends a strong signal to the Council about where Parliament stands on this issue - a necessary signal , as the Council does not seem to be strengthening the Commission proposals but rather undermining them to the point where they scarcely have any meaning at all .
This is why I appeal to fellow party members in the European governments to put the need to shift the burden of taxation away from labour before national short-term interests .
I believe this matter should be a test case in this respect .
Madam President , there can be few areas that call for such a dispassionate analysis as this one - energy taxation . We must make sure that the objectives claimed for it are attainable and that fairness and cohesion are not overlooked .
Just as with the initiative on the taxation of carbon dioxide emissions , once again it is being claimed that the targets are fiscal neutrality and the replacement of taxes on labour , thereby helping to create jobs .
Apart from the obvious fact that any measure that changes production processes cannot be called neutral , another question is whether taxation penalising energy use will not discourage investment - by SMEs in particular - and thereby result in job losses . We also need to ask to what extent direct taxation will be replaced by a form of taxation that , if it succeeds , will discourage the use of energy and therefore will not bring in more revenue .
In other words , there is a conflict between the parafiscal and fiscal aims - you cannot have your cake and eat it .
Another important question is how to avoid regressive taxation , given that poorer people spend proportionately more of their money on energy , and how we can prevent poorer countries from being penalised , as they lie on the outer edges of the continent , have less up-to-date equipment and face higher transport costs .
This problem exists in the north , as Mr Seppänen said , but it is more serious in the south .
It is especially unacceptable to penalise road transport when there is no proper alternative in the form of rail - something that should be given European Union support as a priority .
Let us take a look at the figures : in fuel tax , road tax and tolls , road users already pay twice as much as is spent on them , compared with just 56 % in the case of rail and 18 % for shipping . These taxes are equal to 2 % of the European Union 's GDP .
I therefore call on you to support the amendment tabled by Mrs Esteban Bolea , from my group , to avoid discrimination between different forms of transport - not forgetting air transport , which is also responsible for pollution .
Madam President , the Commission 's proposal relating to the taxation of energy products was accurately summed up by the Environment Committee in its opinion as a proposal to improve the functioning of the internal market .
Now the rapporteur , Mr Cox , and the opinion from the other committee , as well as some of the amendments , have in fact turned this report into a ' green ' proposal , setting us on the road to compliance with the agreements reached in Kyoto and Buenos Aires , as well as in the other conventions relating to the reduction of CO2 emissions .
The introduction of tax credits for solar , wind and water power might also send a clear signal to industry when it is investing in energy , thereby facilitating the transition to renewable energy sources .
I therefore regard this report as a first step in the right direction .
Furthermore , the recommendation that the Member States should achieve fiscal neutrality by lowering labour taxes and taxing energy instead - a so-called tax trade-off - immeasurably improves the proposal by pointing it in a totally ' green ' direction .
I would also urge you to support the amendment tabled by the Green Group .
Madam President , we should certainly be moving towards fiscal harmonisation in the energy sector .
This will , however , be a difficult task in view of the existing differences amongst the 15 Member States and because we ought not to increase prices . That might mean losing competitiveness and employment , which is the exact opposite of what we are aiming at .
As it stands at the moment , this proposal involves increasing taxes and making the cost of transport dearer in the ' cohesion countries ' , that is , those countries that are located on the periphery of Europe and that , in fact , produce the least pollution .
Moreover , if the tax is extended to cover other energy products , the internal market will not be harmonised .
Instead , competition amongst the various sources of energy will be distorted . For instance , coal - which is still our main indigenous source of energy and currently undergoing a technological revolution - will be heavily penalised .
Mr Cox 's proposals present a somewhat contradictory situation .
If the European energy-consuming industries that are currently making great efforts to save energy are exempted , our competitive edge will be lost .
That technological effort would be penalised and competitiveness on the international field jeopardised .
The steel sector is a good example of many of these industries . It competes both within the European Union and internationally , with energy as an important factor .
In light of this situation , we find it difficult to accept a number of unilateral proposals that were put forward .
The Spanish Socialists will vote against Mr Cox 's proposals and we hope agreement will be reached in Council .
Nevertheless , I must stress the difficulty of the task because not only do the different arrangements for energy in the various countries need to be harmonised but also the very countries that are least responsible for the high level of pollution in Europe will be penalised .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is clear that this is a complex topic from the fact that this whole dossier has been in a protracted stalemate for some time now , and given the divergence of positions , this will be the case for longer still .
Mr Cox 's approach , basically to simplify the proposal , is of course commendable , but it does not meet with the approval of a majority of the Group of the European People 's Party , as indeed has already been emphasised .
I believe that we have also already made it clear in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy that we agree with Articles 13 and 15 in terms of the approach chosen by the Commission and presented to us here , and are not in favour of their deletion .
The Commission 's approach , to have the EU define the main exemptions and not the Member States , is the one that we favour , because we believe that if the Member States lay down the exceptions , then competition will become a major factor after all , because in fact no indication is given of the scale of the exceptions permitted .
There will be a flood of control measures here .
We have heard - and indeed we know - that the focus is on the environment , but also on jobs .
However , it is precisely the competitiveness of energy-intensive end products , such as steel , cement , aluminium and others , which is at stake here , and it is also from the point of view of competition from third countries that uniform rules should be adopted in the EU , as advocated by the Commission .
An increase in energy prices , as proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and in particular in Mr Cox 's amendments , is something we oppose , because this of all things seems to us to be counter-productive from the point of view of employment .
Madam President , I too think that Mr Cox 's proposal is very reasonable , and I am prepared to vote in favour of it .
I should also like to thank Mr Spencer , who has , after all , kept the home fires burning for many years .
Unfortunately , the fire will probably have to burn for even longer , because I suspect that the Council of Ministers will not reach an agreement .
That is also illustrated even now by the very inconsistent picture here in the House .
That is the real problem .
In this respect , I think that the Commission proposal is sensible , because it does not in fact take the environment as a starting-point , but Article 99 , and therefore the harmonisation of existing taxes .
I think that is much more sensible ; it brings us closer to our goal perhaps , simply because liberalising the markets means that we are compelled to harmonise the background conditions too .
The fact that this also has an environmental side-effect is all to the good .
Whether the Council appreciates that , I do not know ; I suspect that there will be substantial difficulties there , but in any case I wish the German Presidency the best of luck with making further progress on this .
I have one more comment : paradoxically , it is actually industry which has had the greatest success in cutting its energy use in recent years , while private consumption and consumption in the transport sector have tended to increase .
This is plain to see in the countries of Central Europe .
In proportion to gross domestic product , energy consumption has fallen , in some cases dramatically , while the energy consumption of households and the transport sector has risen .
If , therefore , we wish to have a device , an environmental device , for reducing energy consumption , we must , I am afraid , mainly target households and the transport sector and design a tax instrument in such a way that it particularly affects them .
That is probably also why this tax is so unpopular .
No party will win an election if it puts this at the centre of its campaign .
Nevertheless , I see this as a long-term task which we have to set ourselves , and I should like to thank all those who are working on introducing these thoroughly unpopular , but reasonable measures .
Madam President , as a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and as rapporteur on the Green Paper on the internalisation of external costs and the ensuing Commission White Paper on fair payment for infrastructure use , I am glad to have the opportunity in this debate to consider the complex subject of energy taxation from the point of view of one aspect of transport policy .
In its proposal for a directive to introduce a new framework for energy taxation , the Commission has made a proposal for road transport which the rapporteur , Mr Cox , obviously regards simply as one of the many confused exemptions which he wishes to remove from the draft directive .
In Article 16 of its draft text , the Commission proposes that it should be possible for Member States to introduce tax reductions for road transport , if at the same time charges are imposed on a non-discriminatory basis which reflect infrastructure , environmental and congestion costs .
As you know , in the committees , my colleagues in the Group of the Party of European Socialists voted against the deletion of Article 16 , and I should like to strongly urge all of you to do the same at the vote in plenary , because the provisions which the rapporteur wishes to delete from the draft directive form the starting-point for a new approach to European transport policy , for a transport policy which is environmentally friendly and efficient .
The Commission was only being consistent when it integrated the concept of charging into the proposal on energy taxation , because this is in line with the proposals it made in its Green Paper and subsequently also in the White Paper .
As rapporteur , I agree with the principles contained in these documents , and that is why I should like to advise Parliament also to be consistent and to support this new departure for transport policy in the debate on energy taxation , particularly since we have already done so in the House in the context of our debate on the Green Paper .
I would therefore urge you to make an efficient and sustainable transport policy a possibility in Europe and to vote in favour of Article 16 as it stands in the Commission proposal .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Schmidbauer has hit the nail on the head : the fair payment model in the transport sector has shown us that we need to work on the essential points , which means that we should dispense with cross-subsidisation .
Non-wage labour costs are a completely self-contained issue which needs attention .
We need more competition there and we must see to it that we bring about significant reductions in these costs , and that personal responsibility plays a greater part in the system .
Energy taxation is a completely separate sector .
As far as energy taxation is concerned , it is basically a question of bringing costs down to reasonable levels , so that we become more competitive internationally and create new jobs .
Excessive price increases will simply result in job losses in the energy-intensive sectors , such as steel , and all the others with which we are so familiar .
I must also stress that we cannot disregard the consumer .
At the end of the day , it is consumers who create jobs , by deciding which products to buy and which services to use .
We cannot force them into these decisions by adopting general regulations .
That is also why I think having a ceiling for energy-intensive companies is very important .
It ought to ensure that those businesses which have already brought their technical facilities up to date - and have thus gone a long way towards bringing their energy consumption close to its theoretical minimum level - are given due recognition .
We should reward those which are minimising their energy input .
In this case , higher rates of energy tax will not bring any further significant reductions .
In addition , and quite apart from the environmental argument , doubt has also been cast on the effect which this would have on easing the employment situation .
Only competitive companies are in a position to meet these requirements .
I am therefore in favour of a system which is not out of proportion , but which will actually be able to achieve the declared objectives .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely grateful to Mr Cox for his clear and consistent report and for the conclusions he has reached in it .
I am really glad that you are in full agreement with the grounds for this proposal and the way in which they have been put into effect .
The Commission has put a proposal to the Council , based on the need to modernise the Community system of taxing mineral oils , and extending this to cover all energy products .
This has to be done to improve the functioning of the internal market .
The measures proposed are actually designed to reduce the distortions caused by taxation that currently exist in this sector .
The Commission has also taken advantage of the opportunity which this proposal affords of both meeting its responsibility for reviewing the minimum rates of duty on mineral oils and responding to ECOFIN 's request that it table new proposals now that , as you will be aware , the negotiations on the CO2 / energy tax have reached an impasse .
I have also to say to the House that we are seeing ever increasing concern - and that has been patently clear this morning - about the environmental effects of burning fossil fuels ; and the Council 's recent adoption , in response to the Kyoto Protocol , of the limits on polluting emissions to be achieved by the Union is a further example of this .
Those objectives will not be easy to attain , but the fiscal measures - and Mr Spencer and a number of other honourable Members pointed this out - are one of the specific ways that can be used to achieve them .
I am also grateful for the acknowledgement that has come from many sectors that this is a step in the right direction in environmental terms as well .
The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 and 5 and some parts of Amendments Nos 12 and 14 , particularly those parts of Amendment No 14 that refer to renewable energies .
However , we cannot agree to the proposal that we should move directly to the second stage , provided for in relation to the minimum rates , as early as January 2000 , and then move on to annual increases equivalent to the rate of inflation plus 2 % for the five following years .
Moreover , as regards removing the initial stage of increases in the minimum rates for which the date was initially set at 1 January 1998 , it is worth pointing out that this deadline has long since passed .
However , the discussions in the Council have shown that even the minimum rates caused problems for a number of Member States .
Consequently , any increase in those rates is unacceptable .
The same applies to the proposal that the minimum rates could be increased annually on the basis of the rate of inflation , increased by 2 % for a period of five years .
The Commission proposal limits the tax increases to the rate of inflation in an effort to meet half-way those Member States that would be compelled to introduce substantial tax increases simply in order to reach the minimum rate laid down .
It is therefore unacceptable to compel the Member States to apply increases that are actually above the rate of inflation .
Moreover , we cannot agree to the removal of the bulk of the - compulsory or optional - exemptions and reductions that have been proposed for products that are not currently subject to taxation .
Those exemptions and reductions were provided for very specific reasons : some are already reflected in the Community legislation currently in force , and others are needed to meet certain Community commitments arising out of international agreements .
There is a final group considered vital to secure the competitiveness of the Community industries in relation to their third country competitors .
Furthermore , I do not need to remind the House that this is an issue that requires unanimity .
Mrs Thyssen and other honourable Members have asked for information concerning the progress of this issue in the Council and the timetable for it .
I can tell you that the relevant Council working group has been asked to submit to the ECOFIN Council meeting of 15 March a report that will then be referred to the Cologne European Council in June .
And so we shall soon be able to see whether or not a political consensus is forming .
I very much hope it is .
There is one point I should like to make in conclusion , Mr President .
What we are dealing with here is fiscal coordination which meets the needs of the internal market and , in this instance , environmental needs , and which is also , as many of you have pointed out , a response to the need to shift the tax burden in such a way as to promote employment .
There have been times in the course of recent European debates when a peculiar attitude has emerged : there has been a tendency to look back and to reflect on the earlier White Paper , as if no progress had been made since then towards achieving the kind of coordination we are talking about .
In point of fact , the progress that has been made is now clear : this morning , we have the Cox report on energy , and the House will shortly be debating the Pérez Royo report on taxation of savings income .
Meantime , the code of conduct to prevent harmful tax competition is being applied , and next week I shall be presenting to the Commission the proposal to allow those Member States that so wish to apply a reduced rate of VAT to labour-intensive services .
And so , as you can see , the various elements of genuine progress towards fiscal coordination designed to encourage employment are under way ; they all have the firm backing of this House , for which I am very grateful .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Taxation of savings income
The next item is the report ( A4-0040 / 99 ) by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive to ensure a minimum of effective taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments within the Community ( COM ( 98 ) 0295 - C4-0404 / 98-98 / 0193 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive we have before us deals with a difficult issue . Any matters involving taxation are always difficult within the Union and , as you are well aware , they require unanimity within the Council .
Allow me to summarise the historical background to this proposal for a directive .
It has been anticipated for more than 10 years .
The present proposal arises , in fact , from the directive liberalising the movement of capital , approved in 1988 as part of the programme to set up the internal market .
The directive on liberalising the movement of capital created legal conditions which , in fact , expedited the operation of the internal market as far as placing capital was concerned .
Yet this same directive also opened the door for fiscal competition amongst Member States which , in turn , tended to create the appropriate conditions to attract capital from other Member States .
This very directive liberalising the movement of capital therefore set out a clear timetable for the harmonisation of taxation of savings income to prevent such harmful competition .
As you know , the proposal for a directive presented by Mrs Scrivener in 1989-10 years ago - was never even discussed seriously and was eventually withdrawn .
Meanwhile , the Member States approved rules that discriminated between residents and non-residents with regard to taxation of savings income .
Residents were subject to the relevant tax , but payments to non-residents were considered tax-free .
This gave rise to a number of dangerous situations .
Firstly , a situation arose that was harmful to the operation of the internal market . Capital was not placed in the interest of profitability but according to fiscal considerations .
Secondly , fiscal fraud - tax evasion - increased .
Thirdly , as a result of all this , the tax burden gradually shifted to the detriment of employment prospects .
Ten years on , we have been presented with the new proposal which , it has to be said , represents a definite improvement on the previous one from a technical point of view . Crucially too , and this is the significant factor , the political context is much more favourable .
The general feeling is more positive and , we hope , it will therefore be possible to overcome any obstacles that would prevent it being approved .
The proposal is presented as part of a flexible strategy included in a broader package and in a context in which it has been possible to include the notion of ' damaging ' fiscal competition , harmful fiscal competition , into our common language .
What we are dealing with here is a clear example of such damaging fiscal competition , which the directive aims to eliminate . This is nevertheless a minimalist directive with relatively modest objectives .
The directive is based on a coexistence model , that is to say , it offers the Member States two options . They may either operate a withholding tax on payment of interest within their territory , making no distinction between residents and non-residents , or choose instead to provide other Member States with information on savings income paid to non-residents in their territory .
This is a flexible proposal enabling the interests of the various Member States to be coordinated or harmonised . The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has given it majority support , and this rapporteur strongly supports it .
There have only been a few isolated amendments opposed to this approach and these were subsequently rejected .
Naturally , certain issues are open for debate , particularly the problem of third countries .
For a directive of this nature to maintain the competitiveness of the European financial sector , similar measures ought to be applied in neighbouring areas . I am referring , of course , to our trading partners and to countries where European capital might be placed .
There appear to be two ways of approaching this issue , two lines of thought .
The first is to introduce an element of conditionality , for the approval or implementation of this directive to be dependent on us reaching an agreement with these third countries .
Another way forward , outlined by the Commission and supported by your rapporteur , would be for the Commission to put forward its own legislation , thus gaining moral credibility and even achieving a consensus , in the hope of imposing or carrying through negotiations in this area .
Our committee has come out in favour of this proposal . Only one fairly significant amendment was approved in committee .
It involves lowering the minimum rate of tax from 20 % to 15 % . I appreciate that this matter has to be debated in the Council , but as far as Parliament is concerned , Madam President , I can inform you now , on behalf of the Socialist Group , that we shall be voting for 20 % .
Madam President , my group supports the rapporteur 's position .
Like the rapporteur , whom I congratulate , I too should like to say once again how glad I am that - ten years after the last proposal foundered - there is at last a possibility of making progress in this field .
I think that there is a need for fair taxation in the European Union .
Fair taxation is also a principle which should be observed in the internal market , which means that interest on savings cannot simply be exempted from tax .
Both the proposal for a directive and the rapporteur 's report make it very clear that according preferential treatment to non-residents - a concept which is not actually compatible with the concept of the internal market either - is now a thing of the past , because the directive will not permit any further discrimination .
Of course , a major difficulty with the proposal was that , here too , the unanimity rule applied and continues to do so .
At this juncture , I must emphasise once again that it is absolutely essential for further discussions to be held in the Council on the issue of majority voting .
The Commission proposal contains a coexistence model , and rightly so , because I think that this was the only basis on which there was any chance of its being adopted , although I do believe that a uniform regime is inevitable in the long term .
What is important is that this proposal is part of the tax package , because in this way unfair tax competition can be consigned to the past .
That is also why we could not allow any exceptions , because if we had , we would in fact have been authorising a kind of tax haven in a particular sector .
In this respect , I must support the Commission proposal , which also includes Eurobonds in the regime .
At this stage , I should just like to say a brief word on the problems associated with only taxing the interest on savings accounts .
Even though this particular proposal does not cover interest payments to legal entities and companies , in the interests of fairer taxation and also bearing in mind the opportunities open to all the Member States in the European Union to secure revenue , further thought needs to be given to how the scope of this directive can be extended .
I should also like to say that I fully support the rapporteur 's call for us to keep to the rate of withholding tax proposed by the Commission , namely 20 % .
Madam President , the fact that quite a lot of Member States give more favourable fiscal treatment to the savings income of non-residents than the savings income of their own residents leads to problems on the single market .
People go tax shopping with their savings and for obvious reasons omit to declare the savings income received in other Member States to their own tax authorities , thus avoiding paying tax .
The Member State of residence fails to collect its tax on savings and the single market becomes distorted .
It seems the Member States ' reaction is to try and keep the tax burden on volatile capital at a low level or to reduce it , often at the expense of upward pressure on labour taxes .
Now that we have entered the euro era with the disappearance of the exchange risk and soon also transaction costs , there is a great fear that the temptation to engage in this form of tax evasion will increase further .
The Belgian tax authorities have been familiar with this for some time .
The exchange risk between Belgium and Luxembourg disappeared a long time ago , and the so-called coupon trains to Luxembourg are always very full .
Although the proposed directive consists of just 15 articles , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy tabled no fewer than 89 amendments .
Fortunately , in the opinion of the PPE , only 10 were approved .
Each of these 10 was approved by our group .
Madam President , Commissioner , the PPE wants to keep as close to the Commission 's proposal as possible , but we would like to see the withholding tax reduced to 15 % .
We hope that this amendment , which has also been adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , will be accepted here in the plenary .
The PPE also continues to oppose extending the field of application to include legal persons and the exclusion of Eurobonds , for reasons which were discussed at length in committee .
Finally , the PPE also does not support the amendments which want to see an agreement at OECD level first and which seek to make the directive 's entry into force dependent on this .
We believe there are sound arguments for adopting a different approach to intra-Community and international capital movements , including those to do with the free movement of capital and exchange risks .
Madam President , this directive does not provide the ultimate , comprehensive solution , but it is a major step in the right direction .
We want to encourage this and will therefore be voting for the Commission 's proposal .
But I would have liked to have heard from the Commissioner , and this is my final point , when he thinks the Council will grant its approval .
Madam President , the proposal we have before us today and which is the result of extensive but fruitless discussions 10 years ago is once again back on track because it has been decided to opt for a coexistence model .
I believe it is a good solution and a step forward in ensuring that existing differences , and in particular unfair differences , are removed .
The Liberal Group supports the main thrust of the proposal as it stands and is pleased that the original proposal to extend it to include undertakings has now been dropped , so that it is now purely concerned with the interest earned by physical persons .
This being so , as was pointed out in connection with the previous proposal , we have to consider whether there is scope to reduce labour costs .
This is why we have retabled our amendments in order to ensure we have a kind of fiscal neutrality by which the resources in question are channelled back to the individual .
At the end of the day , the fact that a number of people - and these were very large groups - were able to pay less than no tax had a knock-on effect for everyone else , because the money has to come from somewhere .
If we now introduce taxation , and can do so on a common basis , then I believe we must ensure that the others who have had to pay more get this back in the form of lower taxation on incomes .
I have one last comment regarding the article and amendment , as approved by Mr Pérez Royo 's committee , concerning the sale before maturity of the relevant securities .
I myself added a technical amendment on this , that in the case of purchase after the original issue , you must be careful to ensure that - especially now that it is increasingly common for the portfolio to be reclassified in line with developments on the capital market - a provision is also in place for private individuals .
Madam President , at the outset I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , for his report on the proposal for a Council directive on the taxation of savings income .
The difficulty of trying to find a system aimed at a minimum of taxation on savings income within the European Union has been more keenly appreciated as progress has been made in liberalising the movement of capital .
This liberalisation goes back some 12 years .
It is important to recall that the Commission directive which aimed at introducing a single Community-wide scheme for withholding interest at source did not obtain the unanimous consent of the Council .
It was withdrawn and replaced by the proposal which is under discussion today .
In 1997 the Council agreed that the Commission should preserve the idea of a coexistence model of taxation , meaning that each Member State will have different options : either to operate a withholding tax or to provide the other Member States with information on savings income paid to residents or indeed , a combination of both .
The Commission proposed a withholding tax to be levied at a minimum of 20 % by the paying agent .
Our committee has opted , albeit narrowly , for a lower rate of 15 % .
It is important that the Member States were able to agree that the Union should promote the establishment of equivalent measures in third countries in parallel with the discussions on the proposed directive .
The Commission is due to report back to ECOFIN next month on consultation with third countries .
Contact with third countries and associated territories must cover the same ground : in other words , minimum taxation on the equivalent co-existence model and adoption of the paying agent method .
I fully support the need for contacts with third countries .
At this stage it is obviously necessary to limit initial contacts to nearby third countries , for example , Switzerland and Monaco .
Our group can support the principle of the draft directive .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is no need for me to comment in detail here on the general problem of tax competition , where there is of course a basic conflict between the democratic principle of equal voting rights and the economic principle of purchasing power .
On this we agree : there is harmful tax competition within the EU .
This is precisely the source of the mechanism - and this is always portrayed as the pressure of globalisation - which causes destructive competition between the Member States in the internal market , triggering a downward spiral and undermining the tax base , tax equity and the use of taxes to promote employment .
We can do something about this .
We can intervene in this mechanism and do something for ourselves , without simply waiting for a lead from the OECD or worldwide negotiations .
I have three points .
Firstly , we should not tread more carefully than the Commission here .
What we should actually do is apply the US model and demand 25 % .
Secondly , we should not allow this to be postponed indefinitely , and we should not introduce provisions restricted to physical persons .
If we achieve all that , then I believe that not only will it be a step in the right direction , Mrs Thyssen and Mr Goedbloed , but that it really will be the first step on the way to reform and a political union .
I should especially like to thank Commissioner Monti for his patience , accuracy and perseverance , because in actual fact the only way in which we will overcome the principle of unanimity is by making progress on taxation and the internal market in tandem .
Mr President , as you know , the issue of a minimum taxation of savings income in the Union does not quite have the unanimous support of all Member States , and these differences of opinion are reflected within my group .
As a result , I will speak here only in a personal capacity and on behalf of the majority of the ARE Group . I should like to say that we are in favour of the Commission 's proposal for a directive on a minimum taxation of interest at the rate of 20 % , along with the option of declaring interest paid to the fiscal authorities in the country of residence .
We support this position for two main reasons , but I will not go into the details here .
On the one hand , Commissioner Monti reminded us earlier of the need to redress the balance in the Union 's tax system , a system that places too heavy a burden on labour .
On the other hand , there is a need to bring direct tax systems closer into line , which would be consistent with healthy tax competition , without going as far as harmonising such tax systems .
Our support for the Commission 's position is accompanied simply by a few recommendations .
We should like to thank the Commission in advance for doing everything possible to extend this minimum taxation beyond the Union and , in particular , to OECD countries .
Perhaps we should also make additional efforts to reach a consensus on minimum taxation between all Member States , possibly by agreeing on an appropriate timetable .
We also think that it is important to establish a sound link between the provisions of the tax agreements and this minimum taxation project .
In our opinion , this is the aim of the amendment we tabled , namely to establish sound links between minimum taxation and the provisions of the tax agreements , and this amendment was adopted by the Commission .
It is rather a shame that , in this respect , our measures for eliminating double taxation within the Union are currently based on bilateral agreements .
Finally , to come back to Mr Pérez Royo 's excellent report , we should like to point out simply and succinctly that we do not support the idea of extending taxation to include interest payments to companies .
Instead , we are in favour of taxing interest received through undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities ( Ucits ) .
Mr President , at the end of the report , the rapporteur describes the intention of the proposal as ' a major step on the way to tackling fiscal evasion and the distortions to the functioning of financial markets at Community level ' .
That is a laudable intention , I must say , but is it enough ?
In other words , is it enough to take measures against tax evasion on interest income at EU level ?
As far as I can see , the answer to this is a clear ' no ' .
The problem is more a global than an EU one .
It is necessary to take measures on a worldwide scale in this area .
I do not think there is any need in this House to remind you that there are tax havens in other parts of the world , outside the EU .
The possibilities are there .
Recital 8 of the Commission proposal says : ' in accordance with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality set out in Article 3b of the Treaty , the objective of this Directive , which is that of the effective taxation of savings income within the Community , cannot be sufficiently realised by the Member States and can therefore be better achieved by the Community ' .
But is not the real issue something different ?
I think it is . Surely what this is really about is that , after the introduction of the single currency , the euro , on 1 January 1999 , some people cannot wait to bring about further harmonisation of the whole area of taxes and duties .
That is understandable enough , of course , when we remember what the purpose of monetary union actually is : further political integration .
The former President of the European Commission , Jacques Delors , said that EMU was a launching pad for political union , and you cannot say it more clearly than that .
But that is not the language used in everyday encounters with the bemused populations of the EU countries .
Why not say quite openly that , if monetary union is to function satisfactorily , it means that there must inevitably be a common policy on finance , taxation and redistribution ?
Then people would at least have a fair chance of grasping the real issue .
Perhaps the reticence is due to fear of the reaction which would come from the people if the unvarnished truth were told .
Credit should be given to the Commission for putting an end to tax havens for savings and , at the same time , embarrassing the most corrupt political parties in Europe : Belgium 's Francophone Socialist Party , the PS , and its Flemish counterpart , the SP .
Both parties have developed the nasty habit of stashing their spoils with welcoming bankers in Luxembourg who , in spite of themselves , accept the plentiful bribes generously handed out by Dassault and Agusta .
However , I cannot help feeling rather sad when I think about the small-time Belgian investor who , having had an excessive amount of direct tax deducted from the fruits of his labour , will see his honestly earned but small savings being heavily penalised yet again .
This person will never enjoy the astronomical incomes that elicit such kindness from His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco , whose status as a tax haven is confirmed by the European Union without any hesitation or crises of conscience . In the most illegal and immoral manner possible , it is a tax haven reserved for the rich only , no matter how they may have obtained their fortune .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after the birth of the euro , we are well aware that the fight against fiscal dumping is one of our main tasks .
In view of this , Commissioner Monti 's initiative has come at just the right time .
The text we are considering today , in the form of the excellent report from my colleague Mr Pérez Royo , is one of the strands of this initiative .
The other strand relates to interests and charges .
We should not confuse the two strands .
I understand the concern expressed by those who did not want us to deal with the issue of the rights of companies or legal entities under this text , as they clearly come under the other draft directive .
As for the two proposed options , I believe their merit lies in the fact that they should make it easier to obtain unanimity within the Council .
We must use this device if it allows us to make progress .
I believe that there are grounds for negotiating the rate .
Some suggested 15 % .
This would be wholly unacceptable to us .
In its proposal , the Commission retains a rate of 20 % .
In my country , the rate currently in force is 25 % .
There is room for negotiation here and I believe that the proposal from the Commission is a useful one .
In terms of the scope of the directive , the issue of Eurobonds was raised .
I am delighted that the Commission 's proposal includes these Eurobonds in the directive .
What sense would it make to have a directive on this subject that did not cover these Eurobonds even though , as we well know , they are the main form of activity for some of our Member States ?
This directive will only make a difference if it can be applied to all actors and operators in all Member States .
It is with this in mind , Commissioner , that you drew it up . It is , I hope , with this in mind that the Council will accept it .
Whilst debating this report , I believe that we should perhaps begin to draw a lesson from the method to be used for tax harmonisation . Two approaches are becoming clear , one of which is a pragmatic approach .
The directive being put forward today is clearly along these lines .
We are delighted by this and will seize any opportunity to use it . On the other hand , there is a more long-term approach .
I will outline three aspects of this approach .
The first is clearly the issue of tax havens that we will have to resolve one day as we in the EU cannot impose drastic measures on ourselves and yet see tax havens flourish on our doorstep , or even within the Union itself .
The second aspect relates to the issue of qualified majority voting .
Some people feel that changing over to qualified majority voting comes up against problems with the transfer of sovereignty .
Unfortunately , the issue is more complicated than that .
Undoubtedly , in some of our Member States , there are questions being asked about the fact that changing over to qualified majority voting will lead to a transfer of sovereignty . Yet there are also conflicts of interests between states inside the area and states outside the area .
Finally , and I will conclude here , Mr President , the third aspect relates to external issues .
In this respect , our rapporteur 's proposal that multilateral agreements could be reached with our main partners , the United States or Switzerland , without introducing a sine qua non condition on this issue , seems to be perfectly credible and realistic in the longer term .
Mr President , I too take the floor to speak on behalf of the PPE Group on this extremely important Commission proposal which , as has already been said , is part of a broader package of measures designed to set in train a process of fiscal coordination among the Member States in all those areas in which excessive fiscal competition is very clearly having negative effects that must be countered .
But I must tell you that my group is firmly convinced that it is important not only to move in this direction , but also to restrict our activity to those situations in which the damage is evident . In that way , we avoid losing the benefits of healthy fiscal competition which may bring about convergence of taxation systems , particularly in the direction of lower levels of fiscal pressure that would certainly have a positive effect on the competitiveness of the European system .
Turning to the directive and the proposal for a directive that we are debating today , I agree with what Mrs Thyssen said , and also join with all those who have complimented the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , on his work , even though we cannot agree with some of his proposals .
We consider the Commission proposal to be largely acceptable , subject to a few technical improvements that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has sought to introduce : we believe , in particular , that this should be limited to non-resident physical persons , excluding therefore companies already taxed on the basis of their results .
We are in agreement with the model of coexistence and take the view that , as far as the proposed rate is concerned , and subject , of course , to the Council 's prerogatives , the idea of lowering rates in an initial stage from 20 to 15 % could also help prevent the risk of capital flight from the Union .
In fact , we have pressed the Commission to embark on negotiations as soon as possible , particularly with those countries closest to the European Union , to persuade them to incorporate the main principles of the directive into their own taxation systems in this area .
This , we realise , will be no easy process , and we certainly do not want to see any kind of conditions attached to what we are asking the Commission to do , as we have no wish to see the entry into force of the directive postponed indefinitely ; we actually want the Council to give its consent as soon as possible .
It is important that the whole package should be implemented as swiftly as possible , since that will also enable us to acquire the knowledge we need to set to work in other areas : to quote just a couple of examples , the taxation of company profits and transfrontier working would appear to be good candidates for this .
We agree with Amendments Nos 1 to 10 by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , but reject all the others , although we have some sympathy with Amendments Nos 23 and 24 from the Liberal Group and Amendment No 25 from the Socialist Group which we shall therefore be supporting .
Mr President , I am speaking both as an environmentalist and a Luxembourger .
Allow me to link the Pérez Royo report to the Cox report , which we have just debated .
If a tax reform is to be worthy of that name within the European Union , it must , by necessity , involve a redistribution of the tax burden in favour of the environment and of labour . I do not believe that introducing a tax at source on savings would favour labour or the environment .
I agree with introducing energy taxes to promote energy efficiency and , while on this subject , I must point out that I am also speaking as a representative of a country that , under the Kyoto Protocol , is committed to cutting its emissions by 28 % .
It is clear that Luxembourg will have to do something about energy taxes .
What is more , I do not believe that introducing a uniform tax of 20 % on savings for residents and non-residents alike is a good idea .
This is simply because the middle classes will have to foot the bill yet , for them , saving is a way of supplementing their pensions .
These savers , who often do not have lucrative pension schemes , do not deserve to be punished by the widespread introduction of a tax on savings income .
You can also rest assured that the major companies and multinationals will be able to arrange to have their capital hidden outside the Union .
I believe that by allowing such behaviour we will be doing a disservice to financial markets within the European Union .
Mr President , to sum up , I should like to say that I support a tax reform that involves a redistribution in favour of the environment and of labour , and that I am against a tax on savings income .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with the basic approach of the majority of Parliament in saying that a single economic and monetary area also requires a certain degree of tax coordination ; if we do not have this coordination , we will be heading closer towards fiscal and social dumping .
I also agree with those who wish to redistribute the tax burden on labour , capital and natural resources in order to contribute to the fight against unemployment , and I think the majority of Members of Parliament support this .
I should also like to stress the fact that the fiscal package put together under the Luxembourg Presidency must be implemented in its entirety .
To turn to the directive that Parliament is today being consulted on , it will undoubtedly be the subject of lengthy haggling in the Council , where unanimity is required .
It must be said that the fiscal instrument , together with a whole range of legislative provisions and regulations , is of considerable importance for the development of financial services in Europe .
We cannot manage such an instrument without dealing with immediate competitors and neighbours , as there is a danger of weakening this important service sector in the European Union .
I therefore welcome the amendments on this subject that were adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I should also like to ask the Commissioner what stage negotiations with third countries have reached , countries that , in the financial services sector , are immediate competitors for European Union markets .
Have negotiations really begun ?
How will they develop ?
When can we expect to see some results ?
I believe that the answers to these questions are vital for the events that will follow , particularly for negotiations in the Council .
I am of the opinion that a European tax system on savings will only materialise in the European Union as a result of binding agreements on a code of conduct on tax .
I am told that we must first start with the European Union and that other countries will then follow .
I do not really believe this .
I rather believe that there will be a certain amount of upheaval , that capital will be re-invested elsewhere under better tax conditions , and that the financial services sector will suffer as a result .
In addition , we can see that professional groups have reservations concerning the dual system proposed in the directive .
The European Banking Federation accepts a minimum rate of a 10 % withholding tax , but rejects the regime of information .
It is true to say that this regime of information is technically cumbersome and in danger of becoming bureaucratic .
However , it does have the advantage of making it easier to coordinate taxation of savings and it could , as Mrs Ber & # x010D ; s has just said , help obtain a unanimous vote within the Council .
In my opinion , a tax of 10 % , which is deducted at source , would allow the internal capital market - and I stress that it is the internal market - to function smoothly and the services sector to flourish .
If I am stressing these aspects , Mr President , it is for the simple reason that I consider the development of a services sector with high employment potential , in my own country as in all the countries of the European Union , to be important above all .
Mr President , you will see that there are a whole series of Luxembourg Members on the list of speakers .
The debate must have something to do with Luxembourg .
I well remember the Luxembourg Prime Minister and Minister of Finance , Jean-Claude Juncker , stating on more than one occasion that where this important issue was concerned , he saw the coexistence system as providing a definite opportunity to achieve an acceptable degree of harmonisation in terms of taxing interest .
You see , Mrs Randzio-Plath , this is not just about savings income , but about income of any kind received by physical persons .
That is why the committee also proposed including Eurobonds , so that the United Kingdom and the City of London would not be virtually exempted from the provisions .
The second key point in Parliament and in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was deciding what tax rate to opt for in the coexistence model .
The Commission has proposed 20 % and Mr Fayot 10 % .
However , there do not seem to be any amendments calling for 10 % .
I have not seen any , despite reading them all .
We have proposed 15 % , and I believe that this is a reasonable approach .
Curiously , Mr Pérez Royo , speaking in his capacity as rapporteur , has just mentioned 20 % - it is not for him to do so .
We adopted the report with 15 % , and it is the rapporteur 's duty to convey that here too .
I should like to recommend that we give our full backing to the compromise reached in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy : a minimum rate of 15 % , with an invitation to work towards greater harmonisation in negotiations with third countries at OECD level , and in the knowledge , Commissioner Monti , that your commendable work on tax harmonisation finally needs a worthwhile result .
We hope that this will be the case , for our own and for your sakes .
I hope that it will be possible , despite unanimity , to find a sensible solution .
Mr President , the proposal for a minimum level of effective taxation on interest earnings is really very modest .
Most Member States tax the interest their own residents receive but not that received by residents of other countries .
That is of course an invitation to tax evasion , which occurs on a major scale .
When tax on movable sources of income is so easy to evade , we should not be surprised to find that the tax burden on labour , which is not so easy to evade , increases .
If we want to break this trend - and we certainly do - we must ensure that movable sources of income can also be effectively taxed .
The Commission 's proposal for a coexistence model does no more than that .
Member States can either exchange information on interest receipts with the tax authorities in a saver 's country of residence so that it can tax them , or they themselves can levy a withholding tax without exchanging information on the saver .
This proposal , although better than nothing , is of course very imperfect , because although the withholding tax does not in principle provide discharge , and thus should be declared for income tax purposes in the country of residence , in practice it can easily provide discharge as the information on the withholding tax paid is not exchanged .
A compulsory exchange of information would therefore have been better .
Because of this loophole it is important that the withholding tax should be as high as possible so that there will be a maximum incentive to declare such income in the country of residence .
The proposal to reduce withholding tax to 15 % , adopted by a narrow majority by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , is therefore astounding , and seems more of an encouragement to lower taxes on interest earnings throughout Europe than to increase them .
I am not convinced by the argument that otherwise savers will turn to Switzerland or eastern Europe .
The Union is in such a strong negotiating position with all these countries that any tax flight to them can be avoided if the Union itself has a credible system .
In addition , the exchange rate risk is likely to scare off most investors .
Finally , the UK-Luxembourg proposal to exempt Eurobonds is unacceptable .
Any residents using them do so purely in order to evade tax .
Members of this House who are so strongly in favour of exempting Eurobonds should reflect for a moment on this .
Despite all its limitations , this proposal must therefore be supported , but with a higher level of withholding tax than 15 % .
Mr President , let me begin by saying , and this will come as no surprise to the Commissioner , that I do not see the need for this particular directive , because I believe the concept of harmful tax competition is absolute nonsense .
We , in the European Parliament , believe in competition as being good for the consumer in goods and services .
What is wrong therefore with tax competition ?
My conclusion is that some Member States are doing themselves harm by having excessively high rates of tax , whereas they really ought to be reducing the tax burden on their citizens .
However , due to time constraints here , I am unable to elaborate on the mechanisms of doing that , but you are welcome to talk to me afterwards .
There is one respect however in which I very much support the excellent work done by the rapporteur .
Unfortunately neither I , nor the rest of my group , was able to agree with him when he proposed that the directive should be extended to companies : this would have done enormous harm to the citizens of Europe , as it would have had an negative effect , for example , on undertakings responsible for trading in transferable securities as well as harming the potential of crossborder pension funds .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy did well in rejecting the rapporteur 's amendment and indeed , from that point of view , I am happier with what the Commission is proposing .
I understand that some Member States have reservations about the detail .
Could the Commissioner tell us a little bit about those Member States and their technical reservations ?
Secondly , I understand that the presidency , the Commission and the past presidency , have opened exploratory contacts with third countries about the possibility of extending it .
Thirdly , a question addressed to the Socialist Group - is it Socialist Group policy to support Amendment 25 by Mr Hendrick which is calling for the harmonisation of capital gains tax in Europe ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whether people like it or not fiscal coordination is a matter of great importance .
It is to Commissioner Monti 's credit , and I bear witness to this , that we again have some movement on this matter .
The code of conduct on company tax is operational .
Today we have two directives before us , including this one on capital income .


Let us be quite clear about this , this is a fundamental debate from three different points of view : the single market , about which Mrs Thyssen has already spoken ; making sufficient budgetary resources available to the Community ; and finally , breaking the disastrous spiral of constantly increasing taxes on labour and constantly decreasing taxes on capital income and other movable tax bases .
Coexistence is not exactly the best system , but in the short term it was the only possibility for a compromise .
I still hope and believe that in the course of the decision-making in the ECOFIN Council we will perhaps be able to move towards a single system , maybe based on the withholding tax .
Opponents of coexistence are clearly right on one point , which is that the system must not end up subsidising the Member States with the greatest banking secrecy , in other words those Member States with the most non-residents who will collect the withholding tax .
It must be possible for this to be declared for tax purposes in the country of residence .
This is why I want this discussion to be included in the debate on the European Union 's own resources .
It is the view which Belgium is currently putting forward in the own resources debate , and I believe it is a view which must be given serious consideration .
Finally , it is my belief that it is not for us to deal with rate levels .
The rate level must be determined , for example , according to whether or not it grants discharge .
I believe this is a job for the final compromise round of Europe 's finance ministers .
This is again a test for the tenability of the unanimity rule .
I hope and am counting on the fact that no country will dare to use the right of veto to block something which the vast majority of Europe 's citizens want to see , namely a shift from taxes on labour to taxes on savings .
Mr President , may I first point out that it was under the Luxembourg Presidency that a historic breakthrough on harmonising direct taxation was made on 1 December 1997 .
On that occasion , four elements were adopted that could form a basis for a proposal for a directive on taxation of savings .
One of the elements was the coexistence of the system of a withholding tax and the regime of information .
Unfortunately , if we want this to work , the system provided for in the proposal for a directive is too complicated and too expensive for the paying agents .
The certificates procedure provided for under the framework of the withholding system is extraordinarily complex and makes the coexistence of both systems practically impossible to manage , and even distorts it .
Leaving aside such administrative atrocities , the proposal for a minimum of 20 % for the withholding tax would destabilise the Union 's financial markets .
15 % is also unacceptable and , in my opinion , a deduction of 10 % at source is a maximum .
What is more , the broad definition of interest , which differs from the definitions adopted in the conventions against double taxation , will lead to conflict and even discrimination between financial products that are all much of a muchness .
By including in the scope of the directive collective investment undertakings in the sense of the 1985 directive , we will be chasing them out of the European Union once and for all . They will flee Europe , unless they have already ' got the hell out ' - if you will excuse the expression - due to administrative burdens that would put them at a competitive disadvantage in terms of their internal management costs .
Therefore , the end of European collective investment undertakings is on the cards , as is the early redemption of Eurobonds , as the market for such bonds will be established outside Europe .
It is of little consolation that few natural persons hold Eurobonds and that major capitalists will therefore be able to continue with their plans outside the Community .
This would mean accepting that taxation at source will only apply to small savers ' deposits .
With things the way they are , to adopt this worthless text that only advocates agreements with third countries offering a particularly attractive environment to non-residents , is to completely ignore the fact that Switzerland , for example - which is already rubbing its hands with glee - does not discriminate between residents and non-residents as regards taxation of savings .
Agreements simultaneously establishing measures similar to those adopted in a directive are needed with all third countries that are likely to attract the Union 's capital .
If the directive comes into being there cannot be any question of not applying it to dependent territories or territories linked to Member States .
Mr President , I must tell you that there will no fool 's bargain struck with us .
Mr President , time and again I am filled with admiration for Commissioner Monti and the patience with which he is trying to disengage the brakes on coordinating tax policy in Europe .
He really deserves the utmost respect for this .
Where coordinating tax policy is concerned , the main objective is to limit manoeuvring and distortions on the capital markets .
It is a question of reducing harmful tax competition between the Member States , and part of creating equal economic opportunities is to make sure that investors are subject , at least in terms of approach , to a similar tax burden .
Seen in this light , the Commission proposal is definitely a step in the right direction , and this is accordingly supported for the most part by our rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo .
But it is precisely because we agree on the principles in this Parliament - at least in what we say out loud - that some of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy are more than just ideas to curb the development of European tax policy or precautionary measures .
However , seeking to reduce the rate of withholding tax from that proposed by the Commission to 15 % or 10 % falls into the ' back to square one ' category .
In this context , we should not forget that there are some countries in the European Union with a 25 % tax rate .
My country is one of them .
Ultimately , it is also necessary to reduce the imbalance between the taxation of wages and salaries on the one hand and capital on the other .
That is the goal we have set ourselves .
Moreover - and this is also worth mentioning - exempting Eurobonds from the tax arrangements , as intended or desired by several financial centres in Europe , would give the securities market a considerable advantage over other savings instruments and would substantially limit the scope of the directive .
With ' a little less , please ' as our motto , we will not be able to make any progress on coordinating tax policy .
You will need to be patient , Commissioner !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a Socialist and a Frenchman , I am particularly pleased today to approve a proposal for a directive that will finally let us put an end to a situation where a whole section of savings income was completely avoiding taxation , and this within the European Union .
I should like to thank Commissioner Monti and his team for this .
Of course , I should also like to warmly thank our colleague and rapporteur Mr Pérez Royo for the important and serious work he has done on this issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the single currency will promote the cross-border movement of capital , this text was long overdue .
It is quite simply vital for the Union 's cohesion .
Of course , like many others , I approve of the fact that the idea of excluding Eurobonds from the scope of the directive was rejected .
If we were to exclude them , there would be a danger of serious tax evasion and of distortion of competition .
Lastly , of course , I am also against establishing a conditionality link between adoption of the directive and its simultaneous application in third countries .
In conclusion , I would like to discuss an extremely important point that has been debated at length this morning , namely the rate of the withholding tax .
Although I personally would have preferred a rate of 25 % , I am prepared , together with the rapporteur and the Socialist Group , to accept the 20 % rate put forward by the Commission . I will do so in the spirit of compromise and negotiation .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I now hope that this case will be closed , as we expected , at Helsinki in December 1999 at the latest and that , after this , tax harmonisation will finally gain pace .
Mr President , I too should like to welcome this proposal to work towards greater coordination .
I believe that it is a question of establishing common definitions and creating an environment which makes fair competition possible .
My question is as follows : is there already a study or a simulation model of the impact of the proposals or ideas put forward ?
How will competition develop within the European Union on the basis of the amended provisions , and how will the European Union be able to prove itself when competing at international level ?
I believe that it is also important to highlight again and again the difference between the fiscal regime applied to companies - and its consequences - and that applied to consumers .
Ultimately , of course , we believe that it is important to reduce the tax burden as a whole , so as to become more competitive and to guarantee a higher personal income for consumers .
My final question is this : when will these proposals be agreed with the OECD countries , and are discussions under way with Switzerland and Liechtenstein ?
Mr President , I must congratulate Mr Pérez Royo on his excellent report , which reflects his own considerable talents , and for supporting the rapid adoption of the directive .
My thanks also go to the other members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and all honourable Members for their contributions to the debate and for the kind words they have had for the Commission .
This proposal is part of a package which , as everyone has reminded us , was adopted during the Luxembourg Presidency , and the first element - the code of conduct - was swiftly put in place by the United Kingdom Presidency .
I therefore have to make it quite clear that , although they may have reservations on some points , Luxembourg and the United Kingdom are participating fully in this process to counter harmful tax competition , the aim of which , as mentioned by Mr Secchi and other speakers , is not general harmonisation but a concerted effort to counter the harmful effects of tax competition .
The aim is not to increase fiscal pressure in Europe , but to allow it to be reduced gradually and in an orderly way .
The further aim is , of course , to shift the balance of the tax burden which is currently having an excessive impact on employment .
I welcome the amendment tabled by the rapporteur which is designed to improve the current text of Article 5 © and tighten up the criteria for identifying collective investment funds .
I think I can safely say that , subject to possible technical drafting improvements , the Commission 's services are optimistic about the possibility of including , in an amended proposal for a directive , that amendment and , similarly , the amendment relating to tax competition , that is to say the new recital 7a .
While I understand the spirit of the other amendments tabled concerning the scope of the directive , I think that , as matters stand , they should be considered useful contributions to the debate rather than a direct contribution to the legislative text .
I am referring here in particular to the problems of the zero coupon bonds which are being discussed in detail in the Council .
We are able to accept the spirit , if not the wording , of Amendment No 24 from Mr Goedbloed and will try to ensure that it is accepted by the Council .
As far as the issue of Eurobonds is concerned , the Commission 's position is that we are opposed to general exemptions ; we are very much willing to consider solutions designed to contain the administrative burdens on intermediaries and take a balanced approach to the problems relating to those bonds already in circulation .
On rates , the Commission still believes a 20 % rate to be a sufficient compromise which could , from the point of view of all the Member States , meet the need to secure a minimum of actual taxation of interest .
I have noted that a great deal of attention - and I am entirely in favour of this - has been paid to the issue of contacts with third countries .
Though no questions were put on this , I can say that , as instructed by the ECOFIN Council , the German Presidency along with its Austrian predecessor and Finnish successor , as well as the Commission , is establishing both technical and political contacts with Switzerland , Liechtenstein , Monaco , San Marino and Andorra , and we have been asked to report back on this to the ECOFIN Council meeting of 15 March .
A report on the whole subject-matter of the directive will be presented to the May meeting of ECOFIN and , Mrs Thyssen , as regards the timetable for reaching agreement on this matter , the Vienna European Council set the target date of the Helsinki Council .
Two points finally : this is not a new tax ; that would be a great mistake .
This is not a proposal for a new tax , it is a way of enabling the Member States to cooperate to ensure that the taxes already in existence are not systematically evaded as a result of the creation of a fifth freedom alongside the four freedoms of the internal market , that is to say the freedom not to pay taxes because of transfrontier movements .

On the question of financial services , my response to Mr Fayot and other Members is that the Commission is very much aware of the need to boost the financial services industry in Europe and that , in that context , in the recent framework action on financial services , it has shown how a degree of sensible coordination of taxation can benefit rather than penalise the financial services sector .
Finally , Mr Cassidy , I appreciated what you had to say today , as I always appreciate your comments , even when critical .
I have said that we do not favour combating all forms of tax competition , but only those that are harmful and unfair .
However , were we to accept the idea that any form of competition between the Member States is good , given that competition is a positive thing , then we should also , for the sake of consistency , have to allow them to compete fully with each other using state aids .
That is not , I think , a generally accepted view .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Liquid-fuel tanks
The next item is the report ( A4-0495 / 98 ) by Mr Camisón Asensio , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 70 / 221 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to liquid-fuel tanks and rear underrun protection of motor vehicles and their trailers ( COM ( 98 ) 0097 - C4-0257 / 98-98 / 0071 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , as you all know , the aim of this proposal is to introduce new provisions concerning vehicle fuel tanks made of plastic material , to extend the title and scope of Directive 70 / 221 to include tanks for fuels other than liquid fuels - gaseous fuels , for instance - and to amend the directive adapting it to technical progress so that in future , technical provisions for tanks for all kinds of fuels may be introduced and modified by the committee procedure .
It is also appropriate to bring the directive into line with the technical requirements already adopted by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe in its regulations concerning the harmonisation of services in connection with the prevention of fire risk .
The use of gaseous fuels for the propulsion of motor vehicles is increasing , particularly for ecological reasons .
It would therefore also be appropriate to include specifications relating to tanks for non-liquid fuels .
In the interests of consistency , the title and scope of the directive should be modified to allow for the inclusion of technical specifications on tanks for gaseous fuels .
Given the impact of the proposed action on the industrial sector concerned , the measures under consideration are essential to attain the desired objective , namely , the harmonisation of vehicles across the Community .
It is impossible for Member States to meet this objective acting individually in isolation .
The Commission is proposing that these new provisions be applied to all new types of vehicles with effect from 1 October 1999 , and to all new vehicles with effect from 1 October 2000 .
These time-limits are clearly too short , and have therefore been amended in our report .
We should remember that the modifications to the present directive only concern fuel tanks made of plastic material , and that there is therefore no need to invalidate any approval already granted under the directive .
Nor is there any need to refuse the registration , sale or entry into service of new vehicles with metal liquid-fuel tanks approved under existing harmonisation arrangements .
The eight amendments we put before the Committee on Economic Affairs , and which were subsequently approved , stemmed from these arguments and form the basis of our legislative proposal . One amendment states that the modifications needed to bring the requirements into line with the annexes to the technical project be adopted following a more appropriate procedure .
Another concerns the time-limits mentioned earlier .
Another provides a more rational definition of unladen mass .
Two further amendments introduce an element of common sense by restricting regulations on the flow of fuel from one compartment to another to normal conditions of use only .
They seek to prevent us making impossible demands on the industry .
Yet another amendment is aimed at simplification , taking references to the tank to include its accessories as a matter of course . The final two amendments stress the hazard that the accidental spillage of fuel - especially diesel - onto the roads represents to pedal cyclists and to the riders of motorcycles .
This was a major gap in the Commission 's proposal .
We are firmly of the opinion that this proposal represents an important step forward in the approximation of Member States ' legislation on liquid-fuel tanks and rear underrun protection of motor vehicles and their trailers . The approval of vehicles with regard to the prevention of fire risk , particularly for fuel tanks made of plastic material of category MI vehicles will therefore be more rational .
Category MI vehicles are those intended for the carriage of passengers comprising no more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat .
The general objective of the Commission proposal seems to be very reasonable and we therefore believe that the situation for the industrial sector concerned will improve when provisions at European level are harmonised with these provisions .
The technical changes proposed by the Commission concerning the title and scope of the directive to make the inclusion of gaseous fuels possible in the future do not cause any problems for the industry concerned . Equally , the proposal to modify Annex 1 to the directive to include more severe tests does not appear to pose problems for the industry either .
As was mentioned earlier , these provisions are already included in the United Nations regulations .
However , as regards the amendment on the comitology procedure to be applied for adaptations of this directive to technical progress , we do not share the Commission 's view .
We believe that it would be more appropriate to convert this into management committee procedure 2A . The Commission could then defer application of the measures proposed for a period of not more than one month if the measures were not in accordance with the opinion of the committee .
Furthermore , the proposal is in line with the approximation of provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their aim the establishment and operation of the internal market .
In this context , the Commission is striving to guarantee a high level of protection of health , consumers , the environment and safety . We fully support this endeavour .
The principle of subsidiarity is also safeguarded , as the measure proposed by the Commission is justified by the fact that the Member States acting individually could not adequately achieve the directive 's objective .
I would like to end by summing up and saying that what we have before us are purely technical provisions which will not have any negative impact on the competitiveness of enterprises or on employment and which will significantly increase road safety .
We therefore ask you to vote in favour of them .
Mr President , we should like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done on this rather technical proposal .
Although these are technical changes , he is also right to say that this is actually about safety and environmental considerations , which are important policy objectives for us .
Of course , our proposal is also intended to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market , and to make it easier for manufacturers to comply with the provisions by introducing a standard form of type approval .
We can accept four of the amendments tabled , Nos 3 , 4 , 5 and 6 .
As far as the other four amendments are concerned , we believe that this is not the appropriate place for some of these rules , and that instead we can refer to provisions which either already exist or are to be adopted ; that is why we do not think that we can accept these amendments .
However , Mr Camisón Asensio , ladies and gentlemen , given that this is the first reading , we will certainly have further opportunities to look at details , and an overall agreement may still be possible .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. until voting time at 11.30 a.m.

VOTES
Mr President , following the debate on the Pérez Royo report earlier , your fellow President announced that the vote on that report would take place tomorrow .
However , it appears on the list of votes for today even though it has only just been debated .
As a result , it would make more sense to vote on it tomorrow .
You are absolutely right , Mrs Lulling .
The Pérez Royo report is scheduled to be voted on today , as you quite rightly said . If we have time , I hope we will be able to vote on it today .
Mr President , the opposite is the case .
Your predecessor said earlier - we only finished the debate barely twenty minutes ago - that this report would be voted on tomorrow .
I am asking that the vote indeed be held tomorrow , as the President said it would .
Mrs Lulling , perhaps my predecessor in the Chair made a slight mistake .
The Pérez Royo report is scheduled to be voted on today and , as I said , if we have time , we will take the vote today .
Proposal for a Council Decision on the position to be taken by the Community within the Association Council established by the Europe Agreement signed on 19 December 1994 between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Slovak Republic , of the other part , with regard to the extension for a further period of five years in accordance with the provisions of Article 64 ( 4 ) ( a ) of the Europe Agreement ( 11544 / 98 - C4-0633 / 98-98 / 0073 ( CNS ) ) ( Procedure without report )
Parliament approved the Commission proposal
Mr President , I would like to put forward an oral amendment calling for the removal of the words : ' pursuant to the Amsterdam Treaty ' .
So I am requesting that these words be deleted .
The deeper meaning will not be changed by this amendment , but it will provide greater scope for ensuring future development .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , your proposal is very clear .
Does the House object to putting the oral amendment to the vote ?
Parliament agreed to put paragraph 17 with the oral amendment to the vote
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order .
Could you remind members of staff in the House that it is not their job to substitute for Members by indicating how the vote should go ?
The woman in seat 301 seems to be telling the rest of her group how to vote .
Thank you for your comment , Mr Ford .
I do not think that Members of the European Parliament need advice from anyone , and of course we are not going to encourage them to accept advice .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Since it is in Europe 's interest - and that of the international situation - we are backing the Commission five-point plan that gained the support of the Council on 29 June last year .
We welcome the improvement in relations between the EU and China , which are in the interest of ordinary people in both places , and which should boost the EU 's influence in international politics , independently of the USA .
The EU should therefore support China 's accession to the WTO , in keeping with China 's multilateral principles .
But , without denying that some progress has been made in resuming talks on human rights , such as the ratification of the two United Nations pacts on economic , social and cultural rights and on civil and political rights , I do not think that we can act as though China respected fundamental rights and freedoms .
China is far from doing so .
The economic and financial interests of certain EU Member States cannot justify a Realpolitik that skims over truth and justice and means that we fail to apply common standards and demand less of China than of weaker countries with which the EU has economic or trade agreements including the human rights clause .
The latest serious violations of fundamental rights and freedoms in China - the persecution of political opponents , human rights activists and members of ethnic minorities - should be condemned by the EU in the strongest terms .
The same goes for the violation of workers ' rights , especially lay-offs without compensation , and the absence of trade union freedom , collective bargaining and the right to strike .
Now we come to the references to Macao .
In the motion for a resolution , we have :
' Hopes that the joining of Macao to China will comply on all points with the agreement of 13 April 1987 and enable it to develop a democratic and prosperous society on its own soil ; '
In the explanatory statement , we find :
' Macao : another bridge between Europe and China
Similarly , the situation in Macao , whose return to China in December 1999 has been settled by an agreement signed on 13 April 1987 , should be monitored closely .
Macao embodies a Latin culture , and therefore stands in direct connection with one of the fundamental components of European civilisation .
Macao consequently is in a position to help improve relations with China by enabling that country better to understand our diversity as Europeans . '
I think that the rapporteur has understood the role that Macao could play in the future , given its past and its special characteristics , as an ' open door ' for China into Europe and the west in general , and as a bridge between Europe , with all its diversity , and China .
The EU should very closely monitor the handover due on 20 December next . It should be just as demanding as it was in the case of Hong Kong , mutatis mutandis , so as to guarantee that the principle of ' one country , two systems ' also applies to Macao .
There are still a number of problems about enshrining the rights and principles contained in the constitution , as guaranteed by the Joint Luso-Chinese Declaration , into local legislation .
The EU could give both parties , and the authorities of the territory , its backing with a view to achieving the following :
to guarantee that China respects the prohibition of the death penalty ; -to ensure that China honours its pledge not to station troops in Macao ; -to make sure that China duly stops criminals from crossing the border into Macao and threatening safety there ; -to regulate and guarantee fundamental freedoms , especially religious freedom , freedom of association and membership of political parties , trade union freedom and the right to strike ; -to regulate the use of the territory 's two official languages - Chinese and Portuguese ; -to regulate the issue of nationality , fairly and humanely ; -to establish an independent judiciary with a local Court of First Instance.The EU should , both now and in future , support the development of a civil society ; give its backing to associations including human rights organisations ; support cultural activities and university cooperation with China ; support the action of the European Studies Institute and foster exchanges between lawyers , enabling continental European law to be made known in China , in particular through the activities of the legal translation centre and the centre for training judges .
I would ask the Commission to repeat what it did in the case of Hong Kong - namely to issue a statement on future relations between the EU and Macao , guaranteeing from the outset that it will draft regular reports on developments in the situation after the handover .
The EU 's responsibility for Macao requires an active and competent Commission and EU delegation in the territory .
I would like to ask the Commission what measures it intends to take or has already taken in this respect .
Once again may I point out to the Commission how displeased the entire EP / China delegation was that the Commission 's delegate to Hong Kong and Macao did not bother to meet the EP delegation in person or by proxy when it last visited the territory in mid-1998 .
I hope that this serious incidence of discourteous , incompetent and inconsiderate behaviour will not be repeated .
The way China develops is vital for the way our own societies develop .
It will influence not only our economies but also - and above all - prospects for democracy world-wide .
I think that the European Union must shoulder the main responsibility for steering China into the democratic fold . It must do so audibly , consistently and effectively , particularly by backing the notion of ' one country , several regimes ' .
Europe is not treating Macao or Taipei with the attention that their status as outposts of democracy in the East demands .
The European Union must show more determination .
For that we need :
European Union delegations in Macao and Taipei ( not miserly little offices but fully operational agencies ) ; -clear support for either China or Taiwan 's membership of the WTO ; -political action by Members of the European Parliament of all colours in support of Portugal in the final ' sprint ' to thrash out an agreement with China on a democratic and Sino-European identity for Macao ; Although I agree with the Bernard-Reymond report , I should have liked it to take a firmer line in calling for the European Union to shoulder its full responsibility .
What would become of all our attempts to eliminate obstacles to free movement and speed up the dismantling of our borders if we did not have an ambitious and high-quality policy on transport ?
What can our actions on economic and social cohesion and regional development amount to without vital infrastructure links ?
What can come of a policy for boosting employment if there is no real desire to provide transport links ?
Today , it seems vital that we coordinate national efforts and that there is cooperation between public and private sectors .
Until now , there has not been any significant progress in the field of goods and passenger transport .
There is now more of a need than ever for fresh momentum .
Too many projects are vague , with uncertain timetables and financing .
The European Parliament is in a position to monitor the level of progress , particularly where local and regional financing are concerned .
It is , in fact , vital that public finances are contributed , in spite of current restrictions .
Nothing can be done without this active role because , as in many fields , financial matters are at the heart of the debate .
I therefore support the Camisón Asensio report , and I am disappointed by the serious delays and disagreements that have occurred in implementing the majority of projects drawn up in Essen in 1994 .
I also believe it is a shame that , in view of such a situation , the European Commission has not proposed measures to stimulate these projects and has simply accepted this state of affairs .
It would perhaps be worth reminding the Commission of its mission and asking it to arrange for a Council of Ministers to seek solutions to the problems I have just highlighted .
We should like to stress the importance of ensuring that the design of the euro takes account of the special needs of the disabled .
It is essential that all our citizens should be able to use it .
With regard to the specific proposal relating to the introduction of the gold 100 euro coin , as put forward by the rapporteur , we are inclined to think that no real justification has been provided for the introduction of such a coin .
In the vote , therefore , we have decided to follow the line adopted in committee by our political group .
The second reading of the Council 's draft regulation on the definition of the technical specifications of euro coins provides me with an opportunity to point out that it is completely inappropriate to propose taking all national currencies out of circulation on 1 January 2002 .
This operation would be extremely costly for citizens in psychological terms and would serve only to provide ideological satisfaction for those who wish to see nations disappear .
However , both could quite easily continue to exist simultaneously , as is the case today . There would be the euro , on the one hand , staying as it was when it came into force and restricted to the stock exchanges and to international financial activities .
Then , on the other hand , there would be the national currencies which would remain in circulation . In any event , eliminating the national monetary level would hardly be wise , as we do not know what crises will emerge in the future .
If an asymmetric shock hits us in the near future , we may very well be glad that we can modify the exchange parities between the euro and some national currencies in order to bring a certain amount of flexibility to the system and not force our fellow citizens to make unnecessary sacrifices .
In this way , if we continue to allow both European and national monetary levels to coexist , we will have rediscovered a system similar to that of the common currency , which the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has always supported .
Such a solution would safeguard our future without forcing our fellow citizens to take pointless risks .
Therefore , I hope that the Council will listen to the voice of wisdom and that ministers will not charge headlong towards unification , as this would be a dead end .
However , in order to justify continuing with unification , some people will no doubt hide behind the legal argument in Article 109l ( 4 ) , which states that ' at the starting date of the third stage , the Council shall ... adopt the conversion rates ... at which irrevocably fixed rate the ECU shall be substituted for these currencies ( the currencies of the participating countries ) ... The Council shall ... also take the other measures necessary for the rapid introduction of the ECU as the single currency of those Member States ' .
But this argument does not have the same weight as other legal arguments : in circumstances beyond our control , we can modify the text in an emergency or we can find another way to interpret it .
For example , we could say that as the euro was due to replace the national currencies on the starting date of the third stage , in other words on 1 January 1999 , then it has already happened and we should not discuss it any further .
Governments would do well to seriously consider this line of thinking .
In the vote , we have taken a far harder line on China 's human rights violations than that expressed in the motion for a resolution .
Even though it may be important for Europe to develop trade and political relations with China , economic interests should not blind us to the human rights violations perpetrated there , nor prevent us from criticising them .
The EU should also be consistent in following the same line in its dealings with a number of other countries , for example Colombia and Peru .
Naturally I am in favour of the development and opening-up of China .
Openness is one way of undermining the totalitarian regime and bringing freedom to the Chinese people .
However , I seriously doubt that the introduction of free market principles , which the report so enthusiastically recommends , is the right solution .
We should learn from the mistakes that were made , for instance , in the former Communist states of Eastern Europe .
The people were looking for freedom and openness but instead they ended up with the crudest form of capitalism , which brought with it social exclusion and poverty .
As cooperation with China increases , we should place greater emphasis on the social situation and those areas where we might be able to support development , such as youth exchange programmes , education and increasing the number of non-governmental organisations .
Furthermore , as the report makes clear , we must go on exerting pressure so that , in the end , human rights will be respected .
In its communication , the Commission quite rightly noted the major changes which are currently taking place in the economy and civil society of China .
But it is also important to stress that fundamental human rights are still being suppressed by the Chinese authorities .
In its report , therefore , the Foreign Affairs Committee included some very positive demands for the incorporation of a human rights clause into the agreement between the EU and China .
If economic cooperation with China is to be possible , it is of crucial importance that such a clause should be fully respected .
The supplementary requirements which the committee has added to the areas prioritised by the Commission may help to point development in China in the right direction .
The communication from the Commission , on which our colleague 's report is based , reflects the political priority of applying competition rules to the Structural Funds policy .
The Commission is striving to ensure that the state aid map and the Structural Funds map are entirely consistent .
We support the idea of a discussion in this field , taking into consideration the specific nature of certain regions that makes them eligible for Community funds .
In effect , we are forced to acknowledge that state aids are exceptions to free competition for a very specific reason , namely that of maintaining economic and social cohesion .
The Member States , in partnership with local authorities , must have a certain degree of flexibility .
This will vary according to the development problems in certain regions , and I am specifically thinking of Objective 1 and 2 regions .
It would not be a good thing to blindly apply competition rules and risk endangering the efficiency of Community and national interventions .
I believe that the report by our Committee on Regional Policy is heading in the right direction , with finishing touches added by amendments the PSE Group submitted to this House .
What is more , this request for flexibility was noted at the last General Affairs Council meeting . It will cooperate with Member States , local authorities and the Commission in order to determine the economic and social criteria specific to each region that allow them to be classed as exceptions .
The European Commission 's initiative is clearly laudable and necessary , seeking as it does to establish better concentration and increased coherence of national regional aid and European regional aid , all of which leads to strengthened efficiency .
The aim is to identify the regions most affected and to make European structural aid coincide with national regional aid . The Commission therefore thinks it is being pragmatic .
But , more to the point , perhaps it is being too pragmatic !
In effect , until now , Objective 1 regions were determined by the Council , acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission , such as NUTS regions where GDP per capita is less than 75 % of the Community 's mean .
Objective 2 and 5b regions were determined by the Commission using Community and national socioeconomic criteria as a basis and in cooperation with the Member States . In addition , the Commission has exclusive competence in matters of state aid .
In this new proposal , the Commission suggests also including the Objective 2 map in state aid maps under Article 92 ( 3 ) ( c ) .
This amounts to saying that the Commission will include under the new Objective 2 all the regions that the Member States undertake to include in the list of assisted regions , which they must notify the Commission of under Article 92 ( 3 ) ( c ) .
The proposal also suggests that Objective 1 regions be determined on the basis of strict respect of the 75 % criterion for GDP per capita , so that they fully correspond to regions that will be exempt under Article 92 ( 3 ) ( a ) and can therefore be assisted at national level .
And all this must be defined by 31 March 1999 at the latest .
We believe that this is a little too rigid to be accepted in this form by governments , by our group and by this House , even more so as all states are calling for some flexibility in choosing their aid policies and in defining their territorial competences .
I believe that making zoning systems consistent must continue to be a political objective for the Member States , without forcing them to obtain results .
It is for this reason that the PSE Group has tabled several amendments , in particular a new paragraph after recital Q and a new Amendment No 6 calling for greater flexibility .
These are amendments that I hope will be adopted by this House .
The great merit of the Commission 's communication and of the report we are considering today lies in the fact that they once again highlight , in an almost paradigmatic manner , the contradictions inherent in European integration . These contradictions set European policies at odds with one another and the report highlights the paradoxical effects of these very same policies .
There is , in fact , a major need to review and rationalise economic and social cohesion policy , that has been implemented pragmatically and sometimes erratically over the past twenty years to respond to successive enlargements and the different crises that have weakened the economic and social fabric of the Member States . This must be done in order to face up to fresh challenges and to better meet the objectives of this policy .
In this vein , I should like to offer my support for the options endorsed by our rapporteur .
Therefore , in this speech , I will concentrate on two of the new measures proposed in the context of reforming the social cohesion policy .
Although this reform was designed to reduce disparities between the levels of development of European regions , it has in fact increased the disparities between the richest and the poorest regions .
Reducing the share of aid cofinanced by the European Union would worsen this situation , as such a decision would effectively force Member States to make a larger financial commitment . This would , by necessity , increase the burden for the poorest Member States .
There is clearly a contradiction between the stated aims of social cohesion policy and the foreseeable outcome of measures taken to attain these aims .
Finally , I also believe that the time-limit for ' phasing-out ' aid given to regions that previously had Objective 1 status seems too draconian for still fragile economies .
There is no good reason why state aid should be dependent on EU regional aid .
Such a serious infringement of national freedom of action is unacceptable .
I therefore support the committee 's proposal that Objective 6 funding should be exempted from this linkage .
According to Agenda 2000 , Objective 6 funding which was agreed during membership negotiations would eventually be included under Objective 1 .
This is acceptable provided that the former Objective 6 support criteria are transferred , unchanged , to Objective 1 and that the funding for Objective 6 regions remains the same .
In its communication , the Commission has presented some proposals for greater consistency between regional policy and competition policy in the EU .
This is an immensely interesting and important initiative .
Under the current rules for support to poor regions and those lagging behind , there is a high risk of distortion of competition .
There have unfortunately been examples of this .
It is therefore crucial that the regional classification which will apply in future in respect of the scope for Member States to allocate regional aid should be defined in such a way as to minimise the risk of adverse consequences for free competition .
I therefore fully support the analysis presented in the committee 's report .
There is no doubt that , despite all the efforts made , disparities of development between the regions of the EU still remain wide .
On the other hand , a strict application of the principle of concentration - which we must strive for if cohesion policy instruments are to be deployed effectively - must not overlook the fact that , in the context of subsidiarity , national support measures must continue to be permitted outside these regions .
The so-called rich countries must be given the possibility of introducing appropriate support measures in good time , especially in structurally weak regions bordering third countries .
I am voting in favour of this report because my Amendment No 1 opens up this possibility .
I should first like to thank Mrs Read for the reliability and clarity of her work , which has allowed us to hold such a useful debate .
As well as this introductory praise of the content , I should also like to offer my full support for the recommendations made by our colleague .
This constant wish to guarantee equitable access for all and , first and foremost , for the most vulnerable users among us , fits in with what should be a universal service .
Following Mrs Read 's example , I believe that the Member States of the Union should consider implementing , by means of certain terms and conditions , a tariff scale adapted to low-income users .
If some people believe that such a measure is unfair , then what do they think of the majority of consumers subsidising the long-distance calls of a minority ?
As a result , people who are poor or unemployed can only have low level usage paid for at full price .
We must not forget that the telephone is also a useful job-seeking tool .
Similarly , the fact that the Internet is becoming more common calls for the implementation of adapted tariffs , both for individual users and for educational establishments .
I have already said this but I should like to reiterate that the Web must not become the property of a well-off minority !
On the other hand , I should like to draw my conservative colleagues ' attention to the amendments they wish to introduce .
I believe that , in the long term , these amendments jeopardise equality of access to this means of communication .
These proposals are dangerous , both for the telecommunications sector and for the future of the universal service on a more general level .
I am at last daring to hope that the right wing will be brave enough to declare their intentions in the coming months , in this field and in others .
A politician 's first duty is to defend his ideas .
So , if you believe that liberalising services should mean unequal access , please be honest enough to say so to our fellow citizens .
The guarantee that everyone should be able to have access to essential services at affordable prices and to a satisfactory quality standard is a sine qua non for the socially successful and sustainable liberalisation of what used to be called public services .
This is why there is such major importance attached to this monitoring report on universal service in telecommunications , which we are examining today .
We cannot fail to notice that this first report describes a situation that is far from satisfactory . It shows that the free play of market forces and competition cannot of itself ensure that everyone is properly included in the information society and in communication technology .
Of course , this first report points out a number of problems that must be rectified as quickly as possible .
I would pinpoint in particular the fact that operators are under no obligation to use a uniform tariff for the same service throughout their territory . This is a serious threat to a true universal service .
The fact that some Member States show an overall upwards trend in tariffs is equally worrying , especially as it affects in particular residential users , especially those on low incomes .
Like our rapporteur , I firmly believe that we must pay particularly urgent attention to the case of infrequent users , and especially of disabled people .
One effect of the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector in the EU is that the Member States are obliged to ensure provision of a minimum set of telecommunications services by all operators , and that there is intervention if these requirements are not met .
The Commission has noted that steps have been taken to secure this minimum access to telecommunications services for consumers , but the collection of data has not been entirely adequate in all cases .
It is therefore right for the report to stress the importance of remedying these shortcomings , and of ensuring that the relevant information on the compliance of telecommunications services with the minimum requirements is available .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
In our explanation of vote , we wish to stress the importance of applying social criteria and objectives , a possibility that features most prominently in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the committee 's draft report and in Amendments Nos 5 and 6 by the rapporteur and Mrs Van Lancker .
In our view , it is essential that in achieving greater openness in public procurement , in the interests of employment and increased competition , there should be an equal balance between social and environmental objectives .
As the next millennium approaches , we cannot tolerate the fact that , in the European Union , more than 28 million people are unemployed .
It is our responsibility to combat this plague , and the paths outlined in the report submitted to us are along the right lines .
Since the Luxembourg summit , guidelines established in each Member State have already helped us to fully gauge the Member States ' commitment to this fight .
But the fight must also take place at the level of the European institutions .
In order to achieve this , we could firstly devote our energies to potential job-creating sectors , for example the tourism sector ; it is a shame that the Philoxenia programme was blocked within the Council of Ministers .
This remains an impressive framework for action and there are many operators and actors waiting for it to enter into force .
We must also consider jobs in local services or care services .
It is often difficult for local authorities to take over job creation measures that were set in motion by associations .
On the other hand , there is also the possibility of beginning discussions on a new organisation of work .
We can see that several Member States are currently working towards bringing in a reduction of working time , and this has been negotiated with various partners .
This solution must not become entrenched in a national-level mentality .
A joint contribution at European level must be considered .
Our rapporteur makes some excellent recommendations , presented as an inventory .
We must not fall short of our citizens ' expectations .
For many months I have been asking that we open a debate on the social consequences of technological developments .
As a result , I welcome the report by our colleague , Mr Mann , which responds to one of the main themes of this debate .
In fact , it is important that this House promotes the emergence of these new jobs that appear to have great potential .
I should also like to point out that I support most of the concerns and proposals outlined by the rapporteur .
However , I will express certain reservations and make a few comments on different points that do not in any way detract from the author 's initial aim .
Although I agree with Mr Mann that society must invest financially to generally adapt training to such new sources of employment , I would like to make two comments .
Firstly , I believe that we must invest a considerable amount , particularly as regards jobs with high added value .
We have an obligation to do so , in view of the means needed to obtain quality training .
Furthermore , I admit I was pleasantly surprised to note that our conservative colleagues are becoming aware that private initiative cannot cater for some of society 's needs .
I am also delighted by the willingness to legislate on life-long training by including it in the law on entitlement to annual training leave .
This request for legislation is an important step forward in terms of recognising this right , a right that must allow all employees to develop their careers and enjoy increased employability .
Finally , I cannot finish without mentioning some of the threats posed to workers ' rights that , to my mind , must not adapt to new technologies but should instead aim to guarantee an acceptable quality of life for all .
I believe that our fellow citizens will not indefinitely accept a deterioration in their quality of life , a quality of life that is very much threatened by a minority among us .
How can we not vote in favour of this report that endorses a whole range of common sense measures . The report begins with observations on the current state of affairs : an unemployment rate approaching 11 % in the European Union , of which 22 % are young people , and a precarious work situation for women .
These are therefore common sense measures as they place the emphasis on SMEs , which offer the greatest job creation potential but , in the context of increasing globalisation , must have favourable conditions in order to develop .
The Commission has already established a number of actions to help them .
We must increase the number of SMEs and encourage them .
They are common sense measures as they emphasise the sectors of the future : tourism , culture , new technologies , research and media . There are so many fields that could breathe new life into our local authorities and our regions if we properly prepare access and training for future occupations .
They are common sense measures as they call on Member States to implement the employment guidelines drawn up in Luxembourg in 1997 .
They are also common sense measures because they call for a system of further training that adapts to the constant development of new information and communication technologies .
They call for a system that is capable of accompanying the worker throughout his career in such a way that he can develop as technology develops .
Again , these are common sense measures because they do not want to exclude groups of people , nor do they wish to further isolate regions that are already classified as less-favoured regions .
This is why there are calls for transport and telecommunications infrastructures to be developed to provide access to world markets , so that regions and their populations are not cut off from the labour market of the future .
Finally , they are common sense measures because they call for the principles laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty to be recognised , in particular that of equal treatment of men and women .
Some of our French senators could certainly learn from this !
In conclusion , this resolution , which analyses our society , the changes it is experiencing and its future prospects , is not a revolutionary one ; however , if it were truly to be taken into account , it would mean the beginning of a better world .
No one here will deny that job creation is one of the few fundamental problems that public opinion will use to judge the overall positive or negative effect of European integration on the everyday lives of our citizens .
We can therefore be pleased once again that the Amsterdam Treaty has fully gauged the scale of this challenge and has devoted a chapter to employment .
Nonetheless , such awareness must result in tangible positive effects for our fellow citizens , especially for young people and women , as they are the most vulnerable groups .
I wholeheartedly support the analyses and recommendations outlined by our rapporteur , and therefore it is without any hesitation that I will vote in favour of this report .
Nevertheless , I should particularly like to stress the fact that if we reorganise work according to opportunities provided by the development of multimedia , it will allow us to make substantial ecological gains for society as a whole . It will also result in improved quality of life for many workers who will no longer be forced to make arduous daily journeys .
Reorganising work in this way would ease congestion in access routes to major towns and would also allow us to eventually free up considerable human and financial resources that could then be used to concentrate on developing communications infrastructures in less-favoured regions and in job-creating sectors of activity .
I also wish to emphasise that measures that use very little of the budget and are , on the whole , relatively easy to implement would also let us create jobs rapidly .
For example , I should like to discuss rationalising and streamlining any form of red tape that places a burden on small and medium-sized enterprises . Or we could even give such enterprises access to a powerful network for market research and for passing on the information gleaned from these markets .
Fundamentally , this is a very good report .
It concentrates on combating unemployment and ensuring that everyone has a job .
No one is left out ; there are clear references to women , for example .
The report contains many excellent ideas about the labour market in the future .
It is heartening that the European Union recognises the problems and is willing to focus on them .
Sadly , what is otherwise an excellent report is spoiled by two unfortunate items .
Firstly , taxation is a matter for individual states .
The European Parliament should therefore not ' recommend ' that tax ' burdens ' should be reduced , as is the case in paragraph 41 .
Even more shocking is the ignorance displayed in paragraph 23 .
What the rapporteur refers to as the ' tax burden on labour ' is in fact employees ' own money .
The money which employers hand over to the state to be administered , in the form of payroll tax , is money which we have chosen to set aside , instead of taking a higher salary , to pay for sickness benefit , pensions and protection against unemployment .
Payroll taxes represent an increase in employees ' salaries which they have chosen to forgo to pay for state welfare .
Moreover , a system in which this task is undertaken jointly is the most effective and equitable kind .
The full cooperation of Member States is needed if the European Union is to play its full part in reducing the level of greenhouse emissions .
We owe it to future generations to take seriously the long-term implications of the uncontrolled emissions of CO2 and its impact on the environment .
Failure on the part of some Member State governments to cooperate fully in updating and reporting ' new data ' is unnecessary and only has the effect of undermining attempts to implement effective control programmes as envisaged in the Kyoto protocol .
Unless we have proper measurements then it is impossible to monitor the effectiveness of control programmes or the full extent of the threat from global warming to ' future generations ' .
Ignoring now what is accepted as a real threat will only make the final solution more difficult to achieve .
I welcome the fact that the Environment Ministers have agreed to reduce the EU emissions of six greenhouse gases by 8 per cent between the years 2008-2012 .
The figures agreed will permit Ireland to increase emissions only by 13 per cent relative to 1990 figures .
The European Parliament has worked hard in implementing legislation which reduces the use of CO2 gases .
For example , the EU 's new directive on regulating pollutants obliges oil companies to sign up to ensuring that the sulphur content in petrol is cut by a threefold reduction and that the sulphur content in diesel is cut by a seven-fold reduction by the year 2005 .
If the overall social , human and environmental benefits of clean air are to be secured then the standards laid down by the EU 's recent directive on vehicle emissions and fuel quality must be strictly adhered to .
There must be maximum cooperation between the EU Member State governments and all interested bodies so that a reduction in the use of CO2 becomes a reality in the very near future .
One day waste is of no value , but suddenly the next day it is very valuable .
That transformation was particularly noticeable in the past , when waste from the EU was exported to third countries .
These countries may possibly have been able to extract a small amount of the metals contained in the waste , but it was not a very good proposition for the environment .
There were also examples of third countries simply not being able to use the waste they accepted ; they were simply paid for acting as the receiving country , in other words we used these third countries as dumping grounds because they were cheap alternatives to compliance with European environmental standards .
The new rules have given rise to much confusion and concern among humanitarian organisations which make collections for people in need .
Let us make it clear that the collection of clothing for people in third countries who need it can continue .
However , the new factor is that recipient countries must actively inform the Commission that they wish to receive the waste .
That is the only way in which we in the EU can be sure that the recipient countries have actually decided that they want the waste we ship in across their borders .
It is a guarantee that the countries can handle it in a proper way , according to their own rules .
We must keep all unusable waste at home and treat it under our own rules in environmentally sound waste disposal facilities .
It is with satisfaction that I welcome the report by our colleague Mrs Jackson .
However , I cannot help thinking that this text has taken far too long to come into being .
My disgruntled mood is not caused by the author of this report but rather by the Commission which , I believe , has behaved very casually towards such an important aspect of environmental policy .
Faced with the increase in waste from urban areas there is , as the rapporteur underlined , a need to take steps to reduce the volume of landfill .
In view of this , it would be most pleasing if the Commission were to take strong initiatives to promote alternatives such as composts and biogas from biodegradable waste .
However , I support the proposal to introduce a tax on waste going to landfill .
How can we actually think that we have an infinite amount of space available for use as landfill sites ?
Health considerations are also part of the equation as no one can deny that this type of landfill is potentially dangerous , not only for the environment but also for human beings .
Finally , I certainly support the hierarchy in waste treatment introduced by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
However , once this hierarchy has been established , the Commission must take it into account when drawing up Community programmes related to such issues .
We must show how determined we are to progress in this field as we cannot accept that future generations be left to suffer the consequences of our current inactivity !
As at the first reading of the Jackson report , I have decided to support the report because its basic views are reasonable and well thought out .
However , I would continue to point out that the greatest threat to the ability of Member States to set up national waste disposal systems which go further than the rules that can be adopted at EU level remains the EU 's internal market .
As long as waste in the EU 's terminology continues to be treated as merchandise , there will be an incentive for large producers of waste in EU countries with strict rules on waste management to ship their waste to facilities in other Member States which only comply with the EU 's minimum rules .
If it is not made possible , not just in principle but also in practice , to put a stop to this waste tourism across the EU 's internal frontiers , the environment will continue to suffer .
At the same time , we should not forget the economic damage to waste disposal facilities located in environmentally progressive EU countries .
Their facilities will lose quantities of waste , perhaps to a neighbouring country with its cheaper solutions .
I am pleased to support Mrs Jackson 's report .
Landfill of waste should , as the rapporteur says , be an option of last resort .
Landfill is necessary in some cases .
We must accept that .
The problem is that in many EU Member States it has become the easy option with dire consequences for the environment .
Stricter controls are necessary .
People in residential areas should not have to put up with unsightly and potentially dangerous sites in their neighbourhoods .
At the same time we should have a much better programme in every state to encourage people to dispose of waste with more regard to the environment .
I know that in some countries there are already schemes for the separation of household waste to provide for better recycling .
I trust that this will eventually become the norm in every Member State .
It is the responsibility of Member States to improve waste disposal , using alternatives to landfill , without penalising the taxpaying public .
The landfill tax in my country is a prime example of how an ill-conceived idea that does not address the real problem can lead to taxpayers being out of pocket .
Without a strategy from central government to rethink waste disposal , the landfill tax simply means that local authorities find themselves with no alternative but to pass the cost on to ratepayers .
How this contributes to reducing dependence on landfill is anyone 's guess .
I trust that in the future we will have a much better approach to waste disposal in the EU .
It is essential that landfill becomes , as far as possible , a thing of the past .
To achieve this compliance with the legislation is essential .
Member States must embrace this legislation if it is to have any effect .
The EU Council 's common position on a proposed landfill directive aims to prevent or reduce environmental damage and health risks caused by landfill .
But unfortunately it is lacking in a number of key areas .
This directive will have major implications for waste disposal throughout the EU and especially in Ireland where waste management has tended to focus exclusively on landfill .
Despite the fact that landfill is considered the least-favoured option for waste disposal in Europe , Ireland comes top of the EU list for using landfill to dispose of its huge waste mountains .
This is the second attempt at an EU landfill directive .
The Commission first submitted a proposal in 1991 , which was withdrawn after Parliament , under pressure from environmental groups , rejected the Council 's common position in 1996 .
Although in some respects the proposal is much better than what was presented in 1996 , I am concerned that a number of aspects of the legislation are very weak and could result in governments finding ways to opt out of their commitments on waste management and public health protection .
One major problem is the possibility that landfill sites which have closed at the time of transposition of this directive will be excluded from the remit of the legislation .
Authorities are already planning to close down a significant number of currently active landfill sites in Ireland over the next two years .
Some of these are extremely problematic sites .
Since aftercare is an important part of the directive , it is essential that these sites due to be closed come under the directive .
I am extremely disappointed with the attitude of the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for not insisting that a minimum distance from the site boundary to residential areas be established .
The EU Commission had originally proposed stipulating a minimum distance of 0.5 km from the site boundary to residential areas but the Council of Ministers deleted this from the text of the draft directive .
The issue of distance is extremely important to community groups throughout the EU .
Especially since research ( published in The Lancet , August 1998 ) has shown that infant mortality and birth defects increase by as much as 33 % in host communities within a 3 km distance of landfill dumps .
This failure to set a minimum distance and thus protect local communities from the dangers of landfill goes against the precautionary approach and the protection of public health .
The Green Group tabled an amendment on the issue and will be requesting a registered vote so that local communities at home can see how serious MEPs are about protecting public health .
We find it incredible that so many MEPs would reject measures to ensure that public health is protected .
It is also worth pointing out that in the original proposal from the Commission a minimum distance from residential areas was included and was later removed by the Council .
The Commission should have stuck to its original position and the Socialists should not have done a U-turn on this issue either .
They have failed miserably in their responsibility to protect public health .
Mr President , we are now in a very difficult position on this report .
The whole report has been referred back .
I hope this Parliament will now look at the implications for taxation on those products which are manufactured using energy .
In particular in the ceramics sector we have a policy in the European Union of encouraging employment , and having a resolution which will tax one sector unilaterally is going to be very difficult .
We now have a second bite at the cherry .
I reserve my right to come back on this when it goes back to committee .
The Swedish Social Democrats are of the opinion that a tax trade-off whose aim is to improve the environment and create jobs should be based on a high minimum level of taxation .
Consequently , we have decided to vote for the highest possible minimum level of taxation on electricity and fuel .
On the question of whether to exempt energy-intensive industries , in our view the Commission 's proposal has advantages and disadvantages .
There is a danger that imposing very high taxes on energy-intensive industries will mean that their competitiveness in relation to their counterparts outside the Union will be impaired .
At the same time , it should be borne in mind that energy-intensive industries represent a major source of tax revenue if we are to meet the environmental objectives by means of a tax trade-off .
Furthermore , it should be noted that exemptions for energy-intensive industries could put the enterprises against whom they are competing , but which do not use energy-intensive methods to produce their products or materials , at a competitive disadvantage .
In adopting a position on the taxation of energy-intensive industries , we have decided to strike a balance between these approaches .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of a revision of the minimum rates of duty in the EU for the taxation of mineral oils .
The Commission 's original proposal had a long series of complicated grounds for exemption , but the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has proposed a better solution .
Its effect will be that firms which can show that they will suffer a competitive loss as a result of the duties may be exempted from paying them .
This proposal builds on the EU 's active employment policy in providing a reasonable stimulus for a change in tax systems so that the taxation of labour is reduced , while at the same time taxes on the use of natural resources are increased .
This is a green policy with an employment objective .
We strongly supported the Cox report , which adopts a courageous and original stance on a subject full of pitfalls .
The Commission proposal tried to steer a course through them all , but the complex result remained stranded on the sandbank of the status quo .
The European Union cannot afford to let this happen .
It must respect the undertakings given in the UN Framework Treaty on Climate Change .
The rapporteur is right in starting from the assumption that the polluter must pay .
It is not a question of saddling taxpayers with extra taxes , but of making the polluter face up to the consequences of his behaviour .
Our ultimate goal is to reduce harmful emissions and improve public health and the environment .
Member States must therefore make a serious start on reducing secondary labour costs .
In this respect , the Member States must be given maximum scope on the exemption options , so that one Member State can pursue a stricter than average environmental policy on the one hand , and its own exemption policy on the other .
Of course this policy must not negate the objectives of the Community legislation .
We voted against Amendments Nos 37 and 38 , as they are inconsistent with the rapporteur 's proposals .
Above all , people have to realise that transport prices in general are too low in relation to the external effects which transport causes .
We supported Amendment No 29 .
The international exemption for aircraft kerosene must be abolished as quickly as possible .
Until an agreement on this seems to be within reach , an EU regulation on a fly-over tax would seem to be a good temporary solution .
Finally , we believe that this regulation will be more readily accepted if we fix the minimum rates for a period of five years .
Companies will then know a long time in advance what they are going to be faced with .
The indexing of minimum rates introduced by Mr Cox is a good way of making the regulation simple and reliable .
I fully agree with our rapporteur that a good tax is one that is simple to understand , easy to collect and difficult to evade .
The proposal for a Council directive , as amended , largely meets these criteria .
I also support the line taken by our rapporteur in advocating a strict application of the ' polluter pays ' principle .
It is also important that any increase in tax measures in order to better protect the environment is accompanied by an equivalent reduction in the tax burden on labour .
Through the principle of tax neutrality , better respect for the environment will make a positive contribution to the fight against unemployment and to job creation , which is something that we all need .
And it will do this without jeopardising the financing of social security , the pride and joy of the European development model .
Unfortunately , in the final analysis , it would seem that our rapporteur only partially takes into consideration the different environmental aspects of the issue .
This explains why he supports , for example , preferential tax treatment for more environmentally friendly modes of transport , and quite rightly so , yet does not distinguish between whether or not the energy used has harmful effects on the climate .
The implication behind the proposals is that ' the common minimum rate will apply equally to electricity and heat generated by solar , wind or combined heat and power and to that generated by coal ' .
One may think , as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection does , that there is a gap that must be filled as rapidly as possible if the Union and its Member States are to honour their international commitments concerning climate preservation .
To my mind , we should seek to develop this proposal a little further along these lines .
I cannot support the Cox report , though not because I do not share its views on the need to tax the use of energy and fuels , especially those which are non-renewable .
The reason why I am withholding my support is that I do not wish to contribute to any decision whereby policy on taxes and duties is determined to an ever-increasing extent by the EU .
There may be many good reasons why countries should negotiate common minimum rules for the taxation of areas such as energy consumption - concern for the environment , as well as concern for fair competition between countries - in various international forums such as the UN , the Council of Europe , the OECD , the WTO and so on .
For me , the Cox report and the proposal for a directive on which it is based are a glaring example of the creeping harmonisation of Member States ' tax and duty policies which is currently taking place in the EU : harmonisation which is motivated first and foremost by concern for the internal market , but to an ever-increasing extent by concern for EMU and the single currency , the euro ; harmonisation which is logical and correct , if one is an advocate of the EMU and the euro .
I am not an advocate of either the euro and EMU or the internal market , and for that reason I shall not be supporting the Cox report .
The Commission 's proposal represents the first step towards a tax trade-off from labour to energy through the introduction of minimum levels of taxation .
However , the Commission 's proposal contains far too many exemptions for energy-intensive industries , in other words those which should by rights be taxed .
As a result , the legislation is complex , hard to understand and difficult to apply .
The committee 's proposal broadens the tax base by removing some of the exemptions .
The committee also proposes that the Member States should be entitled to allow firms a tax-free period if they can demonstrate that it really puts them at a competitive disadvantage .
General exemptions should only be granted on renewable sources of energy such as bioenergy and solar and wind power .
The committee proposes that tax rates should automatically be reassessed in line with inflation , with an extra 2 % increase every year , to enable industry to plan ahead .
This is a good way to proceed .
However , I have voted to raise the level to 4 % in order to facilitate compliance with the Rio , Kyoto and Buenos Aires declarations on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
That concludes voting time .
The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Mutual recognition of telecommunications equipment
The next item is the report ( A4-0055 / 99 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive on connected telecommunications equipment and the mutual recognition of the conformity of the equipment ( 3635 / 98 - C4-0024 / 99-97 / 0149 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I am glad to see that one or two colleagues have arrived .
I was tempted to start my contribution with a quotation from Gray 's Elegy written in a Country Churchyard : ' Full many a flower is born to blush unseen , / And waste its sweetness on the desert air . '
I hope the interpreters can cope with that .
It is a bit presumptuous to compare myself to a flower , but , as so often , those who have worked very hard on this particular piece of the jigsaw in the liberalisation of the telecommunications market are here to join in the debate .
I am also delighted to report the successful conclusion of this piece of work .
The Commission and other colleagues will recollect that seven or eight years ago we tried to do this using a system of test-house certification for type approval of telecommunications terminal equipment .
For a variety of reasons , which we need not dwell on here , that really did not work terribly well , and Parliament and the committee took the view that the Commission was right to look at moving towards a system of manufacturers ' self-certification .
We have resolved a number of important issues , particularly at the conciliation stage .
One was the question of the ability of terminal equipment to harm the network .
I would draw the attention of Members to the joint declaration of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission that came out of the conciliation process , because this is very sensible and states that the Commission will carry out a continuous assessment and will evaluate whether that risk occurs frequently .
I went to a considerable amount of trouble to try to find out how frequent a risk this was going to be .
I am very happy that the Commission will undertake this piece of work .
At the conciliation stage we also adopted some strengthening amendments on the whole question of consumer rights that were flagged up to us from some Member States , but Portugal in particular .
The directive is now the stronger because of that work .
During the work in committee and Parliament we also consulted with the Commission about essential requirements and the rights of disabled users , which , again , strengthened the proposal .
There are also clauses on the efficient use of radio spectrum and the emergency services .
All in all , I hope we can congratulate ourselves on having done a very worthwhile piece of work .
I commend both Parliament 's view and the conciliation conclusion to you all .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my opinion Mrs Read has achieved excellent results .
I did not realise that she was such a fine diplomat when it comes to politics and the telecommunications and radio sector .
She has succeeded in combining the many very diverse elements of this issue , and , on behalf of my group , I wish to say I am happy that we have achieved consensus .
Certain factors which Parliament feels are important have now been taken into consideration , such as , for example , adapting equipment for use by the disabled , something that has to be included in all technical matters .
Standards have been raised , and the question of the radio ham has also been given attention .
The question of the responsibility of the manufacturer and that of the distributor has also been raised .
That is important because when this procedure is applied more widely it will be as if the burden of responsibility were much further removed , and thus Parliament is absolutely right to have highlighted the issue .
We have found a procedure to apply in the case of equipment that does not comply with standards and in emergency situations , and naturally , as usual , Parliament has stressed the need for transparency .
We see that many of the requests made by Parliament have been given due attention , making for a healthy compromise .
Customers and consumers can therefore feel safe using equipment , while sanctions and operations remain in skilled hands .
I therefore think the agreement that has been reached is a good one and an example of how progress can be made in such matters , to end in a spirit of consensus .
Practice will reveal what the future holds , and if there are defects in the system we will have to go back and deal with them .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to address this subject out of sympathy more than anything else , because everything that there was to say on the content of the proposal has already been said .
I say out of sympathy also because since 1992 this subject has played such a major role here .
Parliament and the Council are of course working on the final phase of adoption , but in the preliminary stages , the Commission and all the services were very heavily involved .
I mention this in particular because - especially as far as radiocommunication services are concerned , and this is the direction in which the debate is now heading - it simply was not possible to start work on this soon enough for this dossier to be brought to a conclusion in time to have an effect .
It is this area of development which we believe is particularly significant .
If you think that in the future a large proportion of terminal equipment will operate by radio , that is by cordless transmission , then you will see how important this whole subject is , and how important the whole debate has been .
If you listen to the experts , who say that in terms of technical development , one year today is equivalent to seven years in the past , then you have some idea of how urgently this decision was needed .
I can only congratulate all of us - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - on going through the conciliation procedure and thus concluding our work on this far-sighted proposal .
Mr President , if Mrs Read is feeling a little lonely here in plenary she could comfort herself with the words of England 's own bard , Shakespeare : ' We few , we happy few , we band of brothers ' ( and , I would add , sisters ) .
The presence of many people is not always a sign of the importance or seriousness of the subject .
Both the Commission and I personally have always greatly appreciated your work .
By bringing forward European legislation and in that way defending the interests of citizens I would say that you are one of the most effective Members of Parliament .
I only hope my remarks will not harm your chances of re-election .
Unfortunately the citizens themselves do not always appreciate the good that is being done for them , especially here .
Both Parliament and the Commission have to show that they are effectively fighting red tape and over-regulation .
There is a prejudiced view that we produce ever more regulations but , in fact , the piece of legislation that we have been producing here - and , thanks to your efforts , have been able to complete and convince the Council of - is replacing more than 1 , 000 national regulations .
I am sure that we are listening to each other .
People who have prejudices will not listen to us .
They will repeat what they are always repeating , namely that the European Parliament and especially the Commission are eager only to produce new regulations for regulation 's sake .
Considering the advantages for small and medium-sized enterprises that this is creating , I would like to see some of their associations praise Mrs Read .
It is something which is making their lives easier .
I would say to our trading partners , the US and Japan especially , who are always attacking Europe and saying we are a Fortress Europe , that we are now the most open market-place for these products in the world .
We can only hope - and we will do our utmost to ensure - that our trading partners will follow our example .
So many thanks to Mrs Read and to everybody who has participated in the work .
The Commission is quite satisfied , and we endorse the declaration by Parliament and the Council that some adverse effects could possibly result from the introduction of these devices .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Copyright and related rights in the Information Society
The next item is the report ( A4-0026 / 99 ) by Mr Barzanti , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the Information Society ( COM ( 97 ) 0628 - C4-0079 / 98-97 / 0359 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , let me first of all say how much I appreciate , as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the job that Mr Barzanti has done .
His responsibilities as rapporteur on this highly complex issue have not been easy to measure up to .
I now speak as the person who drafted the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and I have some sympathy with what he has gone through .
This is the bundle of lobbying letters , faxes and e-mails that I have received this week on Strasbourg on this particular issue .
I suspect that Mr Barzanti has probably got a pile even larger than that .
This is a highly controversial issue .
On the one hand you have the deserving cases of the artists .
We are shortly to be lobbied here this afternoon by Jean-Michel Jarre and one or two other prominent people in the music industry .
But behind them you have also the very powerful phonogram companies , most of which are American .
I have also discovered from the letters I have received , in this file , that many other bodies have a legitimate interest in this , particularly people who have an interest in the economic results of what the Commission is proposing .
I have been astonished in the time I have been working on this to find out how wide a range of interests are involved in this particular project : not only the performers and the record companies but the manufacturers of consumer electronic products ; the Internet service providers ; representatives of telecommunications companies and of the disabled - I have a letter here from the European Union for the Blind who are very worried about the implications for them of some of the amendments proposed by the Legal Affairs Committee .
Here , I have to make a confession .
Confession , as we say in English , is good for the soul !
I have to admit that as a member of the Legal Affairs Committee , I voted for Mr Barzanti 's opinion .
But I also confess that it was such a complicated vote that I lost sight of some of the amendments that my committee - the Economic Committee - had been responsible for .
Some of them - particularly those that affect broadcasting - were incorporated into the Legal Affairs Committee 's opinion , but many of them were not .
If I have a criticism of the Legal Affairs Committee 's opinion , it is that it is too one-sided .
It comes down too much on the side of the owners of the rights and ignores the legitimate interests of those other groups that I mentioned : the disabled , the consumer electronics manufacturers , the Internet service providers , the telecommunications companies etc .
Neither the Commission nor the Legal Affairs Committee of the European Parliament wishes to make life unduly difficult for people .
But the fact is that we have - as I respectfully suggest - got too involved in detail in the Legal Affairs Committee 's opinion .
What I would hope is that , as a result of tomorrow 's vote , we will come up with something which is clearer , technologically neutral , at least as good for industry as is American legislation and sufficient to comply with the World International Property Organisation treaty commitments which we have entered into .
Mr President , I want to congratulate my colleague , Roberto Barzanti , who has always been an elegant and eloquent contributor to our debate .
Speaking as a near contemporary of his , I am somewhat alarmed that he has felt that this should be his last Parliament , which of course also means that this will be his last report .
I salute him for all he has done in this area .
He has , of course , been caught in the balance of forces between all the great interests involved here which Mr Cassidy referred to , and he is also caught by the fact that the regulations we are trying to make here have to fit in with the new world of encryption and electronic commerce , as well as all the other areas where copyright and ownership are of the essence .
I wish I could say all was sweetness and light in this debate .
Alas this has not been the case and there are doubts that have to be expressed .
I wish to list just a few in my brief minute .
Many of us are not certain that we should assume that the world is utterly changed because of digital technology .
We can see from the report that the Commission takes a more cautious view than the rapporteur , and rightly so .
Digital copying obviously makes profound differences to some , especially in the field of music reproduction , which we need to take account of that and protect it as fully as we can .
We also need to deal with piracy with an iron hand .
But when you use the iron hand , you have to be very careful what you crush , and many of us have tabled amendments giving some protection to other interests which may lose in the new digital field what they have traditionally enjoyed in the analogue field , because of the implications of some of the rapporteur 's suggestions .
I mention in particular those groups which are covered by such exemptions under the right of reproduction and may lose them : the disabled in all their various categories that are not specifically and sufficiently mentioned by the rapporteur ; and those institutions of learning which also tackle disadvantage .
Amendments 89 to 96 which I and a number of other colleagues have tabled attempt to strengthen their position , not because we have anything against the definition of copyright and the protection of rights holders , but because we consider other cultural matters as well .
The last doubt I can raise in this brief account concerns the right of free speech which is entrenched in the protection of quotation , criticism and review .
We have to be certain that this does not disappear under the assertion of copyright .
I have to declare my interest as a rights holder in some broadcasting matters , but I am not speaking here today in that sense .
I am speaking against myself and in the interests of access by consumers and citizens which also has to be considered very seriously when we debate this directive .
Mr President , I too should like to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur , also on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , because I think that the draft report , as subsequently adopted in the committee responsible , does actually adapt the legislation effectively to the new technical reality .
I wish to comment briefly on the points already made in connection with Article 5 , points which proved to be particularly contentious in the discussions of recent months and to which the mountain of letters piling up in all our offices also relates .
Should the exceptions in Article 5 be compulsory or voluntary for the Member States ?
Both the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights have opted here for non-compulsory provisions , because - and this is also in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity - they give the Member States a certain amount of scope when drawing up their own legislation .
If the Member States provide for exceptions in this context , however , they must also ensure - by a method to be devised by the Member States - that rightholders receive a share of the proceeds or a particular level of compensation .
The Culture Committee envisages that rules of this kind might comprise either a flat-rate charge and / or methods analogous to those already used in the Member States to regulate the protection of intellectual property .
A further point was how private copying should be regulated in the digital environment .
I think that a derogation should only be granted for reproductions made by individuals which are intended purely for their own private use and not for commercial ends , and where there is no further dissemination to third parties .
If technical measures are insufficient to prevent this right from being abused , then in my opinion a remuneration scheme - for example a levy on equipment or copying materials - should be introduced to ensure that rightholders receive at least partial compensation , as is of course already the case in the analogue field in eleven of the fifteen Member States .
This position may at first sight conflict with the interests of consumers and the hardware industry , because their associations are calling for the existing provisions in the analogue field to be extended to digital copying as well .
I can understand this demand from the point of view of the groups I have mentioned , but I think that ultimately , exceptions to the exclusive right of copyright can only be justified by a higher social interest , which should then be substantiated as accurately as possible .
Broad sections of the population having access to these new forms of knowledge and learning is something we should very much welcome .
We should not forget , however , that in the long term , the wishes of equipment manufacturers and consumers can only be met if diversity of content is guaranteed .
This diversity of content requires those offering it to be protected too .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has generously accepted a number of the ideas put forward by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , which means that we can also support the report 's adoption in the form in which it has been presented by the Legal Affairs Committee .
I think it is balanced , even though this concept has now been the object of some criticism here .
It is a directive which safeguards the interests of rightholders and protects intellectual property .
It is therefore bound to carry a certain amount of weight in this sector , and rightly so in my view .
Mr President , where cultural matters are concerned , it is the duty of the European Parliament to protect artists , stimulate creativity , strengthen society 's creative powers and thus show respect for intellectual achievement .
That is our cultural duty , and it is one which the rapporteur has fulfilled admirably .
That is why the Socialist Group will be supporting this position .
The Commission proposal bears all the signs of a compromise .
Of course , with such diverse interests it is very difficult to reach a consensus , and of course there is room for improvement .
I should just like to mention two points which I think are very important .
The first concerns the limitations on copyright , in which context we have logically proposed providing compensation .
Limiting copyright is not synonymous with doing without compensation .
I know that this view was shared by some of the Commission .
I would be very grateful if the whole Commission would support these proposals .
The other point concerns the infamous Article 5 ( 1 ) .
I really do not understand the Commission here at all .
You see , by introducing Article 5 ( 1 ) , what the Commission does is abandon artists .
It leaves them unable to defend themselves against piracy .
Illegal distribution of works , of all things , is to be promoted , with artists being left defenceless .
Anyone acting in this way and actually giving preference to the interests of the distributors is no longer being objective .
I do not believe that the comments we have heard on this point in the public debate are accurate .
It is claimed that the Internet would grind to a halt or that services would not be able to work uninterrupted .
That is certainly not true .
That is why I make this urgent request : let us rectify this , the most dangerous point , as it continues to be in the amended Commission proposal .
Let us say no , we will equip artists and rightholders with the technical instruments , in particular , with which to defend themselves against piracy .
The Commission is not able to tell us today how it actually intends to do this .
I believe that we in the European Parliament should stand on the side of the artists , the rightholders , and that in so doing we are making our contribution to the intellectual development of the European Union .
Mr President , this directive affects at least three interested parties . Their interests may not always conflict , but they certainly do not coincide either .
In the first place , there are the creators .
One of the distinguishing features of European culture is that long ago it gave rise to the concept of intellectual property , the creator 's property . There has been a general consensus that creativity should be recognised and remunerated , remuneration being the ultimate form of recognition .
Creators are therefore the first interested party and we should not forget this , as it is one of the distinguishing features of European culture .
The consumers constitute the second group .
The third group is made up of the middlemen , who have a range of differing interests .
If there is a conclusion to be drawn , it has to be that nobody is happy with Parliament 's report .
From my experience as a lawyer , that could be a good sign , because when none of the three parties to a dispute agree with the solution , it probably represents a good compromise between them .
I must therefore congratulate the rapporteur , because both his detailed knowledge of the subject and his skilful handling have been crucial to the matter in hand .
Further , I have to say that the Group of the European People 's Party will support this report , even though it is a contentious issue within our group , as indeed it is for your group , Mr Barzanti .
In addition , we will support all the amendments , including some that you personally are not in favour of , and in which certain points of detail are indeed technically incorrect .
These amendments - particularly Amendments Nos 30 , 31 and 48 - may well prove problematic .
Our group approached this matter from a broad political point of view rather than a technical one . We are aware that the report contains a number of technical difficulties , but they can be dealt with at second reading or by the Commission .
We wish to adopt a political stance .
We support this report and I feel that the fact that neither of the two main political groups has tabled amendments as a group must be an encouraging sign .
I should also like to point out that this report is in line with the Commission 's thinking .
The directive is not aimed at complete harmonisation .
It only concerns ' the harmonisation of certain aspects ' . It is primarily a directive aimed at updating Community regulations to suit other existing directives , such as the directive on hire , the directive on databases and the directive on computer programmes .
In particular , it follows the two major 1996 WIPO agreements .
The structure must therefore be respected , and I feel that this report by the Committee on Legal Affairs represents an excellent response to the delicate balance called for in the Commission 's proposal . The three fundamental principles - reproduction , communication and distribution - receive even-handed treatment in an article which allows room for manoeuvre , enabling the various Member States to maintain often long-standing differences which do not hinder the smooth running of the internal market .
I believe that this is an important directive , pointing the way , as I have suggested , to ' framework harmonisation ' directives which do not seek to harmonise every last detail , but only what is necessary .
I offer the rapporteur my full support , and hope that his position will be endorsed by a majority vote tomorrow . Finally , I must reiterate my view that the rapporteur 's approach is well-balanced and sends a clear message to the Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , it has been said on countless occasions here in the House that what is needed is a set of international rules for the information society to ensure that our countries retain their competitiveness in the new business sectors it creates .
If we adopt the directive in the form in which it has been submitted by the committee , I am afraid that we shall not be acting consistently with what we have said in other circumstances .
We will be setting up a system which makes it more difficult for many of those participating in the information society to operate .
There are no clearly defined rules governing the sharing of responsibility .
As a result , I believe that a growing part of the action is moving away from Europe to other places - one might say that ' the best is the enemy of the good ' .
While the proposal for a directive was being drawn up , I asked repeatedly and with ever more insistence the following fundamental questions : would it not be better to ratify the WIPO Convention quickly and approve the directive dealing with electronic commerce ?
Do we need anything else ?
Should we not accept that this directive was produced before we had come up with a definite proposal on electronic commerce and before we had formed a general view on the sharing of responsibility on the networks ?
It is essential that the WIPO Convention should be ratified quickly .
It affects absolutely everyone in this sector .
It is not certain that we need this directive , and in fact I believe it is holding up ratification .
Is it really in anyone 's interest ?
Many countries in Europe have public rights of way , in other words the public has access to private land where no damage is likely to result and prohibition would be unreasonable .
In my view , similar rights of way should exist in the digital world .
To a degree , the Commission 's proposal respected that , but not the rapporteur 's .
Consequently , we have tabled a number of amendments which are based on the idea of a ' digital right of way ' .
I agree with Mr Whitehead that we should not make too great a distinction between digital and analogue technology here .
Cultural differences do exist , and so I do not understand why there should not be mandatory provision for exemptions .
On the other hand , the list of copyright exemptions needs to be complete .
We have to combat piracy , and the way to do so is through cooperation with the countries with whom we have dealings and other forms of association .
However , we should encourage those concerned to devise a method that is neutral , in other words capable of preventing piracy but which does not impede openness or lead to the emergence of a closed system .
That would fit the bill , and I am glad to see that Mr Cassidy has at last woken up to the fact .
At the same time , it is also crucial that the public should not be deprived of the rights which the directive would give them .
I also wish to join in the congratulations to the rapporteur on his very able handling of an extremely difficult brief and report .
Even though I do not subcribe to all the proposals put forward by the rapporteur , I personally believe that he has come up with a very balanced approach towards resolving the problem .
However , I disagree with some Members who say that the Internet and the new technologies offered by digital communications do not present a danger or mean a huge change in the future , because we can already see , in its very infancy , that digital technology , the Internet and the new information society have altered the way we do business and communicate .
In the future , they will also alter the way in which we get our entertainment - whether through music , plays , television programmes , films or books .
Therefore , it is essential for us now to come up with a balanced approach as to how best protect the intellectual property rights of the creators .
Often people involved in music , art or literature tend to be laughed at because they have no business sense : they tend to care more for their art and the public presentation of their art than for mere commercial realities or business necessities .
Therefore , it is incumbent on us , as we benefit spiritually from the material these people produce , to put in place protection to guarantee that their rights will not be usurped by pirates or others .
Some time ago we debated about giving the rights to artists who sell their artwork .
There was a lot of debate in this House about whether artwork sold by auction would go to America rather than to Europe if we adopted this legislation .
Since that legislation came into being , there has been no noticeable difference .
There is a proper balanced way to achieve the rights that everybody here wants to see .
Whilst consumers also deserve protection of their rights - ensuring that they have the widest possible access to information at the most reasonable cost ( sometimes for free ) - there are also responsibilities on the consumer to pay for some of these rights .
That responsibility must also be balanced with the rights of the authors and the creators of these works to ensure that their rights are protected .
I have submitted a number of amendments to this report to ensure that there will be no reduction in the dissemination of information through public libraries , educational facilities and so on ; that indigenous culture will be preserved and developed ; that the needs of disabled people will not be undermined by this legislation and that the cultural and social importance of major sporting events will be protected .
All in all , my group will support the Barzanti report but we urge that our amendments be adopted .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether there will be another proposal from the Commission with regard to copyright and related rights in the information society in the near future ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to digitisation , reproduction technology is now so advanced that there is no discernible difference between the original and the copy .
In an age of digital communication , anyone not wishing to put at risk everything that copyright rules have achieved must reformulate them in such a way as to take account of the demands of the new technology and the industry using it .
The fact that this draft satisfies these demands - and not least that it puts the stress on copyright - is due to the preparatory work carried out by the Commission , but in no lesser measure to the judiciousness , determination and patience of the rapporteur .
If these achievements are not to be put at risk , it is particularly important to adopt Amendments Nos 33 , 34 and 37 and also to take into account the consequences , as expressed in Amendments Nos 97 and 95 .
I hope we all agree that we do not want to go back to a time when the famous composer Johann Nepomuk Hummel , Chopin 's teacher , had to secure copyright protection for composers for the very first time , and when the great philosopher Schelling lost a case challenging the illegal reproduction of his texts because he was not protected by any rights at all .
Mr President , the June Movement sees free access to information as the very cornerstone of democracy .
The public must retain the right to information and education at libraries and other publicly financed institutions .
In this context , consideration should be given to the weaker members of society .
That is why the June Movement has tabled amendments , seeking to ensure that for example the visually handicapped have the same free access as everyone else to material in libraries when the purpose is not commercial .
A second general principle is that artists should own all the rights connected with the exploitation of their work .
They themselves should be able to negotiate the scale of their remuneration and what rights they transfer to a producer .
In Scandinavia , we have a long successful tradition of solving difficult copyright issues with the help of licensing agreements , and we need to retain this option .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to Amendment No 56 , which quite unreasonably calls for journalists to have the same rights as authors when newspapers use their articles .
Such a principle is contrary to both copyright law and agreements , and would entail an unreasonable commercial risk for the newspapers .
This too is a question of democratic access to information .
In other respects I am in complete agreement with Mrs Thors with regard to this directive .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive is significant because it points the way ahead .
This has already become clear from the public response .
The right of artists to have their works protected must also be guaranteed in the age of the Internet .
For this to be the case , a legal framework needs to be established and the rapporteur has successfully done this .
I can support most of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Alongside the pro-artist provisions , I should in particular like to draw your attention to the proposed rules on the use of archive productions .
I think that the rules need to offer incentives to producers - producers of audio media and those who work for radio - to provide on-line access to the productions they have either produced themselves or on someone else 's behalf .
The new technology can make it possible for the film and audio material currently languishing in cellars to be made available to a much larger audience .
Finally , however , let me sound a note of criticism on the linguistic quality of the proposal .
Parts of it are , I think , the perfect example of legislation which is remote and difficult to understand , and which intrinsically fails to comply with the rule of transparency .
Mr President , in all the time that I have been a Member of the European Parliament and its Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I have never before experienced anything like as complex a legislative procedure as this one on adapting copyright to the requirements of the information society .
There is , therefore , all the more reason for me to wish to thank the rapporteur for trying to guide us through the jungle of numerous conflicting interests and to identify a sound policy .
We may perhaps not agree on all the individual points in this policy , but it has been sketched out and can therefore serve as a guide to both the Council and the Commission .
One point on which everyone is agreed in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is , in any event , the need for a European model of the information society , in which works of high cultural and artistic quality form the core of the content , and the new technologies are not used to undermine existing rights .
Given that content and technologies are universal , however , this does beg the question of whether this aim can be better achieved by having a higher level of protection - compared with the situation worldwide - or whether by doing so we in fact make life so difficult for other players in the European information society that this ultimately also has an adverse effect on rightholders .
If we want more high-quality content , then we should not make it too difficult , or even impossible , for the content providers - as they are now known - and in particular television and radio broadcasters , to distribute this content and pioneer new ways of publishing it .
Consumers are also expecting the information society to bring an increase in easily accessible content , and not repeated requests for money in the future .
This is true , above all , of particularly sensitive groups of consumers , especially the disabled .
I should therefore once again like to call on the rapporteur to tone down the reservations he expressed concerning Amendments Nos 30 , 32 and 48 , which were accepted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I should also like to express my thanks for the support which these have attracted from the speakers in the House so far .
Mr President , I will confine myself to just two points .
The first is that in Europe we need to encourage the use of the Internet and not discourage it .
Equally , we have to recognise that new technology requires modern thinking and a digital copy simply is not the same as an analogue copy .
It is a clone .
This poses a risk for the music industry if such cloning is totally unrestricted .
We should not underestimate the young people of Europe and their entrepreneurial capacity to produce those clones .
Even in today 's Financial Times I saw reference to a product of a French company which has launched a multipurpose CD duplicator .
At the press of a button you can produce an exact clone of the original CD .
I have no doubt at all that the long-term solution to all of this lies in new technology , but there will also be legal restrictions where that is necessary .
The second point I want to address is the proposal made in a number of amendments , including my own , concerning the possibility of having mediation where there could be disputes between the producers and the disseminators .
We are going to see a lot of litigation as a result of this legislation and that no doubt will play into the hands of the lawyers .
We want to have a system where , in those countries that are prepared to allow it , there should be the right of recourse to an independent mediator who can listen to both sides of the story and arrive at an objective solution that is not actually going to cost vast sums of money which the small users , the small producers , the individual musicians and the like would not have access to .
That is a small point but one I would hope the rapporteur and the Commission would have some sympathy with as a way of helping some of those who are going to be affected by this legislation .
Mr President , the report by Mr Barzanti is excellent and perfectly balanced .
It defends legitimate copyright but takes into account the concern to make all works available to as many people as possible .
This is an important point because in this technical and complex debate some people would have us believe that consumer interests are being prejudiced .
This is completely inaccurate .
Neither the author 's copyright on his creation nor the remuneration that he is entitled to expect for its dissemination constitute obstacles to making the work available to the public .
If Member States consider that cultural policy demands free access to works , for example , it is up to them to provide for the necessary measures ; it is not up to the authors to foot the bill .
In education , for example , could we imagine asking teachers to give up half their salary to pay for the education service ?
This would obviously be absurd .
Moreover , in my view the fears expressed by television companies and electronics manufacturers are groundless .
Copyright has never been , and never will be , an obstacle to technical progress , and this has been the case since printing was first developed .
On the other hand , without serious protection , technical development can undermine copyright and , as a result , stymie creation .
In my opinion the system proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights in the area of digital private copying is a good one because before any technical measures are developed to protect the rightholders , there will be a financial contribution and fair remuneration , probably as is currently done with the analogue equivalent .
In conclusion , our job is not just to organise a technological free competition and free trade area .
It is also our job , as Mr Rothley said , to maintain and develop cultural creation in Europe in all its diversity .
This directive , as amended , generalises and thus confirms the European copyright model without preventing works from being disseminated .
For this reason I , together with part of the ELDR Group , will vote in favour of Mr Barzanti 's report .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal and the report both pinpoint the flaws that exist in the Union 's legislative procedures .
An international panel of experts should have been appointed to investigate thoroughly the complex problems associated with copyright and public access .
There should have been a broad public discussion before the legislative process was embarked upon .
Instead , we now have a legal text that is obscure and not sufficiently businesslike .
Nor does a surfeit of words make the legislation any clearer .
In particular , we regret the lack of clarity in defining the position as regards the provisions that exist in the Nordic countries whereby ordinary people are entitled to have access to official documents and information .
What is most needed in this , as well as in other areas , is a serious in-depth analysis of the problems .
Mr President , Tony Blair once said that his country 's culture industry is a greater source of revenue than the steel industry . But digital technology has now opened up a whole new dimension for pirating .
It is estimated that about one million CDS are stolen from the Internet every day .
It is therefore high time that we introduced legislation , not just for music but for all kinds of audio-visual material .
We must ensure that the author or copyright holder is granted exclusive rights to the reproduction , distribution or any communication of his work to the public .
That is the only way to create a favourable environment which can stimulate creativity and investment .
Effective cross-border protection of intellectual property offers many benefits .
In economic terms it will ensure an expanded market , which in social terms will create more job opportunities , and last but not least there is the cultural dimension .
Consumers must continue to have the guarantee of good quality and , let us not forget , creativity and artistic innovation are the source of income for authors .
In order to continue to preserve and further enrich our artistic identity , our artists must be further encouraged .
Above all , we must take care of young talents who are busy creating what in future may be much loved but unprotected .
People are looking to us to provide effective regulation , including on behalf of those who are not yet famous .
It is up to us as the European legislator to guarantee this .
For this reason I shall be voting for Mr Barzanti 's report , on which I congratulate him .
Mr President , the directive is on three levels , namely technical , legal and political , which adds considerably to its complexity .
Both the committee and the rapporteur , Mr Barzanti , have nevertheless done an excellent job .
However , I would urge the House to vote against Amendment No 48 which calls for a non-voluntary licence , or legal presumption .
The Nordic countries have had licensing and collective agreements for a long time , and the experience has been constructive .
The agreements also extend to authors who remain outside the organisations responsible for concluding the agreements , and guarantee rights and levels of remuneration .
It is essential that such a system , which benefits all the parties concerned , should be retained and not replaced by a non-voluntary licensing arrangement .
To do so would contravene both the Berne and WIPO Conventions .
This is basically a cultural issue , but there is also the question of safeguarding the rights of public institutions , such as hospitals , schools , libraries , museums , archives , prisons and , last but not least , both the rights and opportunities of the disabled .
Free and equal access to information , culture and public documents is essential for the democratic development of society .
It is essential that this is guaranteed by the directive .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his good humour and fortitude in tackling this difficult report : difficult , firstly , because it needs to strike a balance between the rights of the authors and the needs of consumers and , secondly , because technology is changing rapidly , which makes it hard to anticipate legislative problems in such a context .
I want to pinpoint three issues : disability rights ; the need to be able to report parliamentary and judicial proceedings ; and the issue of fair compensation .
On the disability rights issue , I have tabled an amendment for the British Labour Group which is preferred by the disability lobby because it is mandatory rather than optional like the amendment adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Philip Whitehead and I have also tabled an amendment to allow fair reporting of parliamentary and judicial proceedings .
The issue of fair compensation , and I speak for the British Labour members , poses a problem for the United Kingdom .
Although the exceptions are optional and can be adapted to national law at the will of the Member States , the amendments as they stand at present would introduce the obligation to introduce fair compensation .
In Britain people have got used to copying their favourite TV programme and watching it at leisure at the time most convenient for them .
This is a right which does not incur financial consequences .
The British public would be extremely unhappy if this right was curtailed by having to make a payment .
Therefore my Group cannot accept that concept .
Mr President , copyright is not merely restricted to the question of who is due compensation and how it may be most effectively collected .
Mr Barzanti 's report should basically be concerned with the principles of the free development of the information network and its commercial exploitation , in other words , enabling the consumer to use the Internet at the lowest possible cost to him or her .
The protection of copyright is in everyone 's interest , but not necessarily on the terms of those who up to now have been in the strongest position .
It is a matter of setting priorities : greater rights for the holder , or the freedoms of the Internet user and the right of the Internet service provider to operate .
As far as the future of the information society is concerned the latter objective is the more crucial one .
The report 's basic theme , that digital copyright may be best protected by prohibiting the temporary reproduction of material for transmission , is completely at odds with the widely accepted principles associated with operating the Internet .
If the prohibition of temporary reproduction is allowed to go through and technological monopolies spring up , such practices as surfing the Internet could be forbidden and an ordinary computer could be regarded as an illicit piece of equipment used to dodge copyright protection .
One of Mr Barzanti 's main objectives is to improve the conditions under which European copyright holders can get their work published .
However , over 80 % of the market in the sales of music products in Europe is now in non-European hands .
Tightening up on electronic copyright would further concentrate business in the mega-companies of Hollywood .
This , contrary to the opinion of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media in particular , would not improve conditions for European artists to get their work published and sold .
Mr President , safeguarding copyright in the world of the digital information network is a crucially important objective .
Illegal reproduction threatens the legitimate interests of copyright holders and ultimately the production of content in its entirety as well as the profitability of creative work .
However , the public 's right to information is just as legitimate and important , as is the development of an information society available to all .
In many Member States a viable copyright environment has been successfully created , one that safeguards a balance between a flexible approach to the use of material and the interests of rightholders .
The EU 's copyright directive , and especially the more stringent version proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , is a threat to this balance .
In its present form the directive would significantly restrict the free circulation of information and the ability of public service institutions to provide citizens with a service .
The copyright balance also requires provision to be made for minimum compulsory exemptions connected with access to information , study and research , to act as a counterweight to strong harmonised protection of copyright ; such exemptions have already been acknowledged and ratified in all international agreements in this sector .
In addition to compulsory exemption we must be able to create codes of practice to be applied nationally , on the basis of local tradition and culture , for example in collective bargaining agreements .
The consequences of library services being solely dependent on licences being granted , or not , by rightholders , as the proposal for a directive suggests , will be particularly disastrous .
The right to information must not be subject to licence in the lifelong learning society , while distance learning and virtual network services are becoming ever more common .
We certainly do not want to take a step backwards and have a situation where electronic material cannot be seen , browsed or reproduced without a separate licence or charge .
In the democratic information society it is appropriate to safeguard the practice of reproducing material for purposes of study , research or private use particularly via libraries , as libraries , archives and museums have an obligation to guarantee that materials connected with matters of culture and heritage are preserved and accessible in electronic form also .
Mr President , many thanks to Mr Barzanti .
He has balanced diverse interests very well .
Quite simply , intellectual creation is vital to the future of our economy but it is also the lifeblood of our society , be it music , film , photographs , books or software .
We are told we must balance interests but , quite frankly , all interests are not equal .
Large telecoms companies will always survive but if we strangle and silence individual creators we will never win them back .
Blank screens will not enrich our society .
We have to ensure creators enjoy sufficient incentive and reward for their work .
A strong system of copyright as proposed by the Commission and Mr Barzanti will ensure dignity , independence and survival for creators .
Too many continue to scrape together a living in a kind of La Bohème garret .
Only 7 % of authors in France earn above the minimum wage .
Let us never forget that .
I have friends who are authors and they survive hand-to-mouth on royalties and have to sell their own belongings to write the next book or create the next film .
I can therefore never support an amendment providing for the forced transfer of rights away from authors to others .
It is absolutely critical to have exemptions for the disabled , education , research , archives , investigative journalism and libraries .
Some would argue that there should be fair use without fair compensation .
Why do we demand of authors and artists what we do not demand of other workers in our economy ?
Systems of fair compensation through a blank tape levy exist in 11 out of the 15 countries .
All the UK creators and their trade unions support a blank tape levy .
All I am saying to British Members of this House is : do not vote against Amendments Nos 34 , 36 , 37 and 41 .
Allow the creators and others in the United Kingdom to have a fair debate about whether we should have a blank tape levy .
Let me make it clear that these are not obligatory exemptions .
Voting for those amendments will not force the British Government to introduce a blank tape levy .
Let us ensure that out of this we have a cultural rainforest , in the words of our great author Maureen Duffy .
Mr President , in my opinion , the report drawn up by Mr Barzanti is a very balanced document .
Whenever the paths cross of those who own intellectual property rights and those who have access to the information , there is a conflict .
I believe that the property issue is a fundamental one , and that this is not a question of how the information is disseminated .
For this reason , I believe that the principles Mr Barzanti has identified and incorporated into his report are the right ones .
Obviously exceptions are needed , but they should be limited and should uphold the rules on the protection of intellectual property .
I will soon have served as a Member of Parliament - both at national level and here - for 20 years , and in all that time I have never before been lobbied so intensively on an issue by the interest groups .
When it comes to the vote , I hope that this Parliament will not help the new forms of media - which have a role to play and should be able to do so - to strike it rich , at the expense of authors .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are three branches of industry which have an interest in seeing a strong and clear copyright directive , namely the content industry , the telecommunication and service providers , and suppliers of consumer electronics .
Then there are also of course our consumers , libraries , schools , etc. to be considered .
The Barzanti report clearly weights the balance in favour of the content industry , at the expense of the other branches of industry and especially the consumers .
Copyright holders are given an absolute right to protection , with the banning of copying for private use for example .
American companies are now trying to lobby for legislation in Europe to go much further than in the United States , where such an absolute right has just been forcefully rejected .
US companies are therefore deliberately placing Europe at a disadvantage and Europe will be accepting this if we accept the Barzanti report .
We will be falling behind , especially our industry , and this will cost jobs .
It is primarily the Committee on Legal Affairs which is now busy fighting a rearguard action , because with this directive the established industry is trying to maintain its present market position in the old media at the expense of the new .
New technological developments , such as the Internet , will be held back by the directive and artists manipulated and made to dance to industry 's tune , with big names such as Claudia Cardinale being brought in .
But the new generation of artists who are distributing their products on the Internet are being left out in the cold .
Finally , I have a question for Commissioner Monti .
How does the copyright directive stand in relation to the proposal for a directive for electronic commerce ?
In other words : if there is a difference in copyright protection between the Member States , which applies ? The principle of the country of origin or the country of destination ?
In the directive on electronic commerce we now have before us , the basis is the country of origin .
I would appreciate an answer from Commissioner Monti to this question .
Ladies and gentlemen , the directive we have before us is a complex one , and I have appreciated the way in which Mr Barzanti has dealt with it .
I am not overjoyed about everything , as he and many other Members of the House know .
This is the first reading - we still have the chance to improve many aspects - and I hope that we are on the right track .
But let us just get one thing clear , and let us not be under any illusion : we are not waging a cultural war here .
This is not actually about poor artists ; Ms Tongue , you know how strongly I support your position against the large telecommunications companies .
It is not about the software industry , about Microsoft versus European companies .
Nor is it about the fact that one industry is being played off against the others here .
Let us be honest .
It is about who wins control of this electronic marketplace , and a hard battle is being fought out there over this .
We are standing in the midst of the interest groups , as we can tell from the constant stream of publications arriving in our offices .
But let us not skate on thin ice by supporting one industry and believing that in doing so we are helping creators and artists ; we do not want to follow a good European tradition and then end up in an American blind alley .
I would urge you not to make this mistake .
In the United States , a compromise has been reached on many points which is acceptable .
Let us not fall behind this compromise in Europe .
I would urge you to examine the law .
The happy medium lies somewhere in between .
It lies in the Commission proposal .
It lies in the proposal which Mr Barzanti has made .
It lies in the proposal made by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which I supported - and as you know , I put forward many suggestions .
It will lie in the second reading , and in the proposals which the Council tables .
Only please let us not choose the wrong approach , let us not be under any illusions , but let us choose a very realistic , pragmatic approach which puts European industry on the right track , which protects the interests of authors and all those in this market - the great and the small , the telecommunications industry and the Internet providers too .
I would urge you to adopt this approach , and that is why I am asking you to take another considered look at the amendments , and in particular those relating to Articles 5 and 6 , in time for tomorrow ; Article 6 also safeguards the interests of European industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are very few areas where the quality and the future of the European integration process are really at stake .
Copyright is one of them .
It may seem that the common agricultural policy or the trans-European transport network are higher priorities , but they are not .
European copyright policy also relates to food and transport .
It concerns the production and distribution of books and newspapers , of music , and of audio-visual and multimedia products .
If these products are in short supply or of inferior quality , that will sound the death-knell for Europe .
European society will be unable to assert its differentness , will lose its vitality and will fail to balance its trade unless it can claim that share of the cultural market that is its by right .
With the advent of the Internet and digitalisation , and whatever other unknown technologies are around the corner , along with globalisation of the market , enlargement of the Union and the increasing role of multilateral treaties , a policy on copyright is a priority for Europe .
That is because creators and artists act as our antennae for the future , as our critical conscience and as our calling card .
It is therefore in all our interests that they should thrive .
So what is involved ?
Basically , facilitating the distribution of creative work , rewarding everyone taking part in that process , creators and investors alike , and eliminating piracy .
What ought to be done ?
We should set up a permanent body to help the Member States negotiate , guarantee the international compatibility of European legislation and make sure it is constantly updated . We should also automate remuneration systems as far as possible , and increase the use of protection technologies .
The Barzanti report is an excellent one because it not only adopts a cultural perspective but it is also an appeal for the key words to be ' compatibility ' and ' harmonisation ' .
That is after all the only way of defending the interests at stake .
All parties - Member States and artists , producers and users - have to be shown that they are in the same boat and need to row in time and row hard if they are to reach a safe harbour .
Mr President , in today 's proposal on copyright , we are rightly concerned to protect authors and performers , but also record and phonogram producers who must be properly remunerated .
At this point , however , the House is being asked to approve legislation which limits the right of European operators to have access to the Internet , in contrast to what has been provided in the recent World Intellectual Property Organisation treaty and the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act .
This is rightly being done to protect copyright , but under pressure from the big multinational record companies which are now all American , if not by origin then at least in terms of their economic interests .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has required technical copies to be authorised , but I do not see how that can strengthen copyright .
Copyright is in fact already substantially protected by Article 2 of the directive , which establishes the principle whereby no one may place works on the networks without the permission of the copyright holder .
How will that further authorisation improve the position of authors ?
That is not the way to combat piracy , at least according to the US legislation , which takes the view that the procedures for identifying and closing suspect sites provide the most effective way of combating that particular scourge .
If network operators were required to monitor all of the ' packages ' sent by service suppliers , numbers would have to be reduced , leaving them concentrated in just a few hands .
That is not what the independent record industry in Europe wants , that same industry which is investing in most of the recordings made in Europe , which is creating jobs and development , believes in young artists and is exporting Europe 's musical products to the outside world .
It is those with interests on the other side of the Atlantic that want it .
The people who are asking us to close off access to the Internet are importing into Europe music produced elsewhere .
Even the small proportion of music produced in Europe is adopting commercial standards that require mass sales , which are in turn dependent on the kind of hugely costly advertising campaigns that the Italian supervisory body recently condemned in Italy in its decision against the Big Five , that is to say the five big music companies .
Let me end by pointing out that the independent record industry and the managers - the artists ' true representatives - are asking us to call a halt before it is too late .
I propose to accept their advice and vote for the Cassidy and Thors amendments which come closer to meeting the needs of artists .
In that way , we shall be able genuinely to protect the future of the information society , of music and of consumers .
Mr President , Mr Barzanti 's report is an important one , and he has demonstrated some artistry in putting it together !
It is true that this is only the first reading and we can correct many of its possible shortcomings if any emerge later on .
However , I would like to point out that a good balance has been achieved in many Member States by virtue of agreements made without any directive whatsoever , as , for example , in my own country .
Three issues are at odds with each other : first , there is the public 's right to information , which means libraries , lifelong learning , and so on .
That cannot be violated ; it is a vital principle .
Secondly , most important is the right of creative people to their intellectual property .
Thirdly , we must create and maintain a viable context for the electronic market , as it is an area that employs a lot of people in Europe .
We have to be able to make these three issues compatible .
We all believe that piracy is a crime , and we have to oppose it .
For that reason , I believe we should look at the next stage of the directive , after voting . We need to discuss the work of the rightholder on the one hand , and industry on the other , from the employment point of view , to achieve the best possible European employment model in relation to copyright and industry , with regard to radio , television and other electronic media .
At present we seem to be squabbling quite a lot among ourselves , and employment and material in Europe are suffering as a result , yet both these issues are now among our most crucial concerns , as they represent European identity , culture and jobs .
Mr President , as this debate draws to a close , I should like to refer to an oft-neglected matter , namely , certain recitals .
I said earlier that this report set a political course although it was technically imperfect .
There are some very clear examples of this in the recitals .
Some of the recitals do not correspond to any of the amendments to the main body of the text and are therefore technically unacceptable , but they outline three clear political ways forward . Mr Barzanti mentioned the first of these , which concerns indigenous peoples and their cultural rights .
The second , referred to by Mr Perry , suggests that the WIPO has made a determined effort to promote mediation as a solution to disputes .
The Group of the European People 's Party will support two amendments to recital 21 to that effect , that is , Amendments Nos 82 and 91 , if I remember correctly . The final political direction concerned an issue that I should like to consider in greater detail , as it has been somewhat sidelined , even though it was the subject of heated debate .
Despite being related to another important directive under discussion at the moment - the directive on electronic commerce - and also to a directive on responsibility in a general sense , this directive has its own distinctive features .
The usual procedures should be followed and it should be approved as soon as possible .
An amendment has , however , been tabled - and it is supported by the Group of the European People 's Party - emphasising in effect that though all these directives have their own distinctive features , they should be handled in parallel and implemented at the earliest opportunity .
Finally , I have to say that I was delighted to hear such an authority as Mrs Mann sound a note of reason with regard to what is often portrayed as the entrenched rivalry between European and American industry . I fully endorse her views .
I believe that this is a balanced directive .
It will need to be improved at second reading , but it sends a clear political signal .
The ball is now in the Commission 's court .
Mr President , Italian companies account for 80 % of original European production , but the big multinationals take up 80 % of the market by importing products from outside Europe , in particular from the USA .
At one time , almost all Europe 's major hits came into being with the help of a producer who believed in them .
Only later , because of distribution needs , did they have to approach a multinational .
That is why our approach to the directive differs from that of the big multinational record companies , which have established a stranglehold on distribution and advertising because they control all the systems for access to stores , the media and the charts .
We feel that the Internet provides an effective way of avoiding that stranglehold .
What is really at stake here is not protecting copyright , that is already guaranteed by Article 2 of the directive , but maintaining the current state of freedom of access to the Internet for everyone , and not just the big boys .
The requirement for technical copies to be authorised , adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , would actually have the effect of extending to the digital sphere the dominance which the multinationals already enjoy over the way in which music is conventionally distributed .
We therefore take the view that it is necessary to redraft Article 5 ( 1 ) to avoid limiting de facto access to the networks for independent operators .
Furthermore , we believe it necessary to encourage the investments of independent access providers who are the natural partners of independent music producers in Europe .
The reality is that European producers primarily need unrestricted and low-cost access to the networks in order to be able to offer the kind of music which the big multinationals regard as uneconomical in terms of their own commercial criteria .
In offering their product on the Internet , the companies also need to use systems compatible with the interfaces most commonly used by consumers , as they cannot run the risk of investing in websites that might subsequently prove incompatible with the new versions of dominant software .
Secondly , European producers need programmes of support similar to those through which the audiovisual sector is supported via the media .
Finally , they need strategic research and development programmes that will allow the European music industry and the European technology industry to establish , by common accord , standards for the secure and effective distribution of music , as an alternative to the American analogue standards .
For all of these reasons , the non-attached Members believe that it is right to reassess the situation and are therefore calling for the directive to be referred back to committee .
Mr President , creative and innovative activities will be critical to the development of the information society .
This proposal for a directive is an important part of the legislative framework which is currently being drawn up at both a European and a global level to guarantee harmonious development of the information society .
The information society is in fact evolving in a global context .
In 1996 , the international community adopted two treaties under the auspices of WIPO : one on copyright , and the other on interpretation and performance and on phonograms .
I would remind the House that the European Union played a vital role in the drafting of those treaties .
It can now accede to them as the European Community and be among the first to ratify them .
The United States has already met its requirements .
Thirty instruments of ratification will have to be deposited before the treaties enter into force .
The European Union accounts for 42 because of the agreements that link it to the countries of the European Economic Area and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and the fact that it has association agreements with still more countries .
Ratification of the treaties by the Union and its Member States is based on their incorporation into the national legal systems ; it is their incorporation into Community law that is , among other things , the objective of this proposal .
Alongside meeting our international commitments , the basic aim of the proposal is to put in place a harmonised legislative framework for copyright and related rights .
We expect that greater legal certainty , guaranteeing investment in creative and innovative activity and in the network infrastructures , will boost growth and the competitiveness of the European industry and job creation .
It is for us to tap this huge cultural and economic potential by providing the appropriate legislative framework .
In drafting and adopting this proposal - which , as you will remember , is the product of wide-ranging consultation dating back to 1994 - the Commission has taken the greatest care to retain a fair balance between the various rights and interests at issue , which are frequently in open conflict .
I am well aware that this was also the aim of Parliament 's work .
On behalf of the Commission , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Barzanti , for having done his job so efficiently .
He has managed to combine a thorough understanding of the problem , founded also on the earlier work on the 1995 Green Paper and the 1996 communication , with the great resolve that tackling such sensitive proposals demands .
Fifty-eight amendments have been tabled , 30 of which relate to the operative part of the text and 28 to the recitals : of those 58 amendments , the Commission is able to accept 28 and to take into consideration 14 , but it has to reject 16 .
The amendments the Commission is able to accept are the following : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 29 , 31 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 55 and 57 .
The Commission will take into account the following amendments , albeit with a number of mainly drafting changes : Amendments Nos 9 , 11 , 16 , 22 , 33 , 39 , 46 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 58 and the new Amendments Nos 82 and 91 .
As far as the recitals are concerned , the Commission rejects Amendment No 3 which , in our view , confuses protected work and information in general and is contrary to the principles of the acquis communautaire ; the first part of Amendment No 13 which is incompatible with the WIPO treaty , though we accept the second part ; Amendment No 14 which does not , in our view , succeed in defining the concept of ' public ' , a responsibility we believe is best left to the Member States , which are in a better position to define this somewhat elastic term ; Amendment No 19 which does not correspond to the amendments tabled in relation to Article 5 ( 2 ) ( b ) ; Amendment No 23 because it calls into question the approach taken in the proposal to the exceptions ; Amendments Nos 27 and 28 which are already covered by the third recital ; and Amendments Nos 15 , 25 and 26 because they are too far outside the scope of the proposal .


Turning then to the actual articles of the directive , the Commission rejects Amendment No 30 because the issue it tackles is taken into account in Article 5 ( 1 ) ; Amendments Nos 32 and 48 which are designed to introduce new exceptions for the benefit of broadcasters - I wish to deal separately , in just a moment , with our rejection of Amendment No 56 concerning Article 5 ( 1 ) - Amendment No 40 because the concern on which it is based is amply taken into account by Article 5 ( 3 ) ( c ) , an amendment at your suggestion ; and Amendment No 47 because that issue is being dealt with under the 27th recital , amended by Amendment No 20 .
As regards the amendments tabled at this part-session , given that they either reflect viewpoints and concerns already taken into account in the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights or are amendments rejected by that committee , the Commission endorses the report .

Of the new amendments , we are able to take into account only Nos 82 and 91 which relate to mediation , a point mentioned by Mr Perry and taken up by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi .
Overall , the Commission is thus able to take Parliament 's line on many points .
I repeat : we are rejecting 16 amendments , taking account of 14 and accepting 28 .
To conclude , I have two points to make concerning two specific issues .
As far as the broadcasters are concerned , the House is proposing to add three new exceptions for their benefit .
I would remind you of our interest in observing a balance between the rights and interests which are at stake .
The Commission accepts Amendment No 39 , which introduces an exception for broadcasters in respect of specific acts of reproduction necessary to facilitate a legitimate broadcasting act , because it meets a genuine technological need .
In contrast , and in an effort to achieve a balance between the interests in play , the Commission feels compelled to reject Amendments Nos 32 and 48 , the first of which introduces an exception that would allow broadcasters to make available , on request , programmes largely consisting of phonograms .
We then come to Article 5 ( 1 ) - the source of such controversy .
What is the purpose of that provision ?
It is designed to establish an exception to the right of reproduction in regard to some technical acts of reproduction that are an integral part of a technological process , carried out for the sole purpose of enabling a different use to be made of the protected material .
This is the only mandatory exception in the whole of the proposal and it is therefore very clearly drafted .
That provision will give the telecommunications operators and service providers the legal certainty they need to be able to perform operations for the benefit of the network services , which are very often transnational in nature .
We have subdivided your proposals on this and are able to take account of some .
As far as the definition of the scope of the exceptions is concerned , we are able to accept the inclusion of the words ' transient ' and ' incidental ' , as providing a closer definition of the concept of ' temporary ' that appears in our proposal , and of the word ' essential ' which further defines the incidental nature of the act in relation to the technical transmission process .
Consequently , we reject Amendments Nos 65 and 88 , which have the effect of watering down the latter condition .
We cannot , however , accept the concept of ' economic significance ' for the rightholder .
The reference to our concept of ' independent economic significance ' is consistent with the aim of the exception and therefore workable when the exception is actually applied .
It is in any event worth bearing in mind that protection against unjustified economic harm is provided for in Article 5 ( 4 ) .
Finally , we cannot accept the insertion of the clause referring to ' uses ... authorised ... or permitted by law ' , the addition of which would mean that the exception would be triggered only in relation to items whose use had been authorised by the rightholders or permitted by law .
We are aware of the concerns of rightholders who fear that the network will end up acting as a broadcasting vehicle for items that have been illegally copied - pirated items - but if we are to hit our target , we have to consider beforehand what is the most workable and balanced way of achieving it .
In this case , that way has to be sought by ensuring a proper balance between rights and exceptions to those rights .
Finally , I would draw your attention to a very important group of amendments : those concerning private copies .
Your amendments uphold two important principles : the right of rightholders to fair remuneration and the fine distinction concerning private digital copies .
The first principle protects a need for equity ; it is a measured step forwards in the quest for legal certainty in this sector .
The Commission 's acceptance of the amendment relating to digital copies for private use must be seen in the context of the approach already set out in recitals 26 and 27 of our proposal .
Specifically in the light of what is set out in those sections of the proposal , the Commission agrees to recognise the principle that , in the digital sphere , the possibility of making a copy for private use must exist , without prejudice to the effective and workable technical means that are capable of protecting the interests of rightholders .
We therefore align ourselves with the solution you have put forward , though the amendment will have to be redrafted in such a way as to provide an accurate statement of the principle .
You link not only analogue and digital copies for private use but also the exceptions concerning illustration and teaching to the principle of fair remuneration for rightholders .
That is a formula which allows broader harmonisation and respects the traditions and practices of the Member States .
The Commission is able to follow Parliament 's line here too , and therefore accepts Amendments Nos 36 and 37 as well as Amendments No 35 and 41 .
The protection of technological measures forms the subject-matter of Article 6 of the proposal , which has been substantially recast by your Amendments Nos 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 and 54 .
We are able to take those amendments into consideration , subject to a degree of clarification which the Commission considers important .
We congratulate Mr Barzanti on a comprehensive and determined piece of work .
I welcome the fact that you support the Commission proposal , in terms of both the overall approach and - I think I can honestly say this - the main components .
In the past , Parliament 's influence has been decisive in the adoption of the five directives already in force ; the cooperation that exists between Parliament and the Commission in the field of copyright and related rights is something we can rely on , and for that I am truly grateful .
Mr President , I put a specific question about the compatibility of this amended copyright directive with the proposal for a directive on electronic commerce that the Commission made to the Parliament and the Council .
In the proposal on electronic commerce the country of origin is the principal component .
In this copyright directive it could be the country of destination .
That is why I asked my question and the Commisioner did not answer it .
Mr President , I am fully aware that I did not answer .
This was because of time constraints . However , I shall now answer very briefly .
The Commission submitted its proposal on the legal framework for electronic commerce last year .
Both proposals are independent and each has its own crucial importance .
According to the proposal on electronic commerce the country of origin principle does not apply to intellectual and industrial property in accordance with existing international law .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Common organisation of the market in wine
The next item is the report ( A4-0261 / 98 ) by Mr P. Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on the common organisation of the market in wine ( COM ( 98 ) 0370 - C4-0497 / 98-98 / 0126 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the common organisation of the market in wine is certainly the most complex of all the COMs because it includes not only aspects relating to vineyard management and conditions of grape production but also all rules concerning oenological practices - the processing of wine - as well as rules on labelling .
The very structure of the text of the COM in wine shows us that wine is an agricultural product rather than an industrial product .
In the time I have been allocated I am not going to present all of the 248 amendments that are included in my report and that are the result of a vote in committee on almost 600 amendments tabled by all Members .
I would like at this stage of my presentation to thank firstly all the officials in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and all those colleagues who made my task easier for me and enabled me to draw up a coherent report .
What are the central themes of my report ?
Firstly , a significant number of amendments concern the decision-making procedure .
The Commission , in its proposal , wanted to have sole authority to change the rules .
In my report we have asked that the procedure known as the Article 43 procedure be reinstated , so that the Council takes decisions on the basis of proposals from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament .
I personally believe that this procedure , although cumbersome , will allow us to preserve specific rules for wine , promoting its status as an agricultural product .
In view of wine imports from third countries and the intentions that some people have , as we well know , European wine must retain its status as a local , quality product .
In this connection , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted an amendment which I had put forward , prohibiting the vinification of musts imported from third countries .
If this proposal is accepted by the Council , in the form in which we adopted it , the quality image of European wines will be preserved .
With regard to structure , the Committee on Agriculture adopted the principle of the right to growth , by an increase of 3 % in the vineyard , while preserving restrictions on planting .
Vineyards with an expanding market will be able to obtain other rights on condition that the Member States and , where appropriate , their regions genuinely monitor them .
This was what led us to adopt a specific amendment on maintaining the rules on the computerised vineyard register .
The duration of planting rights has been extended to allow the land to be rested as necessary .
Other structural measures were adopted concerning the renewal and regeneration of the vineyard .
We have also included measures relating to the vinification tool .
If we finance measures allowing the quality of the grape to be improved , the vinification tool must also be adapted so that the wine will be of good quality .
Finally , the Committee on Agriculture , concerned about the future of the wine-growing profession , wanted all structural measures taken to give priority to young wine growers , either on their establishment or during the period when their holdings are growing .
In the area of market management we wanted to set up distillation for the purpose of supplying potable alcohol so that European viticulture can preserve its own market .
Moreover , as far as crisis distillation is concerned , we have adopted an amendment specifying that it should be compulsory rather than optional , on condition that it targets only those regions and products in which there is a surplus .
Budgetary reasons and considerations of fairness argue in favour of our position .
With regard to producer organisations , the committee has changed the Commission 's proposal only slightly .
Nevertheless , it has deleted measures extending their powers and has reserved the tasks given to them for its members alone .
As for the interbranch organisations , which we have called ' trade organisations ' , we have completely changed the Commission 's proposal , which seemed to us to be more suited to the fruit and vegetable sector .
At my request and at the request of the chairman of our committee , Mr Colino Salamanca , the European Parliament 's Directorate-General for Research carried out a study analysing the role of trade organisations in the wine-growing sector .
I must commend the excellent work carried out under the leadership of Mr Ramsay and Mr Angelidis , which led to the drafting of Article 42 setting out the principle of delegation of powers and the role of trade organisations .
I believe that the amendment we have adopted takes all interests into account , those of the producer Member States and the non-producer Member States , while preserving all the rules on competition and the internal market .
With regard to oenological practices , we have adopted amendments allowing the reintegration of all Community legislation currently in force .
We are wary within the committee of implementing regulations that could turn out to be much too lax .
Finally , with regard to inspections , we wanted to establish a Community inspectorate that has sufficient manpower and is responsible for checking whether inspectors in the Member States are applying Community provisions fairly and consistently .
To conclude on my report , I would like to make it clear that as rapporteur I will be voting in favour of all the amendments adopted in the Committee on Agriculture , with the exception of Amendment No 121 , which is inconsistent with Amendment No 124 .
I feel it is necessary to preserve the production of marc , such as Burgundy marc or Gewürztraminer marc , and for this reason I will be voting in favour of Amendment No 124 and against Amendment No 121 .
Some Members have also tabled amendments , and I will vote in favour of those which follow the line taken in my report , as adopted in committee .
For this reason I will be voting in favour of Amendments Nos 250 and 251 by Mr Arias Caete , Amendments Nos 256 , 257 , 259 , 261 and 268 by the GUE Group , Amendment No 273 by the ARE Group and the Green Group , and Amendment No 274 by the ARE Group and the I-EDN Group .
I will not be voting for Amendment No 249 because we cannot know how the potable alcohol market will develop .
I will also be voting against Amendments Nos 252 , 253 , 260 , 262 , 264 , 265 , 266 , 267 and 269 , which are contrary either to the principle adopted by the committee of maintaining the status quo on enrichment and dry sugaring or to other amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture .
Mr President , I should like to start by offering my sincere thanks to Mr Martin .
By putting in a great deal of work and showing a great willingness to compromise , the rapporteur has successfully produced a good compromise between the individual regions of Europe - which are of course also reflected within our group .
I emphasise that it is a good compromise .
Sometimes , of course , if there is no prospect of a result , compromises are hastily stitched together , simply to paper over the problems for the time being .
That is not the case here !
That is why I am very grateful to Mr Martin .
Where wine growing in the European Union is concerned , we must make sure above all that the wine and the regions in which the wine is produced are not seen solely from the point of view of the end product .
It really makes a difference whether I see the wine - be it directly from the wood or in the bottle - just as a product , or whether I see the whole culture and the whole region behind it , and how it is part of the landscape .
I therefore believe that it is worthwhile for Europe to take special care of its wine .
It is at this point - and I may be speaking on behalf of my group , but I do come from a northern Member State - that I should like to thank Mr Martin , because he has shown a feel for the peculiarities of wine growing , for how wine-growing traditions and also oenological practices have developed - over centuries , almost - and because his proposals have made it possible for us actually to forget the dispute we had for a very long time between northern , southern and central Europe .
Problems will remain , and new ones will arise .
When I think of the amount of rectified concentrated grape must which is coming into the European Union in increasing quantities from outside , it seems that we will also have to call on the Commission to be watchful here .
I think it is particularly positive that flexibility is being preserved where new planting rights are concerned , and that a fair compromise has been found here .
It was decided to increase the area under vines by 3 % by 2010 .
Although many would have liked to have seen more , for others this already goes too far .
On distillation , the approach - which is the same as that adopted by the Commission - is absolutely right , namely that we need to cut back on compulsory distillation and that here too we need to introduce a little more market , but that we should keep compulsory distillation as an instrument , to be used in the future where it proves to be necessary .
A particularly positive initiative , both in the Commission proposals and in the proposals which we discussed and adopted in committee , is the specific and rather privileged - because it is necessary - support for young producers .
Anything which is important in terms of actively supporting young farmers is particularly important where young wine producers are concerned .
I should like to say , even at this early stage , that of course my group wishes to support the rapporteur in his efforts to maintain the compromise reached in the committee and to examine with due care all the amendments which could unravel that compromise .
There are a number of amendments which are in the spirit of the compromise , but there are also a whole series of amendments which could destroy it .
Our group would like to support it , to make it possible for the considerable amount of work which we did in the committee with Mr Martin to be crowned with a large majority at the vote in Parliament .
The Commission supports this , and the Council would be well advised to take this good compromise produced by Parliament as the basis for its deliberations , because it has in fact failed to make a start on these negotiations for at least the last three years .
Mr President , I too should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur and his colleagues , because they have produced a very good piece of work .
This new Commission proposal has taken us down a different path from the one we took in 1994 and 1995 .
At that time , Parliament was split .
The proposal , Commissioner Fischler , was also not nearly as good as this one .
Circumstances have changed in some respects , while in others they have remained the same .
Compared with the 1980s , surpluses have tended to decrease .
Unfortunately , per capita consumption has fallen in the main producer countries , Italy and France .
As a result of the GATT round , we have new competitors in the quality wine sector , a fact which we have borne in mind , and this is where we have made real progress under the leadership of the rapporteur , Mr Martin : in this Parliament , we have finally accepted the special regional characteristics of wine growing in the north and south of Europe .
That is where the real progress has been made .
That is why my group , the PPE , has not , as a group , tabled any amendments to the Agriculture Committee 's proposal and against Mr Martin 's compromises .
I should like once again to outline briefly why we have acted in this way .
I believe that in this new proposal , we have successfully put right what was wrong with the old organisation of the market in wine .
Take the subject of distillation for a start .
Compulsory distillation has not proved its worth .
It is right to make it voluntary .
On the other hand , it is also right - and that is why we have also voted in favour of various compromises - for the potable alcohol market to have a guaranteed supply of wine , for example for cognac , brandy and other products which are traditional regional specialities .
Secondly , for the very first time we have a legal base for producer associations and trade organisations .
We want to make this rather less complicated than it is in the Commission proposal .
That is why we support the Agriculture Committee 's call for a framework regulation .
There is - we have agreed in our group - just one point on which we wish to depart from the compromise .
This relates to the first indent of Amendment No 179 .
Mr Martin , we have agreed that we want to settle the issue of compulsory packaging in the area of production - as previously discussed - in the Lulling report and not now , and that we want , above all , to wait for the decision of the European Court of Justice on this issue .
We will be voting against the first indent at that point .
On all the other issues , however , we have supported reasonable compromises , on the status quo for saccharose , on oenological procedures and on diverse traditions .
I believe that overall we can vote in favour of this draft report .
For the first time , Parliament has the opportunity to speak with one voice on this very controversial issue and thus - and most importantly - to influence the Commission and the Agriculture Council .
Applause
Mr President , I do believe that this time we have come up with a helpful document on the common organisation of the market in such a complicated sector as that of wine growing and wine making .
I also feel that the Commission 's proposal , though initially valid , has nevertheless been substantially improved by Parliament 's report .
Wine growing and wine making naturally take place in certain specific areas with a long tradition of growing vines , areas where replacing vines with other crops would prove difficult . The producers have years of experience in making wine and it is traditional to drink wine .
Wine used to be almost the only alcoholic drink consumed by the local people .
However , as a result of the so-called globalisation of society , the situation has changed dramatically in recent years .
This COM seeks to bring production into line with market demand , and in that respect , I believe it is a positive move .
I feel it is helpful to allow a slight increase in new planting , and also welcome the measures designed to allow new young growers to become involved in this traditional process .
I have no wish to discuss the various methods of wine making , some of which have long been established in certain Member States .
Each area has its own way of making wine .
Consumers , however , are a key element of our society and certainly deserve consideration .
It is not enough simply to put the wine on the market .
A certain amount of information is called for , together with research into the beneficial effects of wine and education in the sensible consumption of this product .
Wine does have a beneficial effect on health , and should be considered as a food .
Wine and health is a nice phrase , but we cannot just depend on tradition . It is up to the producers ' associations to make information available to the consumers .
Mr President , it is unusual for Parliament to deal with the same issue twice in a single legislature .
Fortunately , the context of the common organisation of the market in wine is now radically different from what it was at the beginning of this legislature .
The difference lies in the nature of the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal put before us early in the present legislature was based on what I would call an apocalyptic vision of anticipated surpluses .
In the Commission 's view , the only way of pre-empting such a situation was the mass destruction of vines .
Fortunately , the ensuing proposal gave rise to such opposition within the Council that the matter was shelved .
Five years later , the situation is radically different due to the fact that the proposal put forward by the Commission is so unlike the previous one . Reality is stubborn .
Five years have gone by and the much-feared structural surpluses have not materialised . The Commission 's draconian proposals therefore no longer make sense .
It is worth pointing out that proposals of this nature abound in the Commission when reforms affecting mainly the southern Member States are at issue .
Of crucial importance to us today , however , are the rigour and quality expected from research undertaken by the Commission in its role as the institution charged with putting forward legislative proposals .
This is of key importance when what is at stake is the whole package of agricultural reforms contained in Agenda 2000 . Often , problems can arise not only from research undertaken but also from what is omitted or has not been done .
I trust the Commission 's present proposals will not have the negative consequences of the 1992 reform as far as the grubbing up of vines and the loss of agricultural jobs are concerned .
As regards Mr Martin 's report , I must congratulate him on the excellent work he has carried out .
His report is coherent and this is particularly commendable as he has had to deal appropriately with a great many amendments .
I would , however , like to highlight - and I know he will not take it amiss - a fundamental problem which remains unresolved . It appears that the use of sucrose for enrichment will continue to be permitted .
A valuable opportunity to replace sucrose with concentrated musts might therefore be lost . Replacing sucrose with must would be in line with traditional practice and would allow wine making to be based entirely on the vineyard .
In conclusion , Mr Martin , I should like to remind you of a visit you made to my country , and to thank you for having taken the trouble to go there and to meet with the agricultural organisations .
I am most grateful to you for doing so , and feel that some good has come from it .
Mr President , I hope it was not under the influence of wine that such wide-ranging agreement has been reached in this Parliament .
But if Dionysus has helped us to reach agreement , so much the better !
The truth is that Philippe-Armand Martin 's report , while defending the status quo , also manages to modernise and adapt it to the new circumstances of the globalised market , to make it flexible and to free it from the Commission 's inherent dirigiste tendency . It places the onus on Member States , producer organisations and committees of viticultural experts , and increases the responsibility of both producers and Member States ' governments .
It also takes into account the need to increase our wine production , market conditions permitting , but at the same time to ensure that this is achieved through greater cooperation between the Member States .
I have no doubt that very simple measures are called for , such as reliable registers , something that does not exist right now .
We must also prevent the fraudulent use of concentrated must , for example , and in our negotiations with certain third countries we should apply a very low tolerance threshold about the fraud practised in those countries .
As for compulsory distillation , we should be more flexible . And this implies greater responsibility on the part of whoever decides whether or not to distil , on the basis of market fluctuations .
But arbitrary , senseless compulsory distillation should not be the rule .
Another important point is to respect oenological identities , regional oenological practices , and to avoid pointless squabbles : I have to say that I am sick and tired of arguments that frankly have not improved relations among European wine growers .
I also think it is important - and I must confess that this is an extremely sensitive area for Portugal - to look at the issues of bottling in the region of origin , of accountability , and of quality wines , which are products with a considerable international reputation .
We therefore disagree with Amendments Nos 171 and 179 and we , or at least the Members closest to me , will be voting against them .
Otherwise I think this is an extremely positive report because we have avoided consensus for consensus ' sake but have reached a proper agreement .
That is what is of interest : consensus for its own sake is little short of treachery but an agreement is a contract in everyone 's interest .
Mr President , the reform of the organisation of the market in wine is another case where the EU must eliminate the problems at their source , instead of only intervening - as it always does - when the floodgates have already been breached .
Distillation and the grubbing-up premium are typical end-of-pipe solutions .
They actually ought to be abolished , because distillation is an invitation to produce massive quantities of lower-quality wine , and the grubbing-up premium encourages the transfer of production from regions which are problematic in terms of labour costs , but important in terms of regional culture , to rationalised , export-driven production .
We will only counter overproduction by introducing comprehensive new quality criteria .
I would caution against the belief that here too genetic engineering can be of assistance .
We wish to retain the historical lands developed and cultivated by man and to safeguard an appropriate income for wine growers .
In the long term , quality is the only way this can be achieved .
I am particularly concerned about this , because I believe that we will only be able to defend our European viniculture at the next WTO round if we are able to throw something into the ring related to the environment , social policy and quality , because the Americans would like to have our designation of origin off the negotiating table and to negotiate about brand names instead .
That would mean that Coca-Cola could buy the Bordeaux name and then resell the cheapest wines in the world under that name .
But that is not what we want !
We must therefore have good arguments to explain why designation of origin needs to consist of more than alcohol content , quality grade and colour .
The much vaunted EU model of agriculture will only carry weight and have any substance if we are able to designate regional , social and environmental characteristics for each wine and thus also enter into the negotiations on the offensive .
We support Mr Martin 's report and we say one thing : quality not quantity !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like very much to thank our rapporteur Philippe Martin for his excellent report which takes account of all Europe 's vineyards .
I was there when , at the beginning of August , Mr Martin met viticulture and trade representatives of the Languedoc-Roussillon region in the town hall at Carcassonne .
I was pleased to note that their principal demands were included both in the report and in the vote in the Committee on Agriculture .
What are these principal demands ?
With regard to wine-growing potential , we must preserve the principle of limiting rights by providing for the right to growth of 3 % in the short term , with the possibility of updating this in line with market needs once a proper inventory of planting rights has been carried out .
With regard to improving vineyards , I must stress the importance of this structural component .
As an elected representative of the biggest wine-growing region in Europe , whose vineyards have undergone considerable renewal , I can assure you , Commissioner , that quality is essential for the future of viticulture .
This is why we have asked that the whole of the ' reconversion ' component should allow regeneration of the vineyard and vinification tools .
All of these structural measures , both in terms of wine-growing potential and vineyard improvement , must give priority to young wine growers .
As far as market management is concerned , we must maintain compulsory distillation of by-products , apart from existing derogations .
The alcohols produced must be suitable for the potable alcohol market in order to reduce the budgetary cost of this measure .
As for crisis distillation , in order to be efficient this must remain compulsory only in the regions in which there is a surplus .
With regard to authorisation in the sector , the tasks and responsibilities of the producer groups have to be recognised even though the rules cannot be extended .
I therefore consider the report as adopted in the Committee on Agriculture to be perfectly suitable .
With regard to oenological practices , we must draw up an exhaustive list of authorised practices and preserve the principle of status quo , including in aid for enrichment using concentrated musts .
I would like in particular to draw your attention to Amendment No 274 on the production of natural sweet wines .
Here too we need to maintain a list of compulsory information to be given on the labels .
Finally , Mr President , with regard to trade with third countries , we must keep in place the current rules prohibiting vinification of musts from third countries .
If this ban is lifted , as the Commission proposes , there is a danger that the image of wines produced in the European Union will be considerably damaged and that there will be an actual reduction in quality , which is inconsistent with the objectives of the COM .
In conclusion , I must just mention the procedure proposed by the Commission both for managing planting rights and for labelling oenological practices and market management measures .
Contrary to the Commission proposals , we must preserve the current procedure known as the Article 43 procedure .
Mr President , I very much hope that all Members will vote in favour of the main body of the proposals by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which are the result of considerable effort by Mr Martin to compromise in order to be fair , realistic and open , and I congratulate him .
It is essentially a question of ensuring that wine remains a more strictly defined agricultural product , banning imports of musts from third countries , allowing vineyards to increase in size in line with market demand , maintaining the status quo on oenological practices - including dry sugaring - and having compulsory crisis distillation only in regions where there is a surplus .
As the text does not specifically mention natural sweet wines , I , along with several other Members , tabled Amendment No 274 in order to refer to them expressly , which is essential if we are to adhere to our common aim of respecting the diversity of the ' terroirs ' which give European wines their quality and individuality .
In conclusion , Mr Martin , I shall be tabling two or three amendments , for example on GMO , in the hope that this new wording will be acceptable to the rapporteur and to all the Members .
Mr President , we have been dealing with this wine dossier for six years now , which shows how important - or even doubly important - it is .
It is important firstly because our wine growers are important . They account for 7 % of agricultural GDP and only 2.5 % of budgetary expenditure , which means that wine growers bring in a lot of revenue and cost very little .
It is important also for the economy in general because viticulture is a key item in our balance of trade .
Moreover , on the issue of the balance of trade , Commissioner , I fear that your proposal is rather putting us at risk .
We know what the Commission proposal involves .
It is based , as always in the field of agriculture , on the fallacy of overproduction .
According to you , by the year 2000 we would have produced 180 million hectolitres of wine .
We would consume 150 million of these , leaving a surplus of 30 million hectolitres of wine .
Hence the measures you proposed in 1993 : early harvests , wine quotas , in short , all the extreme measures that we know so well .
Fortunately , today we know that in 1998 the figures balanced and you agreed to compromise .
Technically , therefore , there were positive changes .
But I believe that , beneath the surface , the Commission 's negative attitudes remain .
I will look firstly at the positive changes .
It is true that from the Sierra Bardaji report in 1993 to the Fantuzzi report in 1998 , and now the Martin report , we have succeeded by means of amendments - 600 in this case - in improving the situation : amendments on distillation , which is now compulsory , amendments on new planting rights of 3 % , on regeneration of vineyards , on rest periods for the land , on potable alcohols , on aid for concentrated must - and not merely for the CIII zones , which worried my wine growers in Languedoc-Roussillon and those of Raymond Chesa - amendments also on inspectors , as we had only two inspectors for the whole of Europe , and perhaps even on interbranch organisations , which go back to Maréchal Pétain and are supported by the Left .
But that is not the important point .
We may even have made progress in the religious war on dry sugaring .
However , I fear that other more sinister attitudes are lurking beneath these technical concessions .
There are four , as far as I can see : Malthusianism , fundamentalism , internationalism and dehumanisation .
With regard to Malthusianism , firstly , as is the case with meat , cereal , milk and even coal and steel , you only ever have one management instrument : a drastic cut in supply .
You never look into developing demand .
It is true that we must prepare for the opening of the wine market to the East , with the arrival of Hungarian , Romanian and Bulgarian wines , and even the World Trade Organisation in the year 2000 , with our Australian , Californian and South African friends .
Fundamentalism in this case is the fiscal anti-wine fundamentalism of Northern Europe , with 3 euros in excise duty on each litre of wine in Denmark and the United Kingdom .
It is the health fundamentalism that is seen in Sweden and Finland , where they are lax about drugs but puritans when it comes to alcohol , even though wine is a health product with positive cardiovascular effects , to say nothing of the mental effects of beer-drinking seen in the hooligans at Heisel .
Internationalism is the six million hectolitres of imports , a tenth of a euro in customs duties and the famous concentrated musts from third countries that you were preparing to authorise .
Fortunately , the Commission was able to resist .
All that was needed to perfect this internationalism was to authorise wines in bulk and not to authorise bottling in the region of production . This brings me to the fourth and final undesirable effect , that of dehumanisation , which would make wine an industrial product rather than an agricultural one .
This is the source of the conflict between the beer-drinkers of Northern Europe and the wine-drinkers elsewhere in Europe , and I fear this must affect the balance in the Council of Ministers .
But I would suggest to the House that if there had ever been vines in Saudi Arabia this would have changed the strategic face of the world .
I fear there must be some complicity here between the fundamentalism of the North and the fundamentalism of the South , since neither of them drink wine .
We will adjourn the debate at this point for Question Time .
It will resume at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0020 / 99 ) .
Question No 38 by Paul Rübig ( H-1252 / 98 )
Subject : The euro in textbooks The smooth introduction of the single currency and its acceptance by European citizens will depend to a very great extent on how rapidly and comprehensively information can be provided in the educational sector .
Particular attention will , of course , be paid to educational establishments and subjects which are in general concerned with currency aspects , for example commercial colleges and subjects such as accountancy and bookkeeping .
Can the representative of the Commission present today say what progress has been achieved in the transition to the euro in the educational sector and , in particular , in updating textbooks and teaching materials ?
I should like to welcome Mrs Cresson and ask her to reply to Mr Rübig 's question .
You have the floor , Mrs Cresson .
The Commission is aware of the major challenge which the transition to the euro represents for the educational sector .
Children will play a crucial role in helping parents to adapt to the single currency .
While respecting the exclusive competence of the Member States in this area , the Commission is supporting several projects within the Socrates programme which are helping to disseminate information on the euro in schools and to integrate this topic into the different curriculum subjects .
A number of concrete measures are worth mentioning here .
A working group entitled ' Education and the euro ' has been set up , comprising representatives of the Ministers for Education and the national agencies of the Socrates programme .
This group 's work concerns the promotion of educational initiatives on the euro and the exchange of information and good practice in this area .
The work of this group has led notably to the creation of an inventory of educational tools and initiatives on the euro , both at national and Community level , which is accessible on the Internet on the page entitled ' The euro at school ' on the Europa server .
A handbook describing Member States ' initiatives in this area , particularly concerning the training of teachers and adaptation of school syllabuses and textbooks , is currently being put together .
This document will also be available on the Internet and will be distributed to interested parties .
Commissioner , I should like to ask a supplementary question : if this is being offered on the Internet and multimedia information is thus also being made available , do you see any chance of this being learning entertainment or a learning adventure , which will make it an enjoyable experience for people to learn about this subject , because in the end it is also a question of parents finding out from their children what prospects this has to offer for the future ?
As far as the research programme is concerned , I would be interested to know whether there are programmes in the research sector which address the issue of how the euro can best be introduced and what problems might arise when this actually happens , so that these can once again be overcome by giving instruction before the event .
This activity or action does not directly concern the research sector but rather the education sector . As I said , we are indeed intending to disseminate information via the Internet which will be designed for schools and will therefore be presented in the most attractive format possible .
The idea of designing innovative educational software and games has not been ruled out .
Moreover , I would point out that , every year , we carry out a project of Internet and multimedia dissemination during a week of what are known as ' net days ' .
For the next week of net days , which will take place at the beginning of the next school year , I will recommend that we introduce the topic of the euro in exchanges which take place between European schools so that this genuinely topical issue can feature in the programmes organised at the time .
I also believe that raising the awareness of teachers is absolutely essential .
This was already begun three years ago , as part of my initiative concerning the use of multimedia and the Internet .
As we will have to explain the subject of the euro in greater detail , however , we can start the ball rolling first with the teachers .
That is the information I have on this type of activity .
With regard to research , at my request and suggestion , the structure of the fifth framework programme of research was modified substantially compared with the fourth framework programme , and the second main chapter heading now deals with information technology .
As in the other chapters of the framework programme , within information technology there is a series of key horizontal actions relating to disciplines in both pure sciences and social sciences .
With regard to the issue of educational software and multimedia , it will also be very useful to be able to introduce incentives and invitations to tender relating to the euro so that we obtain responses to our proposals which we can then disseminate if they are good .
Question No 39 by Richard Howitt ( H-0094 / 99 )
Subject : Charges for international bank transfers and the single market in financial services Does the Commission agree with my constituent , Mr Vaughan of Rochford , that it is unreasonable for UK banks to charge up to GBP 20 for direct transfers to banks in other EU countries when the same function is operated by the Dutch bank ABN / AMRO for just NLG 15 ( GBP 6.50 ) ?
In a Union where we are trying to abolish barriers to trade and free movement of labour , would this high cost of transferring money from one Member State to another not contradict the Commission 's principles and actively discourage citizens from undertaking work and business in other countries ?
Will the Commission consider whether the UK banks are thus responsible for anti-competitive behaviour in breach of Article 85 of the Treaty or whether this is indeed a breach of the single market in financial services ?
I should like to welcome Mr Van Miert and ask him to reply to Mr Howitt 's question .
You have the floor , Mr Van Miert .
The honourable Member asked first of all whether the level of fees charged by British banks for international money transfers within the European Union could be an infringement of Article 85 of the Treaty of Rome .
This famous article outlaws agreements or concerted practices between undertakings in so far as they have a restrictive effect on competition and affect trade between Member States .
So as long as the pricing in question is the result of an independent , uncoordinated decision of individual banks there is no infringement of Article 85 .
But if something else is going on there might well be a real problem .
Secondly , the honourable Member asks whether the level of fees in question is a breach of the single market in financial services .
In its communication on easier cross-border payments of 1992 the Commission stated its view that the full benefits of the single market and economic and monetary union will be achieved only if it is possible for businesses and individuals to transfer money as rapidly , reliably and cheaply from one part of the Community to another as is now the case within most Member States .
The Commission continues to hold this opinion .
However , there is no legal base in the Treaty for using legislation to eliminate the higher costs borne by users who are making cross-border as compared with domestic transfers .
Indirectly , however , the Commission has brought pressure to bear on the banking and payments systems concerned , notably by proposing a directive on cross-border transfers .
This directive has been adopted and is going to enter into force on 14 August 1999 .
That proposal has encouraged banks to review their systems and to make them more efficient in order to be able to meet the directive 's requirements , especially on transparency , guaranteed time schedules for transfers and the money-back guarantee to senders .
There is some evidence that some banks have reduced their prices over the past five years since the proposal came on to the Commission 's agenda .
Pricing policy , however , is ultimately a matter for the individual service providers , whether the transfers are made within one country or between countries .
Finally , in its Green Paper on the introduction of the single currency , the Commission renewed its appeal to banks to treat the introduction of the euro as the golden opportunity to move towards a single payment area , at least for euro payments .
The Commission is presently reviewing its policy on retail cross-border payments in order to deal , amongst others , with the issue of what are still significantly higher prices .
The situation as it is now is certainly not satisfactory .
You can rely on the Commission to continue to work to remedy that .
I thank the Commissioner for a very full answer and for agreeing with me that this is an unsatisfactory position .
Will he go further and say that the 1992 survey showed that most Member States - most but not all - have low rate and efficient payment systems ?
Does not the survey by my constituent , Mr Vaughan - showing that British banks are charging up to three times more than their Dutch counterparts - reveal that we have a particular problem in Britain ?
Will you commit yourself specifically to addressing that problem ?
When you say that you will continue with voluntary efforts , will you take into account the commitments from your own colleagues .
Commissioner Monti , after he met the European Banking Federation on 29 January said : ' I intend to examine in a communication what remains to be done to improve the functioning of retail payment systems in the single market ' .
Similarly , Commissioner de Silguy , issued a warning to Europe 's financial institutions on 7 May 1998 urging them to look at this matter again .
Will we have more action , not just more of the same ?
As far as the last part of the question is concerned , the answer is yes , but leave it to us to use the instruments in the best way we can and according to the rules .
There should be no doubt about our determination to do so in all respects .
As far as the first part of the question is concerned , this should also be addressed to the British authorities to find out what is happening in Great Britain .
To the extent that it might concern the European Commission , including as a competition authority , we certainly are prepared to look into it .
May I welcome the Commissioner here to the Chamber this evening .
May I ask him if he does not agree with me that there is , in fact , great difficulty in ensuring the transparency of the cost of transfers until such time as the euro applies in each Member State ?
Would he also agree with me that there is a lack of choice of financial intermediaries within the United Kingdom to access venture capital , particularly for small and medium-sized companies ?
I feel great concern , which I would like to place on record , that to access loans through the European Investment Bank there is only a choice of one intermediary in the United Kingdom .
Is there anything the Commissioner or the British authorities can do to stimulate competition in this field ?
As far as the intermediaries are concerned , if you could give us some more evidence , we would be certainly prepared to look into that .
It is also related to the responsibilities of my colleague , Mario Monti , but , again , we are certainly open-minded about it and will look into whatever evidence you might make available to us .
For the rest , I am puzzled to learn that there is such a big difference between the transfer fees which are still applied in Great Britain and some other European countries .
There must be an explanation for that though , as far as I can see , it would be very difficult to come up with a satisfactory explanation .
Something must be done about it .
As I mentioned earlier , it is also a reason for the British authorities either to take action or to look into what is really happening .
But there should be no doubt that , as we see it , the present situation is largely unsatisfactory .
Question No 40 by Willy De Clercq ( H-0091 / 99 )
Subject : Major national differences in respect of recognition , recognition procedure , classification of and controls on medicinal products Completion of the Internal Market still seems a long way off as far as medicinal products are concerned .
Companies are experiencing difficulties in having new medicinal products recognised in the various Member states because of differences in recognition procedures and in exactly what is classified as a medicinal product .
It is not only companies but consumers , too , who suffer as a result .
In some Member States patients can use a particular product but not in others .
Furthermore , the different controls in the Member states are often the source of legal uncertainty and of inadequate protection .
Nor is this an adequate means of guaranteeing safety for patients .
What progress has been achieved with completion of a uniform and harmonised market within the EU for pharmaceuticals , and what action does the Commission intend to take in the short term ?
I should like to welcome Mr Papoutsis and ask him to reply to Mr De Clercq 's question .
You have the floor , Commissioner .
Mr President , there has been considerable progress made with regard to the internal market for medicinal products .
The picture presented by Mr De Clercq in this respect fully reflects the reality of the situation as it was several years ago .
However , since 1995 , major steps have been taken leading to considerable progress being achieved in bringing about a single market , the technical harmonisation of which is almost completed .
In broad terms , what is being pursued in this sector can be broken down into three strategic action plans : the development of a European procedure for the granting of permits for the circulation of such products ; the development of a high level of protection of intellectual property rights ; and the development of the medicinal products market itself .
As regards the granting of permits for the distribution of medicinal products , in 1995 two new Community procedures were launched which today allow us swift access to the European market as a whole by means of a single procedure . This procedure is based either on a joint central assessment carried out by the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products , resulting in the granting of a single distribution permit issued by the European Commission , or on mutual recognition amongst Member States , resulting in the harmonisation of national distribution permits .
As regards intellectual property rights , I must say that , through legislation adopted by Community institutions , Europe now has available the most adequate provisions worldwide in respect of medicinal products .
The legislation adopted in 1998 by Community institutions made it possible to safeguard innovations in the biotechnology sector by issuing patent certificates , thereby putting an end to the uncertainty plaguing this particular sector .
Furthermore , the procedure for the granting of distribution permits protects the data that is used in such requests for six or , more generally , ten years .
The third aspect of this strategy for developing the internal market in medicinal products is the development of the single market itself and , more especially , the development of the principles of free movement and competition in the context of economic regulation in this sector , in which products are subject to strict checks in terms of pricing and returns .
In May 1998 , the Single Market Council adopted provisions regarding the development of a single market in medicinal products .
In November 1998 , the Commission made a statement on these issues in the form of a communication which deals with a survey conducted into the progress made thus far in constructing a single market for medicinal products .
Mr De Clercq has asked a question which relates to the existence in the near future of plans to improve the operation of the internal market .
I can assure you that the Commission has already made a number of proposals in the realm of so-called ' orphan drugs ' , in other words , drugs for rare diseases , and also in relation to a more effective regulatory framework for clinical tests .
The debate on the single market in medicinal products will continue .
Last year , in its communication , the Commission emphasised the importance of a more rational approach , which would be supported in the market , towards a regulatory framework in the pharmaceutical sector .
The aim is to improve patients ' access to quality drugs and to improve the competitiveness of the pharmaceutical industry .
Thank you for that reply .
I will check it with those who requested me to ask the question .
Question No 41 by Ludivina García Arias ( H-0080 / 99 )
Subject : Neutrality of the Commission 's Director-General for Energy Does the Commission not believe that the remarks made by its Director-General for Energy , a Spanish national , during the debate organised by the European Energy Foundation on ' the implementation of the energy directive in Spain ' constitute an intervention in respect of the texts enlarging on and interpreting Article 24 of Directive 96 / 92 ( EC ) on the arrangements governing the transition to competition , and that serious doubts therefore arise concerning his neutrality as regards the legality of the imputation of the costs of the transition to competition relating to the Spanish electricity sector ?
I give the floor to Mr Papoutsis to answer Mrs García Arias 's question .
I regret to have to say , Commissioner , that the first part of your answer is not an accurate account of what actually took place .
I was myself present at the European Energy Foundation dinner together with a number of other journalists . In the light of some of the things said on that occasion , I began to feel that , as a Spaniard , I was betraying my country .
However , other journalists present confirm what has since been made public , and I agree with them . As I said , I was myself present at the dinner .
In addition , I now have serious doubts as to the neutrality , impartiality and objectivity with which the Director-General for Energy is dealing with this issue . By his very presence at that meeting and by what he said there , he endorsed the legality of the costs of transition to competition in Spain .
I should like to put a specific question to you , Commissioner , in view of the fact that this appointment has provoked a mixed reaction in Spain .
In fact , it has led to much debate , is being challenged in the courts as unconstitutional , and the consumers ' associations have lodged appeals in the hope of ensuring that the procedure is carried through in an objective manner .
Would you be prepared , Commissioner , to meet with representatives of the consumers and of the political parties in Spain who are opposed to the procedure chosen to deliver this aid ?
Mr President , I would like to stand firm on what I have already said .
The cost of transition towards competitiveness is something which the Commission services are investigating thoroughly under conditions of absolute confidentiality . Neither I nor any other Member of the Commission would wish to second-guess the outcome of these investigations , in strict compliance with the provisions of the Treaty which insist on the confidentiality of this process .
For this reason , we will leave no stone unturned in our attempt to achieve an objective , neutral and substantive assessment of this particular case .
All of us - the Commission , of course , the Directors-General and all the Members of the Commission - have a duty to remain neutral and objective in assessing the various cases .
I would like to assure all the political parties in Spain that this is the line the Commission will continue to take .
The cost of the transition to a competitive market will not be taken from public funds .
It will be borne by the consumers and will constitute an additional element of the price of electricity used .
My question relates to the nature of the costs . However , further to Mrs García Arias ' comments , I should like to say that I , too , was present at that dinner , and I agree entirely with you , Commissioner , as to the neutrality of the Director-General .
It is quite usual for senior officials from the Commission to attend dinners .
It would be much stranger if you did not allow them to go .
Furthermore , we all want to hear what they have to say .
I am also quite sure that you all operate discretely and maintain confidentiality .
My question , however , is this : is the cost we are discussing state aid ?
Or is it an additional element of the price of electricity which will simply be absorbed like any other , since it is a result of investments made to guarantee energy and to guarantee supply in tightly regulated and controlled markets ?
I would like to assure you that , following discussions held with the Commission , both with me and with my colleague , Mr Van Miert , the Spanish Government has accepted that the Spanish case be looked into .
This will allow our services to investigate , as is proper and in accordance with the rules , whether these are indeed costs relating to the obligations of the public services , which were previously imposed by the public authorities on their own corporations , and which are now being imposed on the process to free up the market , and which run the risk of causing casualties among the companies involved .
These are the boundaries within which the matter is being handled .
For the time being , I have nothing more to add and under no circumstances will I seek to pre-empt the conclusion which our services will come to .
What I can do , however , is reassure you yet again that , in carrying out their assessment , our services will abide by the principle of absolute neutrality and will simply assess the facts on their merits .
I would also like to point out that this procedure is closely bound up with the operation of the internal market for energy and , as such , it must be a litmus test for the credibility of the system .
This is one more reason for the Commission to stand firm on the impartiality of the procedure .
It will be for the Commission to consider whether the so-called costs of the transition to a competitive situation are genuine costs and should be included in the electricity bill or whether , on the contrary , they are to be seen as state aid .
I must take this opportunity to mention that prior to this debate , the government had refused to raise the matter with the Commission .
Secondly , I wish to put a question along the lines of that raised by Mrs García Arias concerning Mr Benavides ' attitude .
I find it quite unacceptable and I feel personally insulted .
Mr Benavides ' reference to political exhibitionism can only be understood as a reference either to members of the Spanish Parliament or to Members of this Parliament , and I find any such reference totally unacceptable .
I must also remind Mr Papoutsis that very soon , when the common market for energy becomes a reality , all issues relating to energy - and this one in particular - will come within the Commission 's competence .
In this context , I have to make it quite clear that in my judgment - in our judgment - Mr Benavides has forfeited the impartiality and objectivity which are essential when dealing with an issue of this nature .
Mr President , allow me to give my assurances yet again to the honourable Member and to this House that I personally and the services within the Commission will do our utmost to ensure that the directive to create the internal market in electricity is implemented in the most neutral and impartial way possible .
Let me reiterate that what is at issue here is the credibility of the operation of the internal market system and the responsibilities assumed by the Commission in implementing this directive .
On this basis , therefore , I would ask that you respect the answer I gave before regarding the Director-General for Energy .
Mr President , in line with Parliament 's rules and the conditions governing the conduct of its proceedings , the honourable Member will receive the same answer I gave to Mrs García Arias in writing , as provided for in the Rules of Procedure .

Thank you for those answers , Mr Papoutsis , and for attending Question Time .
Question No 42 by Jan Andersson ( H-0020 / 99 )
Subject : Conditions for Swedish adoption of the common currency The introduction of the euro at the beginning of the year has lent urgency to the debate in Sweden on its possible future adoption of the common currency , the timing of which is one of the principal issues .
Here it would be valuable to clarify the formal criteria for adopting the euro .
Can the Commission explain how the present qualifying periods for joining the ERM are to be interpreted ?
Are they irrevocable and absolute , or are there circumstances which might be invoked for allow Sweden to join the ERM at an earlier date than that implied by the qualifying periods laid down for the ERM ?
I give the floor to Mr de Silguy to answer Mr Andersson 's question .
In reply to Mr Andersson , I would like to say firstly that the Treaty does not specify any qualifying period for the passage of a Member State to the third stage of economic and monetary union .
I would remind you that in accordance with Article 109k ( 2 ) , which lays down the procedure for entry into EMU for Member States with a derogation , the Commission and the European Central Bank must report to the Council at least once every two years or at the request of the Member State concerned .
So to enter the third stage of economic and monetary union it is necessary to have achieved a high degree of sustainable convergence .
This is what the Treaty says .
The Commission examines the following criteria here : the achievement of a high degree of price stability , the sustainability of the government financial position , in terms of both deficits and debt , and the observance for at least two years of the normal fluctuation margins provided for by the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System .
The sustainability of convergence achieved by the Member State and of its participation in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System are also reflected in the long-term interest rate levels .
With regard to Sweden , the Commission considered in its report of 25 March 1998 that this country did not fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single currency .
Firstly , Sweden 's national legislation , including the statute of the national central bank , was not compatible with Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty and the Statute of the European System of Central Banks .
Secondly , Sweden did not fulfil the criterion of exchange rate stability .
The Swedish krona never participated in the exchange rate mechanism and , in addition , in the two years under review by the Commission , 1996 and 1997 , the Swedish krona fluctuated against the ERM currencies , reflecting , among other things , the absence of an exchange rate target .
With regard to the criterion of exchange rate stability set out in the third indent of Article 109j ( 1 ) of the Treaty , the Commission considered in its report last March that the currencies of Finland and Italy , although having rejoined the ERM only in October 1996 and November 1996 respectively , had ' displayed sufficient stability in the last two years ' .
In conclusion , I would say that there is no qualifying period and I would point out again that the conditions of entry for the Member States that are today the ' pre-ins ' are the same as for the countries that are currently participating in economic and monetary union .
I have already had the opportunity to comment on this subject and I pointed out that there are only two countries which have an opt-out facility under the Treaty , and these are Denmark and the United Kingdom .
It is obvious that we are not going to force a country manu militari to adopt a single currency if it does not wish to do so .
As for the rest , I very much hope that the economic and political advantages of membership of the single currency that we are currently observing will be able to sway opinions in the countries which do not belong today .
I hope that opinions will be changed quickly , and the excellent stability programme presented yesterday by the Swedish Government and accepted by the Council of Ministers is an encouraging factor here .
However , I would add that the exchange rate criterion is important .
It has legal force and will therefore be applied under precisely the same conditions .
I will gladly forward to Mr Andersson a copy of the speech I made yesterday concerning the Swedish Government 's convergence programme .
I should just like to make sure that we have understood the reply correctly . The background to this issue is as follows .
The French Minister for Europe , in a leading article in a Swedish newspaper , recently described his perception of Sweden 's attitude to the euro under the heading : ' A stronger euro if Sweden joins ' .
He also said that Sweden was perfectly entitled not to join the single currency for the time being .
As my Swedish colleague mentioned earlier , the situation has now changed significantly .
I believe it would be a very good thing , in view of the new positive attitude that currently prevails , if the Swedish people were to feel that the present members of the single currency were keen for their country to join .
I should just like to confirm that the Commissioner and the French Minister for Europe are both agreed on that point .
It is not my place to comment on any statements or articles by European Union ministers .
What I can say is that the Commission obviously hopes that Sweden , together with the other countries which are not participating in economic and monetary union , will join or be in a position to join the euro zone as quickly as possible , because our analysis shows that this is in the interest of the countries in question and in the interest of the EU as a whole .
Question No 43 by Astrid Thors ( H-0042 / 99 )
Subject : The Target payment system The new Target system for payment transactions between European banks was put into practice in connection with the transition to the euro at the beginning of this year .
The system has , at least during the initial phase , been extremely unsatisfactory and caused considerable delays to payments between EU banks .
Delays in payment have resulted in substantial losses for the banks .
According to the Commission , which measures are needed in order to guarantee that the new Target system will facilitate the banks ' transactions instead of making them more difficult , as is now the case ?
I give the floor to Mr de Silguy to answer Mrs Thors 's question .
Mr President , the Target payment system comes within the competence of the European System of Central Banks , which operates it .
It is not therefore the Commission 's responsibility to deal with matters concerning the operation of Target , nor is it my place to advise the ESCB on the matter .
Nevertheless , the Commission has read the various reports describing the initial difficulties encountered by the system .
I assure you that these difficulties are rare and limited , and that they in no way represent functional defects .
According to the Commission 's information , Target itself has posed hardly any problems and seems to have operated normally from the first day of use .
The difficulties mentioned are more likely to result from the inexperience of certain commercial banks , which is only to be expected in the early stages of using a new system .
For example , these banks have input data that are incompatible with the system ; it has also been the case that , out of habit , certain banks have concentrated most of their transactions in the latter part of the day , thus giving rise to bottlenecks .
Finally , it has been necessary to bring the national payment systems ' links - particularly computer interfaces - into line with Target , which also explains the teething problems noted .
However , given the scale and complexity of the system , these difficulties appear to be minor , and the European System of Central Banks now seems to have them completely under control .
This is illustrated by a press release of 21 January in which the European Central Bank indicated that the problems encountered with the cross-border flow of liquidity during the first few days of the euro area money market had diminished substantially and that , overall , only three weeks after its creation the market had reached a satisfactory level of integration .
Mr President , Commissioner , I quite agree with you .
I think you have explained that the problems I asked about were really just teething troubles .
I think it is important to note that part of the problem stems from the fact that some systems do not operate throughout the day . This means that there is a great deal of payment activity at the end of the day .
Is the Commission aware of the continuing existence of this problem ?
According to my information , the situation at the end of January was that some banks were still not connected to the Target system throughout the day .
That is why the problem has arisen .
I should also like to ask whether the Commission has taken part in any discussions regarding the question of compensation that has arisen as a result of the delays .
It was my understanding that in certain circumstances the compensation issue was to be addressed .
Consequently , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his written reply about another matter , which I received this morning .
Mr de Silguy , we are supported by interpreters in the House , and the Spanish booth at least had not completed the interpretation of Mrs Thors 's speech in Swedish . I was obviously anxious to hear the speech in full , and would therefore remind you to wait until you are given the floor .
I have no wish to flaunt my authority . I am merely concerned for the smooth running of proceedings .
You now have the floor to respond to Mrs Thors 's supplementary question .
I apologise , Mr President ; interpretation may be quicker in one language than in another .
In any case , I congratulate Mrs Thors on her French ; I certainly cannot speak in Swedish or Finnish .
On the two aspects you raised , Mrs Thors , I must point out firstly that this was an extremely complex and cumbersome system and that the difficulties encountered were negligible compared to what could have happened , although all preparations had been made .
Once again , it is a question of habit .
You referred to payments made at the end of the day ; this is also a question of habit and all these problems will disappear as the market becomes integrated and begins to operate more smoothly .
I believe that now only small technical or electrical problems occur occasionally but these are dealt with quickly and , I believe , in everyone 's best interests .
In any case , the system works .
Secondly , when the system was introduced , the Commission had to deal with certain aspects which fell within its jurisdiction , for example issues related to competition , which might have posed a problem when the system was set up .
These have now been resolved and are once again the responsibility of the European Central Bank ; you could ask Mr Duisenberg this question at the next opportunity .

As the author is not present , Question No 44 lapses .
Question No 45 by Anna Terrón i Cusí ( H-0082 / 99 )
Subject : Excessive commissions charged by Spanish banks Is the Commission aware that , on the pretext of the introduction of the euro , Spanish banks are charging excessive commissions for exchanging euro-11 currencies , ranging from 3 % to 10 % ( in the case of sums less than Pta 30 000 ) ?
Does the Commission believe these practices are likely to make the public more enthusiastic about the advent of the euro ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mrs Terrón 's question .
These two questions are very much related and it is difficult to separate them because they rightly raise the problem of the cost of banking transactions now that the euro has been introduced .
This is a vitally important issue for the Commission because the acceptance of the euro by the general public depends on it .
We must make the situation clear and distinguish between national banking transactions and cross-border transactions within the euro zone .
With regard to national transactions , on 15 April the Commission adopted a recommendation providing both for equal treatment of the euro and the national currency and for compulsory transactions to be free of charge .
In accordance with this principle , all banking services must cost the same , whether the sum is in euros or in the national currency .
On this point , as far as we know , breaches of the recommendation are quite rare .
The situation regarding cross-border transactions , on the other hand , is different .
There are both manual foreign-exchange operations - exchanging notes for notes - and cross-border transfers .
In the Commission 's opinion a clear and detailed presentation of the level and structure of bank charges for both types is essential to promote competition and thus a reduction in the commission charged , which would be of great benefit to the consumer .
The exchange rate risk has disappeared with the advent of the euro .
The conversion rate between currencies in the euro zone has been fixed irrevocably , thus preventing the use of ' spread ' , which means different buying and selling rates .
But the euro does not eliminate all costs , for example certain handling or transaction costs .
In total , according to our information and our calculations , the birth of the euro should represent an average saving of approximately 20 % on transaction costs in comparison to the period prior to its introduction , and this should of course logically be passed on to the customer .
With regard more specifically to cross-border payment systems for small sums , the introduction of the euro does not automatically unify these systems .
They will therefore continue to operate independently , in accordance with the structure of the national systems .
The issue of manual exchange will , by definition , be resolved definitively on 1 January 2002 , but there will be no automatic progress with regard to transfers .
For this reason we must aim , as soon as possible , to create a Target system for the public so that transfers of small sums - these being of interest to individuals , whereas the Target system which we were just discussing is of interest to the banks - between countries in the euro zone are carried out as securely and quickly as national transfers and at a similar cost .
That is the situation .
In the light of this , the Commission has taken a number of measures to encourage banks to facilitate use of the euro by reducing excessive bank charges .
Firstly , the banks are called upon to increase transparency .
To this end they must publish the structure of the bank charges that they have applied since 1 January 1999 .
Ireland , for example , has published notices on this issue in the national press , and I believe this sets an example for other countries .
The European banking federations must submit a complete overview to the Commission by 31 March at the latest , and at that time the Commission will undertake a full evaluation of the situation .
Secondly , the Commission has just set up a fax and e-mail system , known as ' eurosignal ' , which the public can contact directly ; it has also published e-mail addresses in the press so that people can send messages , and we guarantee to reply to every single one of them .
Thirdly , the Member States are called upon to quickly set up euro monitoring centres , as the Commission has recommended .
Finally , the Commission has encouraged the banks to develop the cross-border payment systems that I have just mentioned , which are safe , fast , efficient and at a reasonable cost .
In spring , the Commission will publish a communication which will allow us to bring all this together and to propose a framework for creating a single payments area .
This communication will examine both existing methods of payment - cards , cheques - and future methods , and here I am referring to the electronic wallet .
My aim is that , this summer , all tourists - and God knows there are plenty in Europe - will realise that the euro makes it cheaper for them in 1999 than it was last year to travel to another European country and to exchange money .
The Commission has not delayed in taking action ; it is determined to achieve a real improvement in the situation , and this must be visible by this summer at the latest .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your detailed account of planned developments in the euro zone , but I had put a specific question to you . Are you aware that on 4 January , all the financial institutions in Spain simultaneously began to charge high commissions on the purchase of currencies that are part of the euro ?
This development and the fact that all the institutions took action simultaneously lead us to suspect that some agreement on this policy must have been reached in advance . Clearly , any such agreement would contravene the basic rules of the market .
Commissioner , you claimed that tourists will find it cheaper to travel within the euro zone this summer . However , tourists who come to Spain and try to change spending money may find that they lose up to 10 % of the money they change , and with no prior warning .
Are you aware of the situation and do you intend to introduce specific measures to remedy it ?
To give you further details , I can tell you that Mr Van Miert is going to speak before the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs next week .
I am sure that for the specific case you have mentioned he will be able to provide you with all the information that you require and that can be given .
I would also assure you that the Commission will fully assume its responsibility and will apply the powers it holds in accordance with the Treaty .
Finally , we have been in direct and constant contact with the banks for one and a half months now , precisely in order to help advance the situation .
I think we are currently making progress .
We could not hope to resolve everything on the first day .
I believe that , from now on , the whole of the banking sector will be more aware of what is happening , and the situation has already improved in a great many cases .
I hope that this will become more widespread in the weeks and months to come .
You will recall , Commissioner , that when this House approved the report on the euro and the consumer - for which I myself was the rapporteur - it also approved a recommendation to the effect that the Commission should put forward legislation designed to eliminate or curtail such practices .
Unfortunately , this never happened , and so unfortunately , events have shown that we were right , and we are now having to raise our voices and complain on behalf of consumers about current practices in the various countries . These practices are preventing the citizen - the consumer - from appreciating fully that the euro has arrived and that charges should therefore disappear .
The Bank of Spain is to be commended for its initiative to provide free exchange of all currencies from within the so-called euro zone in Spain . Unfortunately , however , the Bank of Spain 's network is limited and this initiative has not prevented the private banking institutions from pursuing a policy which may well have been agreed in advance .
If that proved to be the case , I am sure Mr Van Miert would have something to say about it . In any case , our misgivings as to possible abuses of this nature have proved well founded .
Firstly , I believe we should not generalise certain cases which have arisen .
Secondly , it must be understood that the Commission does not have the necessary legislative powers to compel banks and bureaux de change , by regulatory means , to exchange notes free of charge or to observe a maximum tariff .
This also applies to charges on cross-border transfers .
The Commission ensures that banks observe the existing legal obligations : conversion between the euro and the national currency unit without charge , conversion of accounts to the euro unit without charge , and non-discrimination between the euro and the national currency unit in charges for identical services .
Furthermore , the measures we have taken are currently leading to progress in this area .
I have already said this and I will say it again : I believe that what happened at the beginning was overexposed in the media .
We must not generalise this at EU level .
We must be vigilant .
This is why we are maintaining pressure on the banks , and this pressure must be translated into action .
If in fact no change is observed at the end of a reasonable period , we might have to consider alternative measures .
But I do not believe that we have reached this stage yet : the results of measures undertaken in recent weeks lead us to believe that the situation is improving .
It took forty years to put this single currency into circulation , so we should not expect the obstacles and constraints encountered by our citizens and consumers to disappear all at once .
Also , these obstacles are not generally linked to the currency itself but result from other factors , for example the links between banking systems .
I can therefore assure you once again that the Commission is aware of the problems , and we are being vigilant .
We are working in close cooperation with the banks and consumers , and we have issued a number for dealing with complaints and any difficulties that arise .
We will answer all calls .
Like you , Commissioner , I believe in European integration and I certainly believe that we have taken a historic step forward .
Furthermore , millions of euros are in fact being spent on campaigns to inform the citizens about future developments which will benefit them in two years ' time .
Nevertheless , the citizens have had to put up with being charged commission by the banks from the very first day of trading , and there is a sneaking suspicion that the banking institutions may have come to an agreement . This is quite feasible , as there are not many of them .
I do not therefore believe that we can dismiss these as just a few isolated cases seized on by the media .
In practice , when an ordinary citizen travels , he is forced to part with a commission .
Do you not think that a public statement might be called for , Commissioner ?
I understand that you have been in contact with the banks , but could you not give a more helpful response to the citizens who have complained ?
I believe I have already answered all the points you raised , except one .
You asked if I could not do so publicly .
We have done so : on 5 February we published an extremely detailed press release dealing with the questions you have raised .
I will pass this press release on to you very shortly , and I will be distributing it to the whole of Parliament , to show that we are dealing with this issue .
I will bear in mind however - as these debates are of especial interest to me - that Spain has been particularly affected .
Question No 46 by Christine Oddy ( H-0002 / 99 )
Subject : Amnesty International and the European Union 's human rights policy Is the Commission aware that Amnesty International has marked the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with the publication of a report on EU human rights policy ?
What steps is the European Commission taking to evaluate this report with a view to using its main recommendations to flesh out EU human rights policy ?
I should like to welcome Mr van den Broek and ask him to reply to Mrs Oddy 's question .
You have the floor , Commissioner .
I am pleased to confirm that the Commission has received the report to which the honourable Member refers .
This report by Amnesty International contains a number of interesting proposals which warrant closer examination .
This is why the Commission has invited Amnesty and a number of other human rights organisations to exchange their views on this with members of the interservice group of the Committee on Human Rights , which includes representatives from all the relevant Directorates-General .
I would also point out here that in our external human rights policy , a subject which we have discussed on several occasions in Parliament , the European Union is certainly very active .
Where I believe we need to step up our efforts is on the proposals to focus our attention on human rights situations within the European Union itself .
In this connection I should also like to refer once again to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the human rights paragraphs of which were the subject of lengthy debate during negotiations .
There is also a proposal by the German Presidency circulating at present to draw up a charter of human rights .
We will be discussing this tomorrow with representatives of the Council of Europe , in particular in order to see how this initiative should relate to the existing European Convention on Human Rights .
To return to external human rights policy , I would remind you of the important declaration in Vienna by the Council of Ministers in connection with the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This declaration also announces a number of initiatives and studies in the field of human rights policy , one of which I should particularly like to mention , which is the suggestion that we should consider whether the European Union should draw up its own annual human rights report , something that the European Parliament has also called for .
Finally , I should like to point out that the Commission feels that if we are to take such a far-reaching initiative it could be very important to opt for an annual report which deals with a limited number of human rights themes , rather than perhaps seeking to produce a worldwide report .
Apart from the human and financial resources which would be required , the US State Department already issues such a report .
I fear that otherwise we will simply be duplicating their work .
All these initiatives are currently being discussed , a fact which we welcome .
I would say to Mrs Oddy that we have the very definite feeling that interest in human rights issues is not only widening but also deepening in the European Union , which is most definitely to be welcomed .
I thank the Commissioner for his helpful response .
As this is such a broad subject , I will just devote myself to one area .
On the EU code of conduct on the arms trade , is there yet a common list of military equipment covered by that code ?
How many countries have refused export licences for arms ?
And how are you monitoring that Member States are carrying out their duties under this code properly ?
Mrs Oddy will recall that under the British Presidency agreement was finally reached on a code of conduct for arms exports , that of course the content of this agreement was the result of a compromise between the Member States on a difficult issue which has been the subject of discussion for so many years , and that the German Presidency has resolved to see whether the terms of this code of conduct can be further tightened up to allow stricter controls on arms exports .
We must await the outcome of this , but it goes without saying that the European Commission strongly supports these efforts .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Please remain with this question .
Mr Truscott has the floor to put a supplementary .
In welcoming the recent legislative changes in Latvia and Estonia to expedite the naturalisation process for non-citizens born in these countries , does the Commission believe further measures are necessary under the Copenhagen human rights ' criteria to allow the full integration of Russian speakers in Latvia and Estonia ?
The Council and Commission both welcomed the legislation to facilitate naturalisation which was recently adopted in Estonia and Latvia .
I believe I am right in saying that in the past we insisted on compliance with the recommendations of the OSCE High Commissioner for national minorities , and on this point , and particular in relation to stateless children , these recommendations have been met .
What we are currently monitoring more closely , on the basis of cooperation and constructive dialogue with these countries , is the situation regarding the language regime for minorities and the language knowledge requirements in order to stand as candidates in national or regional elections .
But I believe there is every reason to be optimistic as the politically difficult decisions taken in this area fortunately , particularly in the case of Latvia , received very broad support in a referendum on the issue .
This is an interesting question in itself . It is also the reason why I said earlier that we need to take a careful look at what this charter could mean in terms of strengthening human rights within the Union .
The honourable Member is quite correct , apart from the national constitutions of the Member States , which generally provide sufficient protection for fundamental rights and freedoms , there is also the Council of Europe 's European Convention on Human Rights which is still unique , including in the sense that it is the only human rights convention in the world which also includes an enforcement mechanism , on the basis of which a separate court in Strasbourg can be asked to pronounce on violations and infringements of the convention .
Taking all this into account , the honourable Member will also remember that there has already been an in-depth debate on whether or not it would be possible to allow the European Community to be a party to the European Convention on Human Rights as a legal personality .
The Court of Justice in Luxembourg ruled that this was not possible on the basis of the present EU Treaty .
So if this is out of the question , it then raises the question of how else human rights protection can be regulated at European level , perhaps including powers for the Court of Justice .
That is the debate currently on the agenda , but as I said , we are also having discussions with the Council of Europe .
We will certainly keep you informed of the progress of these discussions .
Question No 47 by Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos ( H-0007 / 99 )
Subject : Security in Cyprus Given that the EU , and some Member States in particular , had raised objections to the initial plan of the Cyprus Government to site a surface-to-air missile system , consisting of S-300 missiles , on the island and subsequently congratulated it on its decision to cancel the plan , how does the Commission feel that Cyprus should improve its security ?
I give the floor to the Commissioner to answer Mr Dimitrakopoulos 's question .
My expert colleagues have prepared a long answer to Mr Dimitrakopoulos ' question .
With all due respect for everything this contains , which I am sure Mr Dimitrakopoulos is already perfectly familiar with , I would like to try to give him a rather more off-the-cuff reply .
I agree with him entirely that the developments in Cyprus have had a positive effect in that President Clerides ' decision not to place air defence missiles on the island has considerably helped to ease tensions , and not only on Cyprus : it has also reduced tensions which were in danger of escalating between Greece and Turkey , which could in turn have put further strain on relations between the European Union and Turkey .
We also know that we are engaged in an intensive process of cooperation with Cyprus with a view to accession .
I believe that this wise and courageous decision by President Clerides has created a better climate for that process .
Thirdly , and this is not the least important point , the honourable Member will be aware that the European Union , both the Council and the Commission , are intensively supporting the efforts by the UN Secretary General , and more particularly the special representative Mr Herkus who is on the island at present , to try to make progress towards a political solution for Cyprus .
Here too we can say that the process was certainly not made any easier as long as the threat of conflict over the air defence missiles was in the air .
The positive step taken by President Clerides - at the expense of internal political tensions within his government - was not only a wise but also a courageous act .
But what does this mean for the whole political development of Cyprus as such ?
Although I cannot be very optimistic - there are not enough positive indications that the political process under UN supervision will bring concrete results in the foreseeable future for that - it must be said that it has increased the prospect that , for example , the dialogue on security and the military situation on the island , which is being conducted in the form of confidential diplomacy by the United Nations , will have a greater chance of success .
The honourable Member can be sure that the European Union will try to contribute where we see such chances developing , through the presidency , Member States ' contacts and also the European Commission .
To conclude this answer , we all know what an enormous positive contribution would be made to Cyprus ' integration in the European Union if a solution could be found to the still fundamental problems that exist on the island .
When I speak of expectations my answer must always be conditional , in the sense that positive steps may of course be expected from two parties when it comes to solving political conflicts .
I have clearly stated what President Clerides ' contribution has been .
It could therefore also be expected , especially when the security situation on the island itself - and here I am speaking of matters such as the militarisation or demilitarisation of the island - is so closely linked to President Clerides 's decision , that it would be extremely welcome , and we must now urge the Turkish Cypriot community and thus also Ankara to move forward on this very issue .
Mr Herkus too has made great efforts recently to see whether it is possible to progressively demilitarise the island , also given the very positive boost which that would give to the rest of the political talks which , as the honourable Member well knows , are at present at a serious impasse .
Once again , wherever the European Union , including the European Commission , can give encouragement in its contacts with the Turkish Government , it will certainly do so .
I believe we must also be realistic enough to recognise that Turkey is at present on the eve of parliamentary elections , which is not a period when it is customary to see the most courageous political acts .
But let us hope that when the elections are over we will again see new opportunities opening up .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I must make a further demand on your time , because in accordance with the Rules , Mr Hatzidakis has asked for the floor to put a supplementary question .
Mr Hatzidakis now has the floor for one minute , and his will be the last question to Mr van den Broek today .
It is not exactly the business of the European Commission to state whether or not it is desirable to replace the present UN contingent on Cyprus with a larger peacekeeping force . However , I am convinced that if the parties could agree at some point on the terms for demilitarisation and if the UN Secretary General 's special representative should deem it useful and necessary to comply with the desire for a UN peacekeeping force , then it would certainly then be discussed on the Security Council .
A decision would have to be taken at that point .
I do not therefore believe that the problem lies in the international community 's reluctance to make a contribution , in whatsoever form .
But there must of course be a basic agreement in principle between the parties themselves .
As regards the negotiations , you know the Commission 's position . We have said time and time again - these negotiations have been going on for nine or ten months now - that now is not the time to talk about what the situation will be if the negotiations end without a political solution to the problem of the divided island .
We do not believe it is productive to speculate on this at present and will therefore refrain from doing so .
At the same time , the Commission has done all that is necessary to keep the momentum of the negotiations going and will continue to do this if the situation remains as it is at present .
Thank you , Mr van den Broek .
As I indicated , ladies and gentlemen , that brings us to the end of the time set aside for questions to Mr van den Broek .
Questions Nos 48 to 56 will therefore receive written answers .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 57 and 58 lapse .
Question No 59 by Alex Smith ( H-0045 / 99 )
Subject : Nuclear waste mismanagement Has the Commission examined the report on nuclear waste mismanagement at UK nuclear sites , drawn up by the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate and released in December 1998 , which sets out how the incompetent management of solid radioactive waste at Dounreay and Sellafield may affect the health of UK citizens and the environment of other EU Member States as a result of the leakage of radioactivity into the sea ?
I give the floor to Mrs Bjerregaard to answer Mr Smith 's question .
Mr President , the Commission was not aware that in December 1998 the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate published a report on solid radioactive waste at Dounreay and Sellafield .
The Commission has asked the UK authorities to give us this report .
It is not clear whether the report to which Mr Smith is referring only concerns the safety of the plants , or whether it also deals with the impact on the environment in the event of radioactive discharges into the sea .
If the latter is the case , our study of the report will focus on compliance with the basic safety standards for the protection of the population against ionised radiation , and if necessary will take the form of an inspection pursuant to Article 35 of the Euratom Treaty .
The Commission plans to carry out further inspections under Article 35 of the Euratom Treaty in March 1999 at Dounreay and probably in the year 2000 at Sellafield .
I notice that Mr Fitzsimons is actually in the Chamber .
Perhaps the Commissioner will reply to his question as well .
I must confess I am totally surprised that the Commission was not aware of this report , given its sensitivity at this particular time .
It may indeed talk about the things that the Commissioner talks about , or it may indeed talk about something completely different .
But the important thing is : I would have assumed that the Commission , given its obligations under Article 35 , would have been aware of this particular matter .
Quite honestly , I am getting a bit tired of the Commission coming along here and telling us various things .
When we approach the Council on these matters the Council always says this is a matter for the Commission , the Commission 's responsibility .
We come here to ask a question of the Commission and the Commission says ' We were not aware of this ' .
So I do not have a supplementary question , I just want to register my protest .

Mr President , I am very surprised by the comments from Mr Smith , because in the light of his question , I am naturally obliged to tell the House that we were unaware of the report and that , as soon as we were made aware of it , we asked the UK authorities to give it to us .
We assume , of course , that we will receive it , and then we shall deal with it in accordance with Article 35 of the Euratom Treaty .
Since we had not heard of this report , it would have been very difficult for me to respond other than in the way I have done here today .
I would like to ask Mrs Bjerregaard whether there is such poor communication between the environment ministers and the Commission that the Commission is also unaware , as Mrs Ahern points out in her question , that in December 1998 the Scandinavian environment ministers complained to the UK Government about the radioactive pollution which also affects Scandinavian waters ; whether against that background it is not a very long time to wait until the year 2000 to start inspections ; and whether it would not be more relevant to immediately send the inspection team to Dounreay , as Mrs Ahern is asking the Commission to do ?
Mr President , I would like to give the reply which was prepared for Mrs Ahern - who is not present here today - to Mrs Sandbæk instead , because that is what the question was about , as I understood it .
The Commission is also unaware that the Scandinavian environment ministers have submitted complaints about marine pollution due to radioactive discharges from the processing plants at Sellafield and Dounreay .
This is not in fact a great surprise to us , because it concerns matters which are subject to the bilateral or multilateral contacts between these countries and the UK , and Mrs Sandbæk also said that they had complained to the UK .
However , the Commission is of course aware that high concentrations of technetium 99 have been found along the coastlines of the Scandinavian countries and in the Arctic Sea .
The Commission took an active part in the Council of Ministers meeting held in Sintra in July 1998 .
At that meeting , at which I was also present , the question of radioactive discharges was raised and a reduction in principle of the volume of waste was adopted with a view to reaching a concentration close to zero - and now we are looking a long way ahead - by the year 2020 .
The UK Government has given assurances that it is acutely aware of the problem with technetium 99 , not least in connection with the handling of Sellafield 's discharge licences .
Against that background , I think I can say that we are of course monitoring developments very actively and that we also have the necessary contacts , but that we must of course have it incorporated into our work schedule and take into account the number of people available if we are to carry out inspections .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
I should remind the House that we are dealing with Question No 59 by Mr Smith , to which that was a supplementary question .
Mr Fitzsimons now has the floor to put a further supplementary .
My question is related to Mr Smith 's question .
I thank you for your replies thus far , Commissioner , but for years the Commission has been side-stepping the whole Sellafield issue which Mr Smith , myself and many others have been raising .
It has always failed to deal with the real issue , namely the closing-down of Sellafield .
Recently the German Government has been doing U-turns and going through all sorts of contortions in relation to the whole nuclear issue .
Since there is no real future for the reprocessing of nuclear waste , Commissioner , do you not agree that it is time , and that there is justification , for the closing-down of Sellafield ?
Mr President , it is of course a pleasure to see Mr Fitzsimons so that we can also deal with this part of the question .
Now , we may of course have many different opinions about nuclear power , and for that matter about Sellafield and other things .
I can well understand that Mr Fitzsimons and others think that some of my replies have been inadequate , but I am obliged to confine myself to our areas of competence .
And the Commission has no competence when it comes to inspecting the safety of nuclear plants .
This supervision is the responsibility of the competent authorities of the Member States .
It is also the operator and the Member State concerned who have to assess the economic viability of the facilities .
Therefore , every time we have had questions on these lines , we have had to examine where we have competence and where we do not .
And if you want more to be done , as I understand that Mr Fitzsimons and others do , I am afraid I have to disappoint you , because I cannot exceed the competence we have been given in this area .
Mr President , I would like to ask a supplementary question .
I indicated at the beginning of Question Time that I wanted to do so .
I have sat here patiently and I find it quite extraordinary that you are not calling me .
Dounreay is in my constituency .
Mrs Ewing , it is not that I wish to deny you a supplementary question , but the Rules only allow for two supplementaries , and those have already been called . As President , I have to abide by the Rules .
The two supplementaries to Mr Smith 's question have been dealt with .
I must now move on to Question No 60 .
Do you have something to add , Mrs Ewing ?
Mr President , Mr Fitzsimons had his own question .
It is very common when someone is a minute or so late to allow their question to be taken .
That is what Mr Smith suggested .
Instead of that , you called Mr Fitzsimons as a supplementary to Mr Smith .
My request , which was registered in good time , is being ignored .
As the longest serving member in this House , I would say to you that there is no point in coming to Question Time if this is how you are going to treat the Member who represents the area in question .
I am quite disgusted .
I hope I have made it clear how sorry I am , Mrs Ewing .
In any event , however , Mr Fitzsimons was not given the floor to put his own question but for a supplementary one , because he arrived late .
Question No 60 by Antonios Trakatellis ( H-0026 / 99 )
Subject : Maliakos Bay link - breach of Community environment law As part of the Pathe road network , tenders are being invited for the Maliakos Bay link , an underground tunnel 4.5 km long and 4 metres wide , to be dug at 18 metres below the sea bed .
Local authorities and organisations in the area are categorically opposed to the proposed project and studies have shown that Maliakos Bay is an unsuitable site for construction of this type ( a small , shallow closed bay , geological fault , earthquake-prone , fish farm ) .
Is the Commission aware that the location of the project and the invitation to tender are in breach of Directives 85 / 337 / EEC and 97 / 11 / EC in that no complete and specific environmental impact assessment has been carried out , no information has been made available to the public and there has been no attempt to find alternative solutions ?
Bearing in mind that Maliakos Bay and the wetland of the River Sperkhios have been proposed as protected areas under the Natura 2000 programme , is it possible for this project to go ahead when it endangers the ecosystem and threatens to wipe out all forms of marine life in the region ?
Can the project be jointly financed from Community funds when it is in breach of Community legal provisions and what measures does the Commission intend to take to enforce those provisions ?
I give the floor to Mrs Bjerregaard to answer Mr Trakatellis 's question .
Mr President , the project concerned is part of the new motorway between Athens and Salonika .
Large parts of the rest of the motorway are being cofinanced with the Commission .
The section referred to by the honourable Member is not included in this financing .
On the contrary , it is to be built , financed and operated by private investors .
However , I would like to stress that EU legislation must , of course , still be observed .
Only the provisional studies in relation to the tunnel , including therefore the environmental studies , are being cofinanced through the operational programme for road networks within the framework of EU aid to Greece for 1994-1999 .
I have the impression that the honourable Member believes the public invitation to tender in connection with the tunnel has already started .
That is not the information which I have .
According to the information which the Commission has , that is not the case , and the only thing the Greek authorities have done is to announce that the project will be carried out and thus invite individual businesses to register their declarations of interest .
Before a public invitation to tender is issued , there will be an environmental impact assessment in accordance with the provisions of Directive 85 / 337 .
The Sperheios River valley and the Maliakos Kolpos estuary are indeed among the sites which the Greek authorities have proposed for inclusion in the Natura 2000 network in accordance with the habitats directive .
The Sperheios estuary has been designated as a specially protected area under the birds directive .
According to Article 6 of the habitats directive , a project which is damaging to the ecological integrity of a Natura 2000 area , and for which there are no alternative solutions , can only be given consent for imperative reasons of overriding public interest , and if appropriate compensatory measures are adopted .
These rules already apply to the specially protected areas , including the Sperheios estuary , but not to the site as a whole .
This will happen automatically if the site is included in the Natura 2000 network .
Consequently , in accordance with Directive 92 / 43 and the Treaty on European Union , the Greek authorities must refrain from any activity which could significantly damage the ecological integrity of this site .
The Commission 's services will make enquiries of the Greek authorities to ensure that they have complied with their obligations under the current legislation , and with regard to the project in question .
According to the Greek authorities , the project will not affect the Sperheios area , but that is one of the things of which the Commission wishes to be sure .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the Commissioner for her answer and I would also like to remind her - and I am sure that she is mindful of the fact - that all the prefectures and communities in this region have already registered their protests .
Thirty-two authorities from throughout the region , which have protested and which have not been asked about the project , have appealed under Greek law to the State Council .
In accordance with the Community directive , these official bodies should be allowed to participate in the project .
As a result , there has been a great deal of turmoil in the region and nobody wants this project .
However , there are alternative solutions .
This bridging project could be carried out differently - not via the Gulf of Maliakos . It is curious to note that , while the Ministry for the Environment places this region within Natura 2000 , with the onset of the work it will destroy this region by carrying out a bridging operation which will totally transform this deep gulf into one which is incapable of supporting any form of marine life whatsoever .
I would ask the Commissioner therefore to monitor this affair very closely , as it is of great significance for all communities and inhabitants in the region .
Yes , I am aware that this is a matter which has aroused a great deal of interest in Greece , and also that there have been protests in connection with the project .
That is also why I can assure Mr Trakatellis that we will ask the Greek authorities about this matter .
There are rules which apply in this case , both in connection with the habitats directive and Natura 2000 , and we shall of course study carefully the replies we receive , because it is our task to ensure that the environment is treated properly , which is also what we shall do in this case .
It is now 7.14 p.m. and as Commissioner Bjerregaard was given 20 minutes for questions , starting at 6.55 p.m. by my calculations there is still some time remaining .
Could I draw your attention to the Rules , in particular to the annex to Rule 7 - conduct of Question Time - and could I respectfully suggest that , as well as showing a red light to Members , you show a red light and a red card to Commissioners at times because this is what is taking up the time .
The last answer that Commissioner Bjerregaard gave took 3 minutes , 56 seconds .
Members are cut off at 1 minute while some of the answers from Commissioner van den Broek were very long-winded .
It might be salutary for the Commissioners to instruct their staff to give briefer and more pungent answers to Members ' questions which in turn would allow more Members to get a chance to raise the concerns of their constituents .
I was about to raise a very serious incident relating to a power failure at a nuclear power station which , had it taken place , could have had catastrophic implications .
I would like to draw this to your attention .

I am always grateful for comments and suggestions from the floor , because I believe I need to take everyone 's views into account to be an effective President .
Do bear in mind however , Mr McMahon , that this afternoon 's sitting began at exactly 5.30 p.m.
Question Time to the Commission should therefore have finished at 7 p.m.
We ought to be concerned not only for the Members , but also for the services working in the House .
At present , for instance , we are running 16 minutes over the finishing time for our services , including the interpreters . As you are aware , the work of the latter is particularly demanding .
As President , I do my best to deal fairly with the many supplementary questions which arise , but I cannot work miracles .
Hence we have run 16 minutes over the time allocated for today and Mrs Bjerregaard has used the time to which she was entitled .
I must now close Question Time and thank Mrs Bjerregaard for her replies , for being here today , and indeed for her patience . Questions Nos 61 to 104 will receive written answers .
That concludes questions to the Commission .
The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m and resumed at 9 p.m.

Common organisation of the market in wine ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0046 / 99 ) by Mr P. Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the common organisation of the market in wine ( COM ( 98 ) 0370 - C4-0497 / 98-98 / 0126 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I think we need to begin by acknowledging the significant amendments the European Commission is making to the 1994 proposal .
The image of a wine sector that produces huge surpluses was all that remained of that proposal , a proposal we have fortunately moved on from today and which was geared exclusively to the wholesale grubbing-up of vineyards .
The current reform , however - which is today clearly also the subject of discussion and controversy - focuses on improving the present balance between supply and demand and , above all , giving producers the opportunity to adapt to and take advantage of expanding markets .
But we should not be overly optimistic .
In my opinion , the proposals put forward by the European Commission in relation to one of the issues being debated - new planting rights - seem more fitting than the Committee on Agriculture 's opinion .
I also think that the Commission 's proposals are better able to provide this guarantee of dynamic equilibrium .
What is more , it seems more positive to grant 1 % of the replanting rights in relation to the designated wine-growing areas in zones where demand is increasing , than to extend the limit to 2010 .
Complementary measures in this regard might include permanent grubbing-up measures for regions with structural surpluses and a revised regulation for replanting rights , which might extend beyond the 13 wine years after the year in which grubbing-up took place .
The chapter on reconversion , which also focuses on aligning production to market demands , has been concluded positively , both in terms of recovering restructuring costs and including the possibility of financing specific measures to support wine making in regions which , because of drought , have difficult cultivation conditions .
However , we completely disagree with the fact that Member States may continue to contribute up to 25 % of the cost for production regions located outside of Objective 1 .
As regards market mechanisms , we fully endorse the increase in the volume of alcohol in wine-making installations to 15 % from 7 % through the vinification of grape musts .
Similarly , we think that an important step has been taken as regards the use of specific distillation methods in potable alcohol which means that supplies to the Community sector will be guaranteed , a sector that annually demands almost 15 million hectolitres .
Lastly , in the event of a market disturbance , we should like to see the continued application of crisis legislation on a voluntary basis , in line with the Commission 's proposal in Article 30 .
In our opinion , it is vital that specific aid and measures for promoting wine consumption and providing consumers with information be included in a new title in the new regulation .
From the point of view of who has overall responsibility for these matters , the number of important decisions to be taken by the management committee as laid down in Article 74 and subsequent articles seems excessive . This is why we endorse measures aimed at restoring balance to the decision-making procedures .
Finally , we must once again stress our opposition to the oenological practices used to increase levels of alcohol strength through the addition of saccharose . This immediately calls into question the definition of wine in Annex 1 , where it is defined as the product obtained exclusively from the total or partial alcoholic fermentation of fresh grapes or of fresh grape must .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to Mr Martin 's report , we should welcome not only the important and high-quality work produced by the rapporteur , but also the fact that the time devoted to preparing , discussing and organising this work enabled the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to provide Parliament with a good report which is comprehensive and coherent , and which was adopted by a large majority .
We should be aware that such a result was only possible due to the close dialogue held with wine growers , and also because the basic ideas behind the report were inspired by the general report on the reform of the CAP which had already been adopted by Parliament .
This also means that in several areas the report does not follow the liberal proposals made by the Commission .
The report therefore maintains a definition of the quality of wine , an agricultural and viticultural product , and in this way rejects all forms of industrialisation .
It affirms Europe 's intention to increase its share of world production of quality wine , which is linked to human health when consumed in moderation .
In order to achieve this , the report proposes controlling the expansion of vineyards , notably for the benefit of young farmers , and a more efficient measure for replanting and improvements to vineyard management techniques .
Finally , all of this must be guaranteed by regulated management which includes promotion and adjustment instruments such as compulsory distillation , and which must not be left to the responsibility of the Commission .
I strongly support the priority given within such a framework to enrichment by grape musts rather than by sugaring , the ban on the import of musts from third countries , which would be a Trojan horse for the quality of European production , the ban on blending white wine and red wine and , finally , the clear definition of the specific characteristics of each wine product ; natural sweet wines , for example , are the only product capable of maintaining a level of human economic activity in certain areas of production of the Union .
Everyone can see that the draft CAP reforms tend to become embedded in the rut defined by the Commission 's too liberal tendencies .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is very attentive to the demands of the experts and of society .
This is why we will be approving the report which has been presented to us .
Mr President , today the round of debates on the reform of the CAP within the framework of Agenda 2000 comes to an end .
These debates have revealed how difficult it is to find a common denominator which will reconcile national interests which are divided by profound and increasingly visible differences .
I hope that the debate on wine-growing will benefit the wine producer , the product and the consumer alike .
Our rapporteur , Mr Martin , has contributed substantially towards this .
If nothing else , wine has brought people together from time immemorial and has been an important element in social , cultural and religious life .
As far as an appreciation of the Commission proposal is concerned , it represents in principle a step forwards in tackling the problems faced by the sector .
The complex regulatory framework which has thus far taken shape is an obstacle to attaining market equilibrium , developing productive capacity , improving the quality of wine and promoting products on the European and global market .
The current policy of grubbing up vines has resulted in a 20 % reduction in the area given over to vines in the EU , which is being inundated with wine from third countries , thanks to their aggressive production and marketing policy .
In Greece , in particular , there has been a 35 % reduction , which is threatening the quality of Greek vineyards , as the abovementioned policy has primarily affected vineyards of local varieties of high quality but with a limited production capacity .
For this reason , at least 3 % must be se aside for new planting rights in order to enable European vineyards to make the necessary quality adjustments , especially in the regions which have been damaged most by the grubbing-up policy .
As regards trade with third countries , we cannot accept a proposal which allows grape must to be imported from third countries for use in wine production .
With regard to wine-making practices and the possibility of increasing the alcoholic content of wine with sugar , we must maintain the status quo , the historical continuity of a product which is pre-eminently traditional .
I would like to end with a word about the problems faced by island vineyards and vineyards in mountainous regions , especially in Greece , where production is dispersed over small-scale vineyards in just such regions .
The special soil and climatic conditions favour the production of high-quality products , which the consumer wants , but production costs are high and constitute an inhibitory factor .
The new COM must provide a special support structure for these crops .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to congratulate Mr Martin , not only on his excellent report , but also on his tireless efforts in the search for agreements and compromises .
I should also like to congratulate the Commission because , on this occasion , it has put forward a proposal which differs radically from the famous proposal it unfortunately put forward in 1994 .
This time , the proposal is better adapted to the current needs and concerns of the sector and therefore constitutes a valid starting point to allow Parliament and the Council to reach important agreements .
I should like to concentrate here on three of the fundamental issues approved by Parliament .
First , safeguard clauses have been included in the recitals , articles and provisions on repeal which , in spite of the repeal of more than 23 Council regulations , are aimed at guaranteeing future respect for the acquis communautaire in the area of quality wines produced in specific regions .
Second , with regard to the distillation of table wines to obtain alcohol for potable uses , I should like to thank the rapporteur for having accepted our amendments and for having included them in the final version .
This has meant that the aid set for table wines to be distilled for potable uses will definitely not be set at the Commission 's discretion . Instead , the Commission will have to set the aid in proportion to the needs to supply potable alcohol to those sectors which , according to the rules , are obliged to use it .
Brandy and liqueur wine production will be safeguarded as a consequence , and the production of more than 300 000 hectares of vines and thousands of jobs in vineyards , wine-cellars , related industries andancillary services will be maintained .
It is crucial for this aid to be set at a level which guarantees the competitiveness of by-products of wine for potable uses .
If both the by-products of wine and the aid given for these products were to disappear , the cost of the by-products used to make brandy would increase by 300 % , whereas alcoholic products made from molasses and cereals would remain stable . This would increase the current price differences in alcoholic wine products and force drinks that have to use the by-products of wine off the market .
Moreover , Parliament has improved the Commission 's proposal by setting out the ways in which the aid given will be annually reviewed and precisely how primary and secondary aid will be monitored . And , as in previous amendments that I tabled in the House , I believe that this will guarantee the prices of potable alcohol as well as an annual minimum distillation volume of 15 million hectolitres .
Lastly , I welcome the Committee on Agriculture 's decision to accept separate technical definitions for fortified wine and fortified liqueur wine in Annex 1 .
The particular production methods and organoleptic characteristics of these types of wine mean that they are differentiated and distinct , and , as such , merit a separate definition .
The proposal for a reform offers a welcome opportunity to set out an independent and distinct definition of these fortified wines , which were not and are not the same as the liqueur wines mentioned in the original 1970 COM in wine . And , in terms of geographical appellation , surface area of the vineyard , wine producing and wine making , trade and job creation , they mean far more than other products that are defined separately in the basic regulation of the original COM .
Mr President , this proposal encourages and promotes free imports of wines and musts from third countries destined to be mixed with Community wines .
The Council and Commission forget that there are Community wines of a very special quality , which can enrich the quality of Community wines in a most wonderful and natural way . It is not necessary to import such wines from third countries .
They also forget the relentless way in which the vineyards have been targeted over many years .
Tens of thousands of hectares of vines have been grubbed up , at a rate which has been very detrimental to Greece .
This tragic situation is very difficult to reconcile with the approach you are taking today , unless of course there are ulterior motives and dubious interests at work .
You are promoting a moratorium on planting and you want to restrict wine growing , push it to the brink and perhaps even create a shortfall to justify opening the floodgates to imports to serve the interests of the WTO and GATT , thereby obtaining compensation in other sectors which interest you .
You are allowing sugar to be added to Community wines , especially to German wines , in order to increase the alcohol content .
This is inconsistent with the restriction on production and the quality that you are after .
If you wish to favour Germany , then at least have the sugar content written on the product .
Finally , Mr President , this proposal upgrades the institution of the inter-branch organisations and aims to force the poor wine grower to compete on the same terms as the ruthless industrial processors of this precious commodity .
You are sacrificing this product , Commissioner , and you are sacrificing it to illicit , questionable interests .
You forget that it is not simply a product , it is a popular form of sustenance , and it provides excellent employment . Wine is civilisation , it is tradition and culture .
Do not forget that .
There are countries in which , since the time of Homer , people have been brought up with this culture of wine .
And you are sacrificing it on the altar of questionable multinational interests .
Mr President , I too believe that Mr Martin has done a good job overall , particularly bearing in mind the outcome secured in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development as compared with the others .
Nonetheless , I am not one of those satisfied with the end result , and I therefore did not vote in favour in the Committee on Agriculture .
I think more can be done , and will therefore discuss two aspects in particular that I believe to be gaps about which I am dissatisfied .
My first point concerns the reinclusion of compulsory distillation , which had actually been removed from the Commission proposal .
This proposal is contradictory : we cannot demand , on the basis of the market equilibrium that has now been achieved , to be allowed to launch a policy of replanting and renewing vines , while once again proposing compulsory distillation .
I think this is a contradiction that has to be resolved by the vote in plenary , and our action - as I suggested earlier in the 1997 price package - must be based primarily on a policy of replanting or intelligent grubbing-up , managed on a regional basis within the European Union .
I believe this is the policy that must be pushed forward , combined with the flexible , adaptable and creative approach that other honourable Members have already mentioned .
I believe this is a problem that must be remedied .
At any rate , all we Italian Members will be working for that , not least in the vote in plenary .
My second point concerns our conception of quality .
Many Members in this House have spoken about quality and the need to protect the agricultural origin of the wine and the product itself ; however , no effort has been made to work towards harmonisation , not even of production and vinification methods .
I recognise that it is difficult to ban the addition of sucrose , but all the same , something could be done to improve quality : measures could be taken regarding the level of minimum must content or labelling , or we could leave things as they are but find a way of rewarding those countries with the best record on this .
But nothing significant has been done here .
And that is why - without wishing to start a revolution - we shall again be raising the issue of quality rather more seriously and consistently .
Finally , it is worth pointing out that we are discussing a sector that has been penalised in terms of resources ; it is accorded half of what it contributes to European agriculture 's GDP .
More must be done to promote the product on the international markets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Philippe-Armand Martin 's report modifies some aspects of the Commission proposal .
These changes are mostly positive ones and take account of the amendments that we tabled and adopted in the Agriculture Committee .
They include the possibility of renewing vineyards and aid for promoting consumption in the internal and external markets , and banning products made from musts originating in third countries or prohibiting imports of such musts for vinification .
Lastly , I would like to refer to our acceptance of crisis distillation and the introduction of certain aids , albeit insufficient , for producer organisations and vines planted in less-favoured areas .
However , we cannot go on allowing wine , a Mediterranean product accounting for around 7 % of the Community 's agricultural production , to be funded by only 2.5 % of the agriculture budget , whilst arable crops , which chiefly concern the countries of central and northern parts of the EU , receive 43 % of that budget , although they account for less than 15 % of Community agricultural production .
This is just one more example of the clear discrimination that will still exist between different crops after this reform .
We also think it is unacceptable for products resulting from processes such as sugaring to raise alcohol content to be called wine .
We are therefore tabling certain amendments , which we hope will be approved , making it compulsory to include this on the labels of such products , to inform and protect consumers , and also to set a five-year deadline for ending once and for all the practice of adding sugar to wine .
Mr President , Commissioner , for at least seven or eight years now , we have been discussing wine and the now notorious reform of the wine sector .
As you will be aware , Commissioner , back in 1993-1994 for instance , proposals were tabled on which I had the honour to act as rapporteur in the House , in 1995 .
So this particular wine has been tasted at some length .
That shows both how complex and controversial reform of the sector is , but it also demonstrates that clouds do sometimes have a silver lining .
And that is fortunate , because the failure to implement the old 1994 concept of reform has been a blessing for European wine-producers .
That reform was finally shelved , and what we have on the table today , as previous speakers have rightly pointed out , are other ideas which are certainly an improvement on the past .
The fact is that the fundamental approach taken previously was flawed .
I recall that your predecessor , Commissioner Steichen , predicted that come the year 2000 there would be a 40 million hectolitre wine surplus ; that was used to justify adopting drastic and extremely punishing measures , inspired by the pessimism of the bureaucrats , which would have been highly damaging to Europe 's wine growers .
In point of fact , there have been no surpluses for some years now , and that change of fortune is , I believe , not the work of Bacchus but a result of the extensive grubbing-up and the ban on replanting during that period which substantially impoverished European vineyards and left us with ageing vine stocks .
Europe has therefore lost ground in an art in which it has been and remains the world leader .
Of course , that has caused some alarm bells to ring .
Competition from new European producers is beginning to have a significant impact within Europe too .
In the space of a few years , imports of wine from outside Europe have doubled .
There are countries where costs are far lower than they are here , countries that enjoy far greater freedom of movement and which are not restricted by the bureaucratic obstacles and red tape that have always plagued European wine growers .
And so this new and sensible approach is welcome ; I acknowledge that , Commissioner Fischler .
With this new proposal , the Commission is I think taking a fresh approach based on the premiss that we now need to help a sector which has in recent years achieved market equilibrium , and must therefore avoid adopting measures that could destroy it .
In my view , the best remedy is a good dose of liberalisation .
I realise that , coming from a Socialist , that may sound surprising , but the wine sector in particular shows that excessive regulation can also be fatal .
And so we need to take a more dynamic approach to Europe 's vineyards : there has to be advance replanting , extensive restructuring of vineyards and higher allocations than currently provided for in the Commission proposal .
Indeed , I share the view expressed by previous speakers that more must be done to restore balance .
We have an agricultural policy under which products continue to be protected by applying two different sets of criteria , a policy under which there is a huge gulf between the support given to products from central and northern Europe and the support given to Mediterranean products .
I think that the rapporteur has done a good job , but not good enough : the report is sound on a number of controversial issues , such as the import of musts , the powers of the Commission and the efforts made to make Europe 's vineyards more dynamic .
On two points , however , which have already been mentioned by Mr Filippi , we are unable to agree with Commissioner Fischler , principally the questions of compulsory distillation and the addition of sucrose .
I do not agree with the point concerning compulsory distillation , because the Commission has proposed optional crisis distillation which I consider to be the right response to the new market dynamic .
As far as the addition of sucrose is concerned , I am well aware of the fact that anyone tackling this problem runs enormous risks , in particular the risk of blocking all the rest of the reform .
Nonetheless , it would have been worth taking account of the existing differences and inequities and sending out the message , which we are always calling for , that European producers must enjoy equal worth and show solidarity .
We are always talking about quality ; well , I believe that quality also means giving priority to products wholly derived from the vine .
Mr President , Commissioner , I hope it has been worth the wait !
After the abortive proposal to reform the Common Organisation of the Market in Wine in 1994 , and following our proposed amendments in 1995 , the Commission has certainly taken its time in submitting a new proposal for reform . However , it has now adopted a more positive approach , and it is indeed inconceivable that we should think of meddling with Europe 's wine-growing potential , with all its tradition and its wonderful variety , and simply abandon the European internal market and the world market to competition from third countries , whatever the World Trade Organisation may say .
The human race would be healthier if far more people could afford to drink one , two or even three glasses of wine every day .
The way to meet such a level of demand is not compulsory distillation or grubbing-up , but a far higher production levelof quality wines , especially in the Community , and of course far lower excise duties than those currently levied in many Member States , particularly in the north of the EU .
Having said that , I am delighted that , thanks to the enormous amount of work put in by our rapporteur , Mr Martin , whom I would like to thank very sincerely , the Agriculture Committee has managed to make some real improvements to the Commission proposal . This has involved some sensible compromises , and to achieve these compromises we have all had to mix a little water with our wine .
I am sorry that despite all these efforts some of our colleagues from the south have again gone on the war-path against the centuries-old wine-growing practices in the north of the Community .
And the strange idea some people have that wine growers not using enrichment should be given additional planting rights is simply crazy .
I personally can agree to the compromise , which took so much hard work to achieve .
I can live with it , especially because overall it represents a positive approach to maintaining and increasing marketable wine production , which after all makes a magnificent contribution to preserving our wonderful landscape , not least in my own country .
But the Agriculture Committee 's proposals are also well-balanced and sensible when it comes to wine-growing practices , new planting rights and flexible measures in the event of poor weather conditions or unusually abundant grape harvests , where maximum yields are involved .
I would ask the Commission , and Mr Fischler in particular , to adopt our proposals for the additional chapter on special aid and support measures for wine products and for the involvement of trade organisations in this .
I would be pleased if he could confirm this today .
The proposals also include initiatives to promote moderate wine consumption and advertising campaigns outside the Community .
That is the right way to go .
I hope that the Commission and the Council of Ministers will support us in this , and that a substantial majority of this House will vote for it , as a large majority for this sensible compromise is our best chance of making our voice heard in the Council of Ministers .
Mr President , I am sorry to see that the idea of insisting on bottling at source has crept into Mr Martin 's otherwise excellent report .
Insisting on bottling at source is a well-meaning and naive attempt to protect jobs and the reputation of the wines from particular wine-growing regions .
Unfortunately , with respect , it shows an enormous ignorance of what actually happens to wine in those countries that it is shipped to .
Nor does it recognise the changing way in which wine is distributed , marketed or consumed , especially in northern Europe .
On arrival the wines are specially packed to meet the needs of the particular markets .
They are canned or boxed with the supermarkets ' own labels or they are placed in specialist chilled containers for the restaurant and pub market for easy sale by the glass .
I am assured that bulk imports in the UK are carefully protected by making sure that the right label goes on the right wine .
They do not put the word ' Bordeaux ' on a bottle of wine or a can of wine that has come from a third country .
They make certain that their computerised systems respect quality .
The bottlers have an interest in ensuring that they are seen to be selling quality wines .
It may be that we need to ensure that these control systems are transparent and obvious to all .
Perhaps this is something we can discuss in detail during the passage of Mrs Lulling 's report at some point in the future .
But , please , do not let us risk job losses in our own wine areas and possibly creating problems for our own bottlers by creating barriers between producers , distributors and consumers which are artificial and will damage trade within the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of the wine sector in the rural economy of the European Union is recognised by all .
However , it must be pointed out that this is due to Europe 's dominant international position : Europe 's share of the production in this sector is 60 % and , moreover , 80 % of this is exported .
So , you may ask , why have a market organisation ?
Well , quite simply because the economy is increasingly becoming a global one , and we have to adopt Community rules in order to organise ourselves properly in view of this globalisation .
That is why I consider it useful to emphasise certain aspects of the report which are of major importance to wine growing in Europe .
As regards the planting of vines , we have made great efforts over the past ten years to reduce the areas under vines .
From now on , if we need to know how to grub up vines in certain fragile zones , we should also know how to replant them taking into account the requirements and demand for quality .
This is why we must show flexibility and allow expanding regions to meet demand by replanting vines , while reducing surpluses in certain areas .
As for oenological practices , I am very concerned by what I have just heard .
As a Frenchman in the heart of Europe , I would say this to you : let us put an end to this war waged by the Gauls in southern Europe against those in northern Europe , and let us respect the traditions inherited from our ancestors which are accepted and effective .
We are fighting amongst ourselves , and our attitudes are equally rigid .
As regards the wine industry , it is clear that it is the close cooperation between production and trade that has established satisfactory trade patterns for both the consumer and the quality of the wine appreciated by him .
This is why we need to respect the organisations set up in our regions and , above all , the crucial role they play in adapting resources to requirements .
As far as exports are concerned , let us know how to open up our markets to the outside world and provide the means to promote communications on product quality in Europe .
Finally , it is in this spirit and on the basis of a Commission proposal which seemed to us overcautious and , at times , Malthusian and too bureaucratic , that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has examined the report on the COM in wine .
Numerous meetings and discussions have enabled us to arrive at the compromise reflected in the text which has been presented to you .
Ladies and gentlemen from both North and South , we must vote in favour of this report .
It represents significant progress in comparison with the 1994 proposal , and it should ensure that our opinion is taken into account by the Council .
At any rate , I sincerely hope this is the case .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is the diversity , its variety , the special characteristics , the taste and - last but not least - the way it is identified with specific regions that ultimately sets European wine apart .
We now find ourselves faced with the difficult task of trying to regulate this diversity within a Common Market Organisation , and to regulate it in such a way that this diversity is preserved . We do not want a uniform European wine , but we do want a legal framework that is workable .
I come from one of Europe 's northern wine-growing areas , from the Mosel region .
Our wines grow in different climatic conditions , which makes them different , but they have their connoisseurs , and there is certainly a market for them .
I would like to thank the Commission and our rapporteur Mr Martin , and also the Agriculture Committee , for making it possible to reach a compromise on this common organisation for wine , which , in recognition of the specific characteristics of individual regions , provides for traditional wine-growing practices to be maintained .
This means the wine from Europe 's regions that we know and appreciate will be preserved .
Jobs in upstream and downstream sectors will also be preserved , as will our agricultural landscapes .
You can regulate the market , but you cannot regulate nature , the weather and the harvest .
I am therefore in favour of setting a quantity of wine that can be marketed in any given year .
Our wine-growing regions have already set corresponding maximum yields per hectare .
But I am vehemently opposed to the Commission 's proposal that if the yield per hectare is exceeded by 120 % the entire harvest would lose the right to be designated as quality wine .
Up to now , quality wine has not been regulated in this way .
Every farmer and every wine grower is dependent on the weather , and good years are needed to compensate for bad ones .
Wine from years when there was a good harvest can be marketed during years with poorer yields , as a way of ensuring the income of family businesses .
So we should allow carry-over .
I would particularly ask you to consider this point again .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and on the level of consensus reached in the House , which is something that has not been easy .
This issue is still pending from the 1992 CAP reform and the Commission 's proposal is of vital importance for the present and , above all , the future of this sector , especially given the crossroads European wine making has reached .
We need the instruments to enable us to be competitive in today 's open market and to enable the European Union to maintain its position as world leader in this sector , a sector which has an enormous added value in both social and economic terms .
The consensus reached clearly respects the specific traditional qualities and the various oenological practices that exist and also lays great emphasis on quality and promotion both inside and outside the European Union . What is more , it enables European wine making to enjoy moderate and controlled growth .
As regards alcohol and other related issues , I shall try not to repeat everything that has already been said , but I should like to stress the need to strike a balance between the technical progress made and the need to preserve the specific characteristics of European wine .
This is something else that the reform must resolve .
As a result , demand for European wine in an increasingly open market would increase if it were more competitive , and if such competitiveness was not solely confined to vineyards but also extended to include improved installations , as was mentioned , and wine promotion that is linked to the dissemination of the results of scientific research on wine .
We are also in favour of the creation of a standing committee for wine exports , as we believe this is vital .
Commissioner , there is , however , one other issue which concerns me , namely , wine making which purports to be European but which uses grape musts that have been imported from third countries .
Can you comment on this ?
In my view , Commissioner , you have a golden opportunity to adopt the amendments approved by the House and , in particular , the consensus reached here which we have worked hard to achieve . Indeed , we must admit that some have worked harder than others .
Nonetheless , I believe that this would be in the interests of European wine making for you to adopt these amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , as far as I can see I am the last speaker .
Well , we have drained this particular bottle and , as often happens , we are left with the lees that could have clouded the wine .
Thank goodness I am , as I said , the last speaker : yes indeed , because I think that the Commission proposal is a sound one , I think the rapporteur has shown admirable zeal - taking the diplomatic rather than the technical approach - and yet , for me , the reform and the outcome of this work are something of a hollow victory .
In politics , there is a tendency to evaluate any given issue depending on whether you come to it from the Left or the Right .
When we discuss agriculture , we inevitably return , Mrs Lulling , to the old way of looking at a problem as perceived from the North or the South .
Despite the best of intentions , that gap has yet to be bridged ; in fact the gulf is still very wide .
This could have been an opportunity for trying to reach across it but , for reasons that other Italian colleagues have already explained , we cannot be optimistic about the chances of what I would venture - a little exaggeratedly perhaps - to describe as an almost epoch-making recovery from an age-old handicap , and it will be a few years yet before there is any possibility of even a partial recovery .
However , I do not wish to cloud the issue of the wine at all .
There are some positive aspects , and I would like to mention one or two of them .
First we have the move towards quality and the promotion of wine as a drink that is completely harmless and digestible , suitable for all ages and all tables ; then there is the aid for vineyard restructuring , replacing table wines with quality wines ; in addition , we have aid for young producers and for disadvantaged mountain regions .
Those elements with which I cannot agree are , however , the dearth of protection against wine from third countries , and the excessive focus on the technical aspects of cultivation and bottling , with less attention paid to the aspects of production .
Unsatisfactory also is the drive towards replacing saccharose with concentrated and rectified must , with all the necessary incentives , for reasons already explained by other colleagues .
Finally , I come to compulsory distillation : I have to wag my finger at my old friend Mr Martin here .
It was an excellent idea on the part of the Commissioner and the Commission to get rid of compulsory distillation and keep only crisis distillation .
For reasons that I have yet to understand , our friend Mr Martin has sought to reinstate it .
It is up to you to redress the balance , Commissioner !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you all for the work you have put into examining the Commission proposal on the market in wine .
And I would especially like to thank Mr Martin as rapporteur for his analysis of the proposal , and above all - and this has already been acknowledged by several speakers - for his efforts to achieve a compromise .
By virtue of all these efforts we have been able to ensure that the proposal for the wine sector will not slip behind the other Agenda 2000 reform proposals .
As you know , this proposal is intended to replace 23 existing Council regulations , to achieve simplification and to cover all basic areas , from the vine to the labelled product .
Although the final list of amendments is rather long , I am still pleased to see that there are many important subjects on which we are at one .
In particular , we are in agreement that quality is essential to maintain and improve the competitiveness of Community wine , and that the conversion measures planned should play an important part in achieving this objective .
We are also agreed that the market position requires more flexible administration of production potential .
There is also agreement that we must preserve the specific character of all Community wines and provide a legal basis for this by means of regulations on traditional winemaking methods .
Before I respond to your amendments in more detail , allow me to remind you once again of the seven objectives of the Commission 's reform proposal .
First , we want to make the wine sector more competitive .
Second , we want to maintain the improved balance between supply and demand .
Third , we want to eliminate the availability of intervention as an artificial outlet for surplus production .
Fourth , we want to continue to maintain all traditional outlets for potable alcohol and other products .
Fifth , we want to accommodate regional diversity .
Sixth , we want to strengthen the role of producer organisations and inter-branch organisations .
And , seventh , we want to considerably simplify the legislative framework and make it more transparent .
There is a large degree of agreement on these objectives .
Some of your amendments suggest improvements in the measures we have proposed in order to realise these objectives .
In particular , we consider the new wording of the provisions on the creation of a legal framework for producer organisations and inter-branch organisations to be a very constructive proposal .
I hope that will answer Mrs Lulling 's question .
We have already started to discuss this .
Other helpful amendments are those on the introduction of criteria for triggering crisis distillation , new rules for liqueur wines and a whole series of technical improvements .
However , there are also areas where we differ and I would like to discuss those in rather more detail today .
In order to give areas where production cannot keep pace with demand an opportunity for some limited expansion , the Commission is proposing an allocation of newly created planting rights totalling some 35 000 hectares .
Spread over a period of three years , this is nearly twice as much as the additional rights granted under the last two agriculture price packages .
Furthermore , the proposal that producers undertaking to grub up areas under vines will simultaneously be granted replanting rights will also lead to a considerable expansion in production potential . This expansion could even be substantially greater than the 35 000 hectares which we are to achieve with the additional percentage .
So I cannot see any scope for us to go any further , as we would otherwise jeopardise the objective of balancing supply and demand .
In one amendment , there is a call for the inclusion of pure and simple renewal of vineyards in the restructuring measures .
I would like to remind you that the restructuring measures are intended to help to adjust production in certain problem areas to changes in market demand .
Of course we only have limited means at our disposal and we cannot therefore afford to finance measures which up to now have always been part of normal vineyard management .
Again on restructuring measures , you have suggested that restructuring costs outside Objective 1 areas should be cofinanced by up to 25 % by Member States .
I recognise that cofinancing is still under discussion , but a final decision on that will have to be taken as part of the Agenda 2000 package .
This therefore needs to be dealt with separately from the common organisation for wine , as part of the overall financing of Agenda 2000 .
Certain other amendments raised doubts about the status quo as regards enrichment , especially enrichment by sugaring .
I have to agree with Mr Bébéar in this case : I think it is 150 years too late for us to start thinking about waging a new war between the southern and northern states .
So I believe that we are right in sticking to the various traditional enrichment methods or oenological practices .
As regards the amendments concerning the proposed crisis distillation measure , I am firmly convinced that the Commission 's approach is the right one .
Compulsory measures are inappropriate in the more open market which has prevailed since the Uruguay Round , in which minimum prices can no longer be set , as the withdrawal of quantities of wine would simply result in making room for additional imports .
However , I can accept your proposal to incorporate additional criteria for triggering the measure in the Council text , particularly those on market prices .
Another amendment calls for the common market organisation to include measures for internal and external sales promotion .
I would like to be clear about this : I think that external sales promotion would be more effective in a horizontal regulation .
But I am of course in favour of external sales promotion measures .
However , I think that the various views of the Member States on the promotion of sales in the internal market and the overall stance of the Member States on the sale or promotion of sales of alcoholic drinks would make it difficult to include this in the common organisation of the market in wine .
With regard to lifting the current ban on producing wine from must originating from third countries - a subject several Members touched upon - I am conscious how strongly some Member States feel about this provision .
We have taken detailed advice from various experts , and have received clear legal opinions indicating that our WTO obligations quite simply require us to lift the present general ban .
The Commission has nevertheless explained to the Member States that our proposal will very probably include provisions on controls and labelling , including a scheme for depositing an import security , in order to guarantee that wine made from third country must cannot be regarded as Community wine .
Lastly , a number of amendments have been tabled about quality wines produced in specified regions .
I would like to make it clear that we intend to adopt the provisions of the current Council regulations in their entirety .
Nevertheless , we want to limit the Council regulations to general provisions and to cover the remaining provisions in implementing regulations .
With regard to maximum yields of quality wine , the Commission has already taken this opportunity to draw up a common scheme for cases where a maximum yield is exceeded , so that uniform conditions are guaranteed for Community producers of quality wine .
As long as Member States can settle this question efficiently themselves by means of transparent provisions at national level , then we could revisit this proposal and thus take account of Mrs Klaß 's concerns .
Lastly , I would like to discuss an amendment affecting various parts of the proposal .
This calls for various Council decisions affecting market organisation to be subject to Parliament 's opinion .
Although I regard this as an excellent decision-making procedure for major changes and above all changes of policy , it is simply too slow and cumbersome for purely technical market organisation measures , where decisions are needed so that we can react promptly to the market situation .
It is precisely for that reason that we have made a conscious decision to cover basic principles in a Council regulation , whilst decisions on market organisation are to be made at Commission level .
This is intended to maximise flexibility and ensure a rapid response .
I cannot therefore accept any amendments that would jeopardise this objective .
I hope that my comments have made the Commission 's position on the amendments included in the report sufficiently clear . In conclusion , I would like to stress once again the large measure of agreement which is apparent on many important questions .
Mr President , I was thoroughly confused by Commissioner Fischler 's explanation about imports of must from third countries for vinification .
I did not understand his explanation . Does the Commissioner realise what an explosive decision it would be to allow this precedent ?
Mr President , I really thought that my explanation on that point was very clear .
I clearly stated that the present GATT rules do not allow us to keep a ban on imports of must .
If we are to comply with GATT , we have to change this .
However , what we very probably can do is to ensure that imported must , even if it is mixed with musts produced in the Community , is adequately labelled so that anyone can see that the wine in question has been produced from imported musts .
So it is a question of ensuring that consumers can see that a wine containing imported must is indeed a wine that is either partly or entirely produced from imported must .
But we cannot simply ban imports of must .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11 a.m.
Crossing of EU external borders
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , thegovernments of the Member States have now accepted the fact that asylum policy can no longer be dealt with at national level only .
The Amsterdam Treaty has confirmed this view by making it possible to eventually make asylum a Community policy with qualified majority voting in the Council .
However , time is short and such an uncertain time-limit for harmonising Member States ' practice is not feasible .
Several attempts have been made under the third pillar , and we must hope that these will be transposed promptly into Community law .
The Dublin Convention has entered into force , but several problems have been observed with its implementation .
The Council resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures comprises some positive developments , but we regret that its provisions are not binding .
The Council 's Joint Position of March 1996 on the harmonised implementation of the definition of the term ' refugee ' endorses a restrictive interpretation of the Geneva Convention , which excludes persons persecuted by third parties from being granted refugee status , and creates situations which are difficult to manage and tragic in human terms .
The successive proposals for a joint action on temporary protection which seek to provide a response in the event of massive inflows of displaced persons have met with difficulties in the Council .
There is an area where progress has not been made on harmonisation , and that is forms of protection complementary to the Geneva Convention , although it has been included as an item in the Council 's programme for several years .
In fact , the Geneva Convention does not cover all situations involving persons who have fled their country of origin and cannot or do not wish to return because they have justified fears of being persecuted .
Even if the Geneva Convention were interpreted in accordance with the UNHCR recommendations , which is what we are firmly calling for in this report , a legal vacuum would still continue to exist between the level of protection guaranteed by the Geneva Convention and the temporary protection currently under discussion , which is only applicable to massive influxes of refugees and therefore excludes individual cases .
At present , solutions , where they exist , are left to the discretion of the national authorities , and they differ widely , to say the least .
What happens to nonsuited persons according to the terms of the Geneva Convention who would be in serious danger were they to return to their country of origin ?
Fortunately , the majority remain within the territory of the Union , and we will see under what conditions they do so .
However , we must not forget that some are sent back , regardless of the danger and putting their lives at risk , as several tragic cases have demonstrated .
The situation is becoming so worrying that for example , in my country - the situation in other Member States not being any better - NGOs which do not have a reputation for following hardline or irresponsible policies have set off alarm bells denouncing the ridiculous bureaucratic demands made on displaced persons reporting incidents of torture or degrading treatment .
These organisations deplored the decline in recognition rates for the status afforded under the Convention and the tragic situation of nonsuited persons , some of whom were convinced that their applications would be rejected and no longer dared to request refugee status .
They advocated a change in our way of thinking and a return to a code of ethics based on precautionary action .
As regards nonsuited persons who are not sent back to their country of origin , what conditions are they offered ?
They are subject to national provisions in the host country which vary extremely widely .
These range from those who are fortunate enough to enjoy genuine protection complementing refugee status , to those who are merely tolerated and do not have refugee status or rights , and whose situation is totally unstable , precarious and constantly being called into question .
Current national provisions , where they exist , differ widely in the various Member States , and often even within a Member State .
Who benefits from this kind of inextricable labyrinth ?
Evidently not the interested parties , but neither the Member States , which cannot expect asylum applications to be distributed in a coherent fashion and are faced with the problems that arise from the presence of less advantaged people in society .
The aim of my report is to bring to the attention of the Commission and the Council the urgent need to make headway on the harmonisation of these complementary forms of protection and to define refugee status and rights , thereby making it possible for those persons who will remain on the territory of the Union in any case to extricate themselves from precarious and distressing circumstances .
These forms of complementary protection must not call into question the full implementation of the Geneva Convention and must at the same time be clearly distinguished from temporary protection .
As regards the amendments , the majority of those proposed aim to alter the meaning of the text considerably and in fact appear to conflict with the actual object of the report .
Everyone will therefore understand why I am rejecting them .
I would have liked to agree to the ARE Group 's amendments concerning the persecution of homosexuals .
However , I understood that agreeing to them could negate the lengthy consultation process with members of other groups and , when all is said and done , the final vote could be jeopardised .
I will therefore be asking my group to reject them .
I should like to conclude by thanking the many Members who have contributed to this report , which I hope will eventually establish a practice in the area of EU asylum policy that is more in keeping with the international undertakings to which the Member States have subscribed , and with the humanitarian principles on which our Union is based .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am presenting two reports here today .
The first is about the Convention on third-country nationals , and the second is about the harmonisation of visa law within the European Union .
I would like to start with the Convention on third-country nationals , which is certainly the more complex legislative project .
I believe that within a functioning European Union internal market we need to have close cooperation on immigration and of course on the rights of third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
It makes no sense using Schengen and other provisions to abolish borders if at the same time there are large numbers of third-country nationals living here whose freedom of movement within the internal market is very limited , and if there are in any case different immigration regulations in the Member States .
This can lead to cases where some Member States admit immigrants who then of course find their way onto the internal labour market as a whole , ultimately contributing to the impact - I do not want to say burden - on other Member States .
That is why I very warmly welcome the fact that the European Commission has brought forward a proposal for a Convention on third-country nationals .
I think that this in itself is a step forward .
Unfortunately , the history of Parliament 's consultation on the Convention on third-country nationals is not a happy one .
You will recall that we concluded our discussion of this Convention in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs last summer , and that the final debate on it was to take place in the plenary in September .
At that point , the Socialist Group requested that the Convention on third-country nationals be referred back to the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , and I supported this .
The reason was quite simple : at that time a series of highly controversial changes had been made in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and submitted to the plenary . These included an almost unlimited extension of the right to reunification to all members of the immediate family , including grandparents .
The existence of a partner relationship was to be adequate justification for family reunification .
Opportunities for seasonal workers to repeatedly enter into rolling contracts were extended .
The mere offer of a job was to be sufficient to justify immigration rights .
Expulsion for serious criminal offences was to be abolished .
All this would have led to overloaded labour markets and social systems in the Member States of the European Union .
Apparently the very people who supported the amendments got cold feet and then quite sensibly requested referral back to committee .
At that point I attempted , as rapporteur , to find compromise solutions .
I believe that the report before us today is a genuine compromise and that an attempt has been made to reconcile the various points of view within the committee .
On family reunification , we have gone no further than the Commission proposal . Regarding seasonal workers , we have given the principle of subsidiarity priority in the individual Member States .
We have also been guided by the principle of subsidiarity in the case of making jobs available in Member States .
At the same time , and I always thought this was correct , we have quite simply deleted Chapter 8 from the Convention entirely .
This chapter refers to the rights of third-country nationals who are long-term residents of the European Union . We have done this because we believe that , as its name implies , the Convention should deal with immigration and not the rights of third-country nationals who are long-term residents .
However , we are at the same time calling on the Commission to submit a new proposal to Parliament dealing with the rights of third-country nationals who are long-term residents of the European Union in a separate draft , because that of course also needs to be legislated for .
Furthermore , we in the committee have gathered from preliminary discussions with Commission officials that in view of Parliament 's opinion on the third-country nationals convention and in view of the Council 's reaction to it at first reading , the Commission in any case intends formally to withdraw this draft Convention and rework it , with a view to reviving it as a proposal for a directive once the Treaty of Amsterdam has entered into force .
I welcome this and I am sure that it will also be welcomed by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
I believe that a revised Commission proposal would provide a more appropriate basis for discussion than has been the case up to now .
I would like to stress that I intend to reject the amendments tabled by the ARE Group , the GUE Group and the Liberal Group , purely and simply because these amendments effectively resuscitate ideas from the first consultation in September , which I rejected for the reasons I have already stated and which I have no alternative but to reject again now .
Let me make myself very clear : if these groups ' amendments were to be adopted , I would be forced , after the votes had been taken , to ask the House to reject my own report .
That is why I am asking you to reject these amendments .
Now for the second report , on what is known as the visa directive .
This too has a rather unfortunate history .
You will recall that the European Parliament gave its opinion on this directive years ago , and the Council subsequently reached a decision on it .
We did not agree with the text adopted by the Council , for the very simple reason that although the Commission had submitted a mandatory proposal for a visa list which we in Parliament supported , the Council subsequently adopted a visa list which was effectively not mandatory at all , as each Member State was allowed to introduce additional visa requirements for other states , and was simply required to notify the Commission of this .
The result of this was that the European Parliament brought an action concerning the directive before the European Court of Justice , and ultimately won , because we had not been adequately consulted .
The debate in recent months , since this judgment was pronounced , has essentially revolved around procedural aspects , namely what we are actually being consulted on - the amended Council Regulation annulled by the European Court of Justice or the original Commission proposal ?
We subsequently reached a compromise by taking the Commission proposal as the basis for our consultation , but by also giving an opinion in our new report on the proposals mentioned in the Council decision .
I would like to draw attention to a key political problem on which my position as rapporteur has always coincided with the majority view in Parliament in previous debates .
This is the question of Bulgaria and Romania 's inclusion in the list of states required to obtain a visa .
In my opinion , Bulgaria and Romania should be deleted from the list , for two reasons : firstly because discussions with the relevant Commission officials , and in particular with Directorate-General Ia , have shown that Romania and Bulgaria have already met some of the conditions imposed on them for the removal of the visa requirement .
They have not all been met , but a great many have .
Secondly , I believe that it is time for the European Parliament to set an example .
You know that in the negotiations on eastward enlargement and in the run-up to these , some states felt that they had done well , but there were also other Central and Eastern European countries which felt that they had come off badly .
I believe that it would be good if Parliament set an example by lifting the visa requirement for Bulgarians and Romanians .
I do not intend to use all my speaking time .
Thank you very much for your kind attention .
That completes my comments on the two reports which I am presenting to Parliament here today .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and my group , I should like to begin by pointing out something that has come to my attention .
Following the approval of the Amsterdam Treaty , our committee received several documents detailing the progress made in the communitarisation of issues relating to immigration , asylum and refugees , in addition to all the other work being carried out within the framework of the third pillar .
This is something we welcome and look on as a step in the right direction .
However , my attention would not have been drawn to this information quite as much had it not been so easy to see that the progress made is not always consistent in terms of content and strategy .
Proof of this lies in both the proposal the Commission is putting forward with regard to the entry of citizens from third countries and the other documents Parliament has recently received , for example , on the strategy adopted by the Council .
In my opinion , Parliament is not some machine designed to give out orders or amend each and every document we receive , but it does have to have an overall view of events and proposals put forward by institutions in relation to this matter . As a result , I should like to find out what strategy the Council and Commission intend to adopt , if indeed such a strategy exists , and what direction we are heading in .
As regards the convention , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I should like to point out that we are aware of how important the way in which we deal with immigration is in terms of our relations with third countries . I should like to make three comments in this regard .
The first relates to the fact that we cannot carry out border controls alone . We need the help of third countries , as has clearly been demonstrated by events at Mediterranean borders and the troubles experienced there .
We also believe that immigration is an important factor in codevelopment and we should help , for example , to provide citizens from third countries with the opportunity to study in the European Union , and for account to be duly taken of this . It is also something we would like to see reflected in the report .
As this is closely linked to the content of the draft convention that has been proposed , I have to say straight away that I feel that the rapporteur 's reference to the previous debate was inappropriate .
I am under the impression that the report had been referred back to committee with its support , and I also think that we have made an effort to continue with the debate because , as I said before , we think it is heading in the right direction .
This is why the rapporteur 's comments seemed inappropriate .
There are a number of things that we should like this report to avoid in particular . First , it must avoid generating a climate of legal insecurity for immigrants and those wishing to enter .
Second , it must avoid the tendency for illegal immigration which occurs because of excessive bureaucracy or bureaucratic red tape . In other words , we must prevent people who could reside among us legally from being reduced to the status of sans papiers , as they are known in France .
Nor must we be over stringent , because zero immigration does not and will never exist .
And in my opinion , if we were to act in such a stringent manner , we would be forcing these people into the hands of people traffickers .
That is why we have tabled a number of amendments and reached a compromise ; these both represent positive steps forward on a number of important issues .
As regards people who work for others , we believe that entry into a country should be linked to an offer of work , and , in turn , that the work contract should be linked to the opportunity to reside in that country or obtain a residency permit , as opposed to granting entry and residency solely on the basis of a contract .
To me , this seems somewhat utopian .
Certain countries , such as Italy , have already put forward imaginative proposals along these lines .
As regards temporary work , subsidiarity must be adhered to , as the rapporteur pointed out .
And as regards entry granted to people wishing to undertake independent economic activities , I think it should be pointed out that countries that have quotas should be excluded from the rule provided for in the report .
There are a number of points that I unfortunately do not have time to go into here , but I should like to mention the fact that through the issue of family reunification , we have introduced the question of exceptional cases . I should also like to stress that under no circumstances shall we accept the amendment tabled by the PPE Group which seeks to lower the age at which children have the right to family reunification to 16 .
Lastly , I should like to mention section eight .
We believe that the Commission should put forward a proposal detailing the rights of immigrants living here to give them a status and regulate their legal situation .
These are rights that all European citizens living here enjoy .
We do not wish to create a Community with two types of citizens , one with one set of rights and the other with a different set , but , in effect , the rights citizens possess in order to be classed as a citizen in a Member State - if you will excuse the repetition - do not apply to immigrants . We therefore believe that the Commission should put forward a proposal which includes these immigrants and resolves the issue of free movement for those legally residing here .
Mr President , two years ago , in December 1997 , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy called in the Oostlander report for the visa requirement for Romania and Bulgaria to be abolished .
This position was supported by the plenary and was adopted again in a second report in March 1998 .
So Parliament has always been consistent in its view that the visa requirement for those countries should be lifted .
Of course , as everyone here this evening knows , the requirement causes a lot of problems for people in both countries , many of whom are increasingly seeking opportunities to come to the European Union for study meetings , seminars , exchanges of contacts and so on in the context of the enlargement process .
This means that there are huge queues at the EU embassies and people face long waits , often after travelling considerable distances to get there .
In short , it all takes a great deal of effort and is an obstacle to opportunities for direct contact .
This is why we would strongly urge that the requirement should be abolished .
Furthermore , the countries in the leading group , in other words those which have made more progress in negotiations with the European Union , are now also planning to impose the same requirements as part of the adoption of the acquis communautaire , so instead of becoming more integrated , they are not only becoming more excluded from the Union , but it is also being made more difficult for them to have contact with former eastern bloc countries .
In my opinion , which has the backing of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I also draw attention to the fact that it is wrong to introduce a visa requirement for Hong Kong , given that it does not apply vice versa and EU citizens are free to visit Hong Kong without a visa .
It is also sending an important political signal to let it be known that the Union still regards Hong Kong as an autonomous administrative region .
Mr President , I am draftsman - or should I say ' draftswoman ' - of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights on the initiative taken by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs which seeks to establish harmonised minimum rules that are uniformly applicable for asylum seekers not covered by the Geneva Convention .
This initiative , commendable in itself , must not of course result in the European Union leaving its borders wide open in order to grant asylum to almost all the inhabitants of most countries throughout the world .
However , if we are limited to justified and necessary harmonisation , my aim is to draw attention to the specific problems experienced by certain categories of refugee women whose situation is a special one in some countries .
In the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , the harmonisation recommended to complement the Geneva Convention should cover special situations , such as gender-specific persecution , sexual violence and exploitation , and trafficking in women , where these put the lives and health of the women concerned at risk .
Our intention is certainly not to grant asylum to all women in all countries because of women fearing sexual violence .
Moreover , there are also cases of this in the Member States of the Community .
However , where women can legitimately invoke the right to asylum in this type of special situation in their country of origin , we urge in particular that they are granted a status separate from that of their husband or relatives , and that they also receive special medical and psychological help . All of this is along the lines of the conclusions adopted in my opinion .
Madam President , as you know , this report has already had a remarkable history , to say the least .
This also accounts for why it has taken so long to reach the plenary , but now at last it has arrived .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights would like to see Parliament give its support , as it has recommended , to the amendments such as those calling for the criteria determining who should appear on the common list - black or grey or whatever you will - to be the same for all countries and accessible to the public .
On the other hand , these initial criteria should also include provisions allowing for the list to be abolished .
The list itself should be evaluated and updated on a regular basis .
There is no need for it to be set in stone .
The question of compulsory visas for Bulgaria and Romania has already been mentioned and the Legal Affairs Committee has delivered its opinion .
This concerns the applicant countries which are still in the process of membership negotiations , but which in the meantime are being discriminated against .
Such a situation is unacceptable .
We should also like to have sight of the reports that were compiled by the Committee of Experts who visited the respective countries and on which the visa requirement for Bulgaria and Romania has been based .
We should like to see these reports laid before Parliament , since it would be interesting to see on what principles they are founded .
Consequently , we shall give our support to Amendments Nos 28 and 29 , amongst others .
With regard to the policy on refugees - which is the subject of this joint debate - on behalf of the Green Group , I should like to express concern over the EU 's refugee policy , particularly in the light of the Schengen Agreement and the fact that each year fewer and fewer refugees believe that such a thing as asylum actually exists within the EU .
Should we not be preventing the walls around the Union from becoming too high ?
The Green Group believes that a generous policy on refugees , in accordance with the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees , is an absolute requirement .
Madam President , it is unfortunately the case that asylum and immigration are politically sensitive issues , particularly in the run-up to elections .
It is a great pity that they are increasingly being exploited for political reasons , despite the fact that many political parties have signed up to the charter against racism drawn up by the Monitoring Centre in Vienna .
It is obviously very tempting to try to curry favour with the voters by exaggerating the risk that we will be overwhelmed by sweeping tides of asylum-seekers and by playing on people 's fears that too many foreigners will threaten our prosperity or identity .
There is therefore every good reason to regulate asylum and immigration policy at European level , not just in order to prevent these sorts of abuses at national level , but also because of the cross-border nature of the problem .
Time and time again , however , the Council has disappointed us here .
Of course , when it comes to restrictive measures , defending fortress Europe and passing the problem off onto neighbouring countries , it is only too happy to turn a blind eye and has no problem in finding agreement .
But constructing and harmonising a humane and fair asylum and immigration policy seems to be well-nigh impossible .
This is why I think it is good that the Commission and Parliament keep putting these issues back on the agenda .
Mrs Lindeperg 's report on the harmonisation of forms of protection complementing refugee status is certainly needed now that it appears that many people are falling through the net , sometimes because the Geneva Convention is interpreted too narrowly and sometimes because people do not actually meet the criteria to be classified as genuine refugees but cannot return to their country of origin .
It is often claimed that the Geneva Convention is being abused , that the people asking us for asylum are not genuine refugees , and that the asylum problem is beset by liars and criminals .
But we ourselves largely encourage this by making the Convention the only possible way of getting into Europe .
This is why I particularly welcome the fact that the Commission has looked at this side of the problem and considered under what conditions the nationals of third countries can be admitted .
We very much appreciate the fact that the Commission , and particularly Commissioner Gradin , have asked us for our opinion on this .
However , in order to arrive at an opinion we have had to make a sacrifice , because we were only able to achieve a majority in the committee by deleting Chapter 8 .
We can well imagine that this will come as a disappointment to the Commission , as indeed it is to us , because it means that the basic objective , which is one that we value , has been nipped in the bud .
Amendment No 49 , which calls for a status to be introduced for third-country nationals , is designed to counter this objection .
I hope that the Commission realises that my group at least supports its idea of improving the position of illegal residents too .
We are therefore hopeful that a status will be created which establishes the rights of fellow citizens from third countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my own comments relate to the proposals , underlying trends and amendments emanating from the left of the House .
They generally have one thing in common : they repeatedly support immigration from third countries and above all an extension of family immigration and reunification , with an overwhelming tendency to class all forms of partnership - regardless of gender - as a family , and at the same time adopting an increasingly wide definition of relatives .
The result must be obvious .
These proposals also tend to facilitate access to the labour market of the European Union . For example , one amendment suggests that the mere offer of a work contract should be enough to qualify for a one- to four-year stay in the European Union .
The extension of refugee status is another issue exercising our minds .
I am all for thought being given to this and for seeking solutions .
However , we will not find any solutions based on the very vague definitions we have of the groups involved , for example , if when we talk about groups of people threatened with violations of fundamental human rights , we insist on categorising the right to health or the right to work as basic rights , or if we include groups who are threatened by major disruptions in public order , or people who give homosexuality as grounds for asylum .
The net is being widened somewhat too far if all these groups are to be given the status of refugees wishing to enter the European Union .
If you consider the extensive new appeal arrangements , which provide that an appeal always has suspensory effect for all these groups , even if there has been abuse of the system , then you end up with similar problems , as I have already mentioned .
Regarding asylum , I would also like to mention that we must of course give positive signals to states such as Bulgaria or Romania who are making an effort .
However , I know from my own experience of the Ministry of the Interior there that there are major problems with the justice system , the police and the development of border security .
We know that there is a constant risk of illegal immigrants entering the Member States of the European Union via these countries .
We must help them to improve their border security .
However , we cannot remove the visa requirement whilst Europe has no guarantee of security .
The effect of all these demands tends to be an increase in immigration , an invitation to abuse asylum status and an impression that we are doing too little for refugees .
This effect is unacceptable and that impression totally erroneous .
What we need , and we in the PPE Group are arguing for this , is a comprehensive solution embracing asylum and refugee issues , which provides for burden sharing and for measures to counter abuse .
The objective we should be setting ourselves is to help refugees , but to limit and regulate immigration and to combat abuse and illegal activity , so that in future we can guarantee a safe and stable Europe , in the interests of our all our citizens .
Madam President , I should like to make four remarks in the joint debate on the Lindeperg and Lehne reports .
The first concerns the appropriateness of holding the debate on the Lehne report at this time .
Mr Lehne himself said in his report that we can raise the question as soon as the Amsterdam Treaty - once it has entered into force - provides a more appropriate framework for dealing with problems connected with the admission of third country nationals .
In this case , however , the Commission has exercised its right of initiative for the first time by formulating a position on the subject .
Parliament has repeatedly called upon the Commission to give impetus to policies which come under the third pillar , and therefore cannot take a favourable decision on this .
Moreover , the urgent need for harmonisation in this area no longer has to be demonstrated .
Secondly , the admission of non-Community nationals concerns issues as important as the labour market , vocational training , family reunification , all issues giving rise to controversy which is sometimes very acute . In short , we are dealing with an extremely sensitive issue here , which - if the case arises - provokes emotional and impassioned reactions and is also very often the cause of irrational thoughts and behaviour .
Words are therefore important in themselves because of the ideas they express and the messages they convey , or rather suggest .
Recent events remind us that regarding nationality as an ethnic concept , for example , would by its very nature wake evil spirits from the past and make it possible for parties pursuing this line of approach to win elections .
It is the whole political class that is being questioned about the way in which it must take up these challenges .
To summarise my view regarding the admission of non-Community nationals on the territory of the European Union , in particular , and general relations between European citizens and non-Community nationals , I would say that there is reason more than ever before to consider how the debate should be organised , and how to encourage reflection and to convince the sceptics .
We need to show ourselves to be understanding and sometimes patient , as well as imaginative and generous towards those concerned by the policies referred to in the Lehne and Lindeperg reports .
In other words , two different approaches are possible .
The first approach , which is based on populism and electioneering , tends to send out a strong message to the more fortunate members of society , and a weak one to disadvantaged social groups .
The second approach , which consists in giving positive signals to the vulnerable groups in society , and less positive ones to those who are more fortunate , seems to me quite obviously to be more compatible with our duty to show solidarity , as is stipulated by the Geneva Convention with regard to asylum seekers .
Thirdly , and I thank Mr Lehne particularly for having mentioned this aspect , we should welcome Parliament 's coherent attitude towards maintaining visa requirements for Romanian and Bulgarian nationals .
Of course , the Member States will probably not follow the conclusions of Parliament , which calls upon them to remove Bulgaria and Romania from the famous common list .
It would be a real shame if the Council were to persevere in its attitude .
However , without being particularly optiministic , I hope it will respond favourably to our demand .
In doing so , it would merely be recognising the progress achieved by both these countries .
What is more , it would merely be putting an end to a form of discrimination which affects two countries associated with the European Union .
Finally , I should like to say that the policies at the centre of our debate are part of an overall picture .
I am also the first person to regret that no progress was made on burden-sharing , a subject to which a previous debate was devoted .
This would allow us to progress more quickly in terms of the policies we are currently discussing .
Madam President , once again we are dealing with the important issue of asylum and , more specifically , protection complementing refugee status in the European Union .
However , we must remind ourselves that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - a declaration that is often cited and one that is presumably adopted by all - recognises the right of any person to protect themselves against persecution and to enjoy asylum in any country . We must also bear in mind that the Geneva Convention , without restrictive interpretations , must be the frame of reference for all national or Community regulations on the right to asylum and refugee status .
On the basis of the content of these texts , we strongly criticise the ever more stringent conditions that Member States are imposing on persons seeking protection in countries of the Union .
Entry , residence and the status of persons seeking international protection in the territory of Member States cannot , under any circumstances , be treated merely as issues relating to the internal security of those states . They must be considered with respect for international conventions and a supportive policy of aid for development and economic cooperation .
In recent years we have noted with some concern that legislation on asylum has been tightened up . This has resulted in a downward trend in the number of applications for asylum in the European Union and stagnation in the rates of acknowledgement of refugee status in many countries , despite the fact that the human rights situation in the world has not considerably improved .
With regard to protection complementary to refugee status , we support the measures put forward by the rapporteur . They focus on the protection of persons threatened by widespread violence , internal conflict or violations of human rights and lay particular emphasis on the international recognition of women who are subject to sexual violence .
We also believe that it is essential to adopt measures to ensure the integration of refugees into society and to help them develop as residents .
Lastly , I should like to highlight the case of the Kurdish leader , Abdullah Ocalan , and call on the Council to make a determined effort to intervene in this situation .
Madam President , human rights and citizens ' rights are not principles that are infinitely variable .
They must be applied constantly and coherently in all countries ; there must be no exceptions and no grey areas .
In this sense , Mrs Lindeperg 's report endeavours to increase throughout the European Union the level of protection for refugees and persons subjected to persecution .
It proposes a useful complement to measures protecting human rights .
With reservation , we approve the need to harmonise at EU level the rules applying to refugees who cannot claim the status afforded by the Geneva Convention but cannot return to their country of origin for fear of losing their lives or being subjected to degrading or humiliating treatment .
The definition of refugee status given in the Geneva Convention is interpreted in a narrow sense by a Council decision : refugee status is only granted where persecution is carried out or encouraged by the authorities .
Where the authorities fail to act , the persons concerned are eligible for forms of protection under national law , and this is where the shoe pinches and the measure proves to be inadequate .
Complementary protection can vary from one Member State to another , creating to all intents and purposes disparities with regard to opportunity of protection depending on the place where the individual being persecuted makes his application for asylum .
This unequal treatment can have serious consequences , for example where a refugee 's life is at risk if he returns to his country of origin .
Harmonisation is therefore desirable .
Moreover , it will make it possible to establish a set of rules which will provide a basis for examining the forms of protection taken from the European Convention on Human Rights .
However , refugees benefiting from complementary protection must not be confused with immigrants .
Poverty in a country may result in severe disruptions to public order or create internal conflict .
Is a person fleeing this type of disorder a refugee with the right to complementary protection or an immigrant ?
This is where there is the risk of confusion .
Harmonisation of these forms of complementary protection must not of course be an end in itself either .
We must not only pursue a policy of education by constantly denouncing human rights violations , but we must also provide development aid for those countries and regions where human rights are flouted .
Mrs Lindeperg 's report corresponds to the notion of generosity to which we are attached , and proposes solutions which seek to improve the rights of persons subjected to persecution by making progress in the area of the rule of law and in this case , accepted standards of behaviour in Europe .
However , our final vote will of course take account of possible subsequent amendments which will be tabled and adopted in plenary .
Madam President , at a time when in many European Union countries asylum seekers are not necessarily regarded as refugees who are to be welcomed , Mrs Lindeperg 's report is a valuable document .
She is a Member of Parliament with the courage of her convictions .
Migration is a social reality in the European Union .
We are concerned about the tendency in some Member States to substitute temporary so-called refuge for genuine recognition of refugee status under the Geneva Convention .
The EU should not harmonise forms of protection supplementing the Geneva Convention without allowing for a liberal interpretation of the Convention on the status of refugees .
For this reason we welcome the debate needed on the Austrian strategy paper on migration and asylum policy .
The report makes it clear that Austria 's so-called strategy paper is intended as a deterrent , and is not suitable as a basis for solving the problems of migration and asylum-seekers , because it confuses not only the various issues surrounding their causes , but also the solutions to these problems .
Of course there is an urgent need for coordinated action .
The objective is to create approximately equivalent admission criteria for refugees by means of a common legal protection system , so that recognition criteria can be interpreted as uniformly as possible .
Mrs Lindeperg 's report makes a valuable contribution to this .
I would also like to say something about the two amendments tabled by my group .
It is our view that Amendments Nos 16 and 17 are not relevant to this debate .
A debate about the future or the fate of refugees in general is not the place for a discussion of what has happened to Mr Ocalan .
That should be dealt with separately .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Lindeperg .
The ARE Group has always supported her attempts to find a decent solution to the problems facing asylum-seekers and many others in this world who feel oppressed and threatened .
We share her concern and we will continue to support her .
We are in favour of harmonising legislation at European level in principle , but we fear that it would be used as a way to consolidate fortress Europe , with the legislation and the Convention being applied increasingly strictly , whereas what we want is greater understanding for the huge numbers of refugees throughout the world and for all those under threat .
We regret the fact that the European Parliament has been reduced to an advisory body on this issue and that we are not able to make a more decisive contribution .
In our experience the Member States are the only ones that take the decisions , and they are often very hypocritical about it .
Very often they talk about solutions that need to be taken at European level , while at the same time rejecting existing European solutions and pursuing their own restrictive policies .
We are extremely unhappy that various countries are pursuing this approach , and we think that the Convention should be updated to include a more modern definition of the term ' political refugee ' .
We want new categories to be admitted to allow people over this very difficult hurdle .
We want people persecuted for their gender or sexual orientation to be included , and we want new rights for a new generation .
We know that Europe cannot escape its responsibilities here , and we know that we are weak when it comes to protecting democracy in the world .
On the other hand , we ourselves create illegality .
It will always be more difficult - it already is - to enter Europe legally than illegally .
And this causes distortions in our own society and condemns people to go through life ' sans papiers ' .
We want nothing to do with such a short-sighted policy .
We want things to be regulated properly so that the problem can be brought under control .
We do not want to be or to become a totalitarian state , but we want to adopt a pragmatic approach in order to deal with current problems realistically .
We have tabled two amendments which , from what I have heard , can count on considerable support .
Mrs Van Lancker , I am sure that there are a lot of people as well as you who agree in their hearts , but we will have to wait and see if they actually vote for them .
What is the point of going for a Conservative majority when we could win a more progressive majority here in the House , with various representatives of the Liberals and our two groups ?
Madam President , I have decided .
I have to point out that we agree with the first Lehne report , but we definitely cannot vote for the decisions in the second report , where we thought the Commission text was much better than what the report says .
Madam President , the three reports on the crossing of EU borders , which are the subject of this joint debate , are very different .
Two of them are the result of what is termed the intergovernmental method of negotiation : they concern the draft Convention on rules for the admission of third-country nationals , and the proposal for a Council regulation which was also negotiated by consensus within the Council , which determines the list of countries whose nationals require a visa to enter the Union .
The third text comes under a completely different category : it is an own-initiative report produced by the European Parliament which proposes a wide interpretation of the refugee status laid down by the 1951 Geneva Convention .
Yet , just as the first two texts try to be strict on the subject of the crossing of external borders , the third text clearly adopts a more liberal attitude and is inspired by ideas which it would be difficult to claim are shared by the majority of our fellow citizens .
I will come back to this point in my explanation of vote .
In fact , it is as though this joint debate had a hidden agenda seeking to lead us to the following conclusion : the intergovernmental negotiations unanimously concluded in the Council are the ones that produce the texts which are the closest to what happens in the real world .
This is why , for all crucial issues connected with the international movement of persons , my group hopes that we stay with this method and reject the possibility of switching over to majority voting and codecision with the European Parliament , as provided for by the Amsterdam Treaty .
Madam President , first of all , let me congratulate the rapporteurs of both reports for having grappled well with exceedingly complex issues .
As far as the Lindeperg report is concerned , this is a very positive attempt to try to provide - and encourage the provision of - supplementary assistance to asylum-seekers .
There is a lot to be said for trying to harmonise the social provisions which the Member States make in varying degrees and indeed for endeavouring to have a harmonised and common approach .
There are some amendments , which Mrs Lindeperg has already referred to , which I equally would not be happy to go along with .
But we can end up , if we accept this report essentially as it has been drafted , with a very positive contribution to dealing with this issue .
As far as the Lehne report is concerned , I must say that here again I have some concerns : it exposes the inadequacies of the convention proposals in that they are particularly restrictive in some respects but lacking in others .
Not a happy set of proposals , as the Lehne report explains .
I basically want to talk about the report on visa requirements for third country nationals .
Here I have a lot of problems and difficulties .
I agree entirely with those speakers from my group who have highlighted the undesirability of introducing complex and difficult-to-operate rules relating to employment conditions , and also the reduction of the age at which family members would be allowed to enter the country .
The reference in the Commission proposals to the age of majority is correct and we should not introduce some other factor .
But I must say - and here I think I speak for the majority of British Labour Members - that we really find it difficult to accept that the rights of Member States to respond to changed circumstances by introducing visa requirements should be removed .
The difficult situation that we have encountered in Britain with people coming from Slovakia in the last year or so has led the British Government to introduce visa requirements , which were almost unavoidable .
It is premature to talk about removing visa requirements for people from Romania and Bulgaria when a number of western European countries are already receiving considerable numbers of asylum-seekers from those countries , some of them with very genuine complaints .
Much more needs to be done in these countries in terms of ensuring proper protection for the rights of their minorities before we can think of removing these restrictions .
In all those respects I really could not accept the report as it stands and I shall be voting against those particular parts .
Madam President , the right of asylum is sacrosanct .
That is enough said about the grand and noble principle .
On no account should the right of asylum be changed in any way , either in the form of a restrictive interpretation of the Geneva Convention by the Member States , or through abuse of the system by interested parties .
What we need , on the other hand , is an extension of the principles of the Geneva Convention by means of a regime providing complementary protection to deal with exceptional cases .
However , such an extension must in no way aid the interests of those who try to misuse the right of asylum and wish to throw the door wide open to all forms of abuse .
If we are to be effective , we need to find solutions which are pragmatic as well as humanitarian .
We must firstly promote transparent solutions at European level and then - instead of pursuing a liberal line of action - seek sensible solutions which guarantee the right of asylum while preventing it from being misused .
I do not think that the Member States are closing their doors to asylum seekers , as is suggested in the Lindeperg report , but they are rightly closing them to illegal immigrants seeking to abuse the system on economic grounds rather than on political grounds .
By combating illegal and uncontrolled immigration , the Member States guarantee the right of asylum and prevent our citizens from making asylum seekers outcasts .
Yes to the right of asylum and complementary protection !
No to lax and ideological attitudes on this serious matter !
Madam President , I fully endorse the Lindeperg report because it reinforces the right of asylum and provides an adequate response to the strategy paper produced by the Austrian Presidency , which calls into question the international law on refugees guaranteed by the Geneva Convention .
However , I am opposed to the Commission 's draft Convention on rules for the admission of third-country nationals .
In fact , it proposes an admission and residence policy which conforms with the Member States ' most restrictive rules .
This is particularly true in the case of employment since it makes national and Community preference one of the key principles of the admission policy .
Was the Commission never informed of the OECD study in which it is acknowledged that there is no close correlation between the influx of foreigners into a country and the increase in the unemployment rate ?
I nevertheless admit that the adoption of certain amendments has made a significant improvement to the draft .
However , I am dismayed at the compromise amendment proposed by the PSE / PPE to Article 7 ( 1 ) on employment .
This amendment not only implies acceptance of the notion of national preference , but it clearly vindicates the system of quotas which would allow each Member State to take from poor countries the manpower and qualified workers it needs .
My group has therefore tabled an amendment to correct what I had hoped was only a mistake until I heard Mrs Terrón i Cusí 's speech .
My group 's final vote will depend on acceptance of this amendment , and I will be requesting a roll-call vote .
The Commission 's draft convention does not augur well for the substance of future Community immigration and asylum policy , as provided for by the Amsterdam Treaty .
We must warn the organisations of the dangers of this and take action with them to transform the present stumbling blocks into proper reception conditions .
I am taking pains to do this .
I reject this notion of a fortress Europe which is inward-looking .
We must put an end to this scapegoat strategy which the Minister of the Interior , Mr Schily , also talked about a fortnight ago in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
However , our French Minister is no better on this subject .
He has never addressed the issue of immigrants in terms of the legal implications .
He has consistently linked immigration with unemployment , insecurity and criminality , as if evil always comes from elsewhere .
The danger of this type of xenophobia - it cannot be called anything other than this - is great , for as Gorki wrote , ' it is preferable to expect the best of man ; expecting the worst will only lead him astray ' .
Madam President , I wish that Mrs Lindeperg could have had a better time-slot and a fuller House for this debate .
Not only is it one of the most important reports we have discussed for a long time , it is also one of the most outstanding .
It demonstrates , with depressing sobriety and enormous clarity , that we find ourselves slipping into a human rights dilemma or even a human rights emergency .
Many of the Members not here today would , if they were to study this report , very probably have to stop telling the public that asylum , in terms of human rights and international law , is not under attack .
It is .
Mr Pirker , on the other hand , is an example of someone quite capable of maintaining all his aggressive prejudices despite being in possession of the facts .
I would really like to know how you can escape into Europe .
I think you would need to be the invisible man or jump down from a satellite .
Otherwise , it will soon be impossible to penetrate this continent famed for its justice and human rights .
We have abolished the right to asylum within the European Union , despite the Geneva Convention and current international law .
We have simply taken matters into our own hands , and no one is doing anything about it .
Outside the EU , we have created a cordon of states that we have lumped together as being safe third countries , thus flying in the face of the Geneva Convention and current international law .
Under the Geneva Convention , an applicant is only entitled to asylum if a justified fear of persecution can be demonstrated . We have changed the criterion to one of proving that persecution is a fact .
We are constantly raising the hurdles , creating barriers and imposing new conditions , so that it has become virtually impossible to get into Europe .
The end result is mass deportations , children held in pre-expulsion detention centres , families torn apart , and refugees being repatriated to countries where they are in danger of life and limb .
That is where we now stand in the European Union , which when it wants to implement something like the internal market , the euro or competition law , applies itself with great determination , but which is achieving less and less when it comes to human rights and democracy , the underlying principles of the Union .
Madam President , Mr Lehne 's report gives me the opportunity once more to denounce the excesses of Europe 's emigrationism .
Immigration policy is and must remain the responsibility of each Member State .
I reject the outright harmonisation of immigration policies , the right of asylum , and criminal and judicial procedures that is advocated by Brussels .
A healthy state is first and foremost a state which controls its influx of immigrants and makes it possible for its nationals to work and go out in the evening in complete safety .
We will vote against this report which protects non-Community nationals and damages the interests of European nationals , and which encourages family reunification even where a family unit is not legitimate or recognised as such in the eyes of the law , since it talks about partners .
What is more , we want to offer jobs to foreigners when seven million people in our own country are unemployed or live below the poverty line .
I would point out that according to this report , a contract of employment will be sufficient to obtain refugee status .
If adopted , these various amendments will undoubtedly turn our Europe - which is already an open door when it comes to immigration - into a Europe where the floodgates are opened to what will become a spate of immigrants .
Some Members of Parliament talk to us about populism , electioneering and racism .
But they do not live in the so-called problem areas .
It is the poorest and weakest people who put up with this type of situation , and this can no longer be tolerated .
It is unthinkable that those who advocate jobs and security in Europe could support such initiatives which are destructive to our countries and people .
I for my part will not do so .
Allow me to remind you of the famous words of one of our colleagues , who said that we cannot take all the troubles of the world upon our shoulders .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that most of us in this House are not of the same opinion as Mrs Stirbois - thank goodness ! - and that the majority of us see refugees in a different light .
I confess that I am now finding it difficult to keep to the subject I had actually planned to speak about , that is Mr Lehne 's report on visa policy .
We have been discussing this subject ever since I have been in Parliament .
Our discussions on how to formulate arrangements giving people from third countries legal access to the European Union spanned the whole of the previous legislature .
The judgment of the European Court of Justice - as Mr Lehne has already said , Parliament took this to court - still failed to clarify the degree of consistency we should apply to this question .
My group has also taken the line that if we want to retain our credibility we should give our opinion on both the Council and Commission proposals .
But as we have found ourselves in a state of deadlock with the forthcoming ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , we expect that once it has been ratified and the Treaty has come into force , the Commission will submit the new proposal it has announced without delay , and that the amendments from Parliament that we are voting on tomorrow will appear in the new proposal .
Nevertheless , I agree with the rapporteur that the procedure for granting visas should comply with the same requirements and procedures in all the Members States .
The fact that there is a visa requirement for certain third-country nationals does not mean that the relevant procedures should be unjust or even discriminatory .
Yet that is very often the case at present .
People who need a visa for relatives or business visitors or for youth and student exchanges should be given clear information on the documents required and the time taken to issue a visa when they submit an application .
We know all too well that waiting times of six months are frequent , with all the costs that implies .
The authorities in the Members States should have to observe clear guidelines in this area , to make the process both transparent and humane .
Article 62 in fact requires uniform conditions and procedures in this field .
We also hope that incorporating the Schengen Agreement into the Treaty will at last make it possible to draw up a single European list of third countries whose nationals require a visa for travel into the EU .
Many members of my group also believe that both Romania and Bulgaria should be deleted from the list , something Parliament has indeed been advocating for the last four and a half years .
It cannot be right that countries with whom we have association agreements are still at a disadvantage and are still on this list .
I often go to Romania and Bulgaria myself .
When you see how things are going there , you are bound to conclude that this needs to be changed , because both these countries have already made great efforts ...
The President cut the speaker off
Madam President , even though the two Lehne reports are extremely important , I am only going to refer to the Lindeperg report , as it would be impossible to talk about all of them in the two minutes I have available .
I should firstly like to welcome and thank the rapporteur for demonstrating her ability for dialogue and for constantly seeking solutions . Of course , when such solutions have not been forthcoming , she has sought to point out discrepancies in a way that I consider to be very constructive .
The rapporteur is aware that many of us , and in my view , a broad majority in the House , agree with her objectives .
As she points out , these complementary schemes of protection must be harmonised so that those who genuinely merit a specific form of protection , but who do not meet the conditions laid down in the Geneva Convention , can receive it .
Therefore , we must not lower ourselves to the level of popularity-seeking , because this is ultimately the worst enemy of those who are or who should be allowed to enter under the terms of the Geneva Convention , and those for whom complementary forms of protection must be found .
The two amendments tabled by the ARE Group , which Mrs Lindeperg wanted to accept and which I hope she does not accept , are a clear example of this .
I hope they will be rejected because they are really the epitome of what Parliament is not able to do .
Whether we like it or not , the Geneva Convention says what it says and , Mrs Lindeperg , there are other people who are qualified to interpret it apart from the United Nations High Commissioner , including the Member States ' high courts .
However , this is something that appears to have been overlooked .
We obviously cannot try to change the Geneva Convention and say that it protects homosexuals . That would be impossible because in order to change the Geneva Convention , we must use all the traditional instruments of international law .
And , were we to do this , in short , we would merely be prejudicing those groups - and potentially even homosexual groups - in need of adequate protection , protection that is not provided for in the Geneva Convention . Indeed , the complementary measures we are currently seeking are , in fact , aimed at those groups .
Madam President , Commissioners , I should like to begin by saying something about the Convention on rules for the admission of third-country nationals .
Mr Lehne 's report and the Commission proposal are extremely important elements of what should become a common immigration policy .
A European approach is particularly important here because the differences that currently exist between the Member States undermine not only the free movement of persons , as Mr Lehne said , but also , in my view , the rights that we grant to immigrants .
This is why a European approach is so important .
I must admit that the view that Parliament is putting forward today does not exactly fill me with enthusiasm .
Even here in the House there is not a majority in favour of opening the door a little wider for further immigration .
Of course , I realise that this is a highly sensitive issue with its connotations of unemployment and social exclusion .
But the main point is that there are still people , even here in the Chamber , who constantly manage to present immigration as a threat and as something that will inevitably bring an increase in crime , thus encouraging xenophobia and making the whole issue taboo .
I hope that some day the majority will support the view that migrants not only need Europe , but also that Europe needs migrants , if only for the sake of our own labour market and demographic development .
It is important to have this report , because these proposals ensure that European harmonisation will not be harmonisation downwards .
The references to quotas and measures deliberately allow those Member States which have a broader policy the scope to implement it .
We are not defending quotas as such , but as some countries already have them , it is important for us to support them .
This also guarantees that families have the right to be reunited .
We must learn to accept that people do not migrate temporarily - these are men , women and children who are entitled to a family life .
I would like to say a few words about the report by Mrs Lindeperg , on which I congratulate her .
I am particularly pleased that there is broad support for this report in the House at long last , as an additional status is absolutely necessary .

Many countries such as Belgium only have a ' tolerance status ' with complementary forms of protection , and this has particularly damaging consequences .
It causes uncertainty for the refugees in question , and uncertainty for society , because having residents with no rights in an insecure position is not good for any society .
So we really need an additional status in Europe .
All I would add is that in December 1998 , the Council of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs put these two important issues that we are discussing today on the agenda for the forthcoming legislative period , but with such an unreasonable deadline that there is a danger that it could become a long-term project or even be shelved altogether .
So I think it is particularly important that Parliament should today send a political signal to the Commission , and via the Commission to the Council , that we in the House want to tackle these two sensitive and difficult issues , and I hope that this will then lead to a clear signal being given not in five years , not in twenty years , but at the Tampere summit that we need solutions to them .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many speeches on asylum and refugees in Europe remind me of Bertold Brecht 's famous play ' The Good Woman of Szechuan ' , in which the main character has to work hard at night as a realist to put right the damage she has done as a philanthropist during the day .
We are being urged to drop the visa requirement for Romania and Bulgaria , yet any security specialist can show that this would promote organised crime , traffic in human beings and drug smuggling .
Where does that leave our concern for our citizens ' security ?
Here in Europe , we quite rightly accept refugees and people facing political persecution .
There is no dispute about that , as every right-minded person knows .
However , there are also numerous economic refugees who can neither come here nor remain here permanently , and now Mrs Lindeperg is proposing that we should accept everyone coming from countries where there is widespread violence , internal conflict , or other circumstances which have severely disrupted public order .
My dear Mrs Lindeperg , this definition applies to three quarters of Africa and half of Asia .
So provision is to be made for measures to ensure that all these people are integrated into social and economic life - not forgetting that we have 20 million unemployed in Europe - and at the same time , if they are rejected , they can lodge an appeal with suspensory effect !
Mrs Lindeperg , that may well earn our respect and you may deserve our sympathy , but it will not win our vote for your report .
It is high time we limited immigration into Europe .
Only then will we have a chance of integrating those who already live here , and that should be our priority .
Mr President , firstly I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Lehne and Mrs Lindeperg on the enormous amount of work they have put into the three reports we are discussing jointly this evening .
I can support Mrs Lindeperg 's report without hesitation .
It must be sensible when subsidiary protection issues will be an area of growing importance for the EU , for Member States to operate similar procedures and a similar level of social provision for all refugees .
With respect to Mr Lehne 's report on the admission of third country nationals , one can only share the report 's view that the draft convention is unbalanced with unnecessary rigidity in many areas and with unworkable elements in others .
However , despite my acknowledgement of Mr Lehne 's hard work , I have some problems with his report on visas for third country nationals .
The main areas of difficulty are : firstly , the fact of his adding to the visa-required list a visa-exempt list ; secondly , the ruling-out of Member States ' right to impose national visa regimes in certain circumstances like those we have experienced in the United Kingdom recently ; thirdly , while I acknowledge the progress made by the Bulgarian and Romanian authorities in combating illegal immigration , the reality is that significant numbers of Romanian and Bulgarian nationals continue to make poorly-founded claims for asylum in Member States of the European Union .
Despite this , however , I intend to support the report , primarily because I completely endorse the rapporteur 's view that visas should be not be required for individuals who hold residence permits in any state in the Union .
As long as he continues to press the point that residents of the European Union should have the same rights and same duties as citizens I have to be in favour of this report .
Madam President , Mr Lehne and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs have spent a great deal of time familiarising themselves with the Commission 's proposal relating to the Convention on rules of admission , and I appreciate their efforts .
I have followed with particular interest the various twists and turns of the committee 's deliberations .
Numerous demands have been made , many of which touch on one or two issues that are absolutely central to the proposal . It is those that I should now like to comment on .
The first concerns family reunification , which is a fundamental right laid down in international law .
The Member States of the Union , through international agreements , have established the importance of the family for the welfare and well-being of the individual .
This bodes well for agreement on a common line to be followed , but as ever , the question is how far should we go ?
The concept of family varies from one Member State to another , and the same applies to age limits .
In both instances , my proposal means a step towards a closer approximation within the Union .
The discussions in the Council of Ministers will show whether there is scope to advance our positions further , which the Commission naturally welcomes .
Secondly , integration requires stability and a long-term perspective .
The objective must be that immigrants are able to live under the same conditions as those enjoyed by European citizens , a vision that should run through all the policy initiatives on immigrants .
Consequently , our proposal also addresses the question of the rights to be offered to Europe 's immigrants .
In this respect , my first thoughts are focused on the nationals of third countries who have lived legally in Europe for many years .
In the proposal , we have identified the following basic areas in which we think our citizens and immigrants should receive the same treatment : access to the labour market and freedom to pursue an activity as a self-employed person , basic education , vocational training , trade union rights , freedom of association , and access to the housing market and social assistance .
We have also taken up the question of freedom of movement for nationals of third countries .
For example , it would be reasonable for permanently domiciled immigrants to apply for jobs that are not filled in other Member States .
The alternative is a segregated Europe with all the attendant problems of discrimination , social tension and instability .
As one might expect , the views in the Council of Ministers differ widely on this issue .
Consequently , I had hoped to be able to count on a clear expression of support from the European Parliament .
Now it seems as though this is not to be , which is deeply disappointing .
Nevertheless , I have no intention of withdrawing the Convention .
The underlying causes of current migration are largely unchanged .
People are looking for a better life for themselves or their children .
There are no longer any uninhabited continents , and migrants therefore look for places which they can physically reach .
Europe will continue to be an attractive destination , a state of affairs we should accept as permanent and normal , instead of regarding it as a passing and somewhat dramatic occurrence .
Furthermore , a strategy for a common policy on migration is a natural consequence of integration and the idea that similar social and economic conditions should prevail throughout Europe , with no one being left behind .
I would assume that the ideas contained in the Lehne report will be taken into account in the forthcoming negotiations .
Naturally the Commission will do its best to ensure that progress is made .
Mrs Lindeperg , in her report , addresses the issue of protection for people who flee their homes but do not fulfil the requirements laid down in the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees - what we sometimes call supplementary forms of international protection .
The rapporteur urges the Commission to begin work at the earliest opportunity on harmonisation of the European Union 's asylum policies .
I am sure the House will be pleased to learn that this work is already in hand .
As a beginning , I have put forward a proposal for a directive on asylum procedures within the Union .
At the request of the German Presidency , I will soon be submitting a working document on the subject .
The aim is to begin discussions on the points at issue as early as the spring .
Secondly , we have now begun work on adapting the Commission 's proposals on temporary protection and burden-sharing to meet the requirements of the new Treaty .
As you know , we have been putting in a great deal of hard work on this since the Commission submitted its original proposal in 1997 .
The issue will be discussed for the third time at ministerial level during the informal meeting of the Council in Berlin at the end of the week .
But despite all this , the Member States are still a long way from reaching a decision .
If there is no agreement by the time the new Treaty enters into force , we shall have no alternative but to submit entirely new instruments .
In my view , this is what will happen .
Thirdly , the adaptation of the Eurodac Convention is another major task .
Last December , the Council of Ministers decided to freeze work on Eurodac , wishing to wait until the Amsterdam Treaty had entered into force before further negotiations .
During the meeting , the Commission was also asked to submit a new proposal in the form of a regulation .
Such an adaptation of Eurodac will mean a great deal of work , and it goes without saying that it should begin immediately .
The work on this area alone will take up much of the time between now and next June .
In the longer term , the new Treaty stipulates minimum standards for supplementary protection .
This is in fact mentioned as a key point in the action plan on freedom , security and justice which the Council approved on 4 December .
Asylum policy in general and supplementary protection in particular will accordingly be the focus of considerable attention during the coming years .
Consequently , the Lindeperg report makes a welcome and constructive contribution to the discussion on the future direction of asylum policy in Europe .
Madam President , my thanks to Mr Lehne for his excellent report .
This consultation of the European Parliament completes the process that began with the annulment by the Court of Justice in June 1997 of Regulation No 2317 / 95 laying down the list of third countries whose citizens had to be in possession of a visa .
We need first to put this into context .
The regulation that was annulled was based on Article 100c of the Maastricht Treaty .
According to that article , Community jurisdiction in relation to visas is limited , firstly , to determining the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing the external borders and , secondly , the introduction of a uniform format for visas .
If it has to be adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the new regulation will be adopted by the Council again on the basis on Article 100c . That circumstance , which cannot be avoided , makes matters still more complex .
This tricky situation has been well depicted by Mr Lehne , and some of your amendments reflect this .
My view is dictated by the evolving legislative context .
I wish also to draw attention to the prospect of incorporating into the Union the progress achieved through the Schengen Agreement and its consequences for visa policy .
I turn now to the amendments , which I shall separate into two categories : first of all , there are many amendments based on the evolving legislative framework that I have just described and which I would roughly classify as anticipatory amendments : Amendment No 1 , concerning the title , describes the regulation as provisional ; Amendments Nos 3 , 7 and 11 , relating to the recitals , include a number of references to changes that will be introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
But when we look at the actual articles of the regulation , the amendments I have described as anticipatory are incompatible with the provisions of the current Article 100c .
Let me cite to you , by way of example , Amendments Nos 18 , 19 , 20 and 21 , concerning the various aspects of visa issue , an area that is not at the moment - and I stress for the moment - an area of Community responsibility .
In these circumstances , it is not legally possible for the Commission to accept those amendments which anticipate an area of Community jurisdiction that will not exist until the Treaty of Amsterdam enters into force .
Secondly , the European Parliament is proposing a number of amendments that fall perfectly within the scope of Article 100c : these respect the parameters of that article , but we do have to consider them , paradoxical though this may seem , in the light of the forthcoming entry into force of Amsterdam .
I can explain this better by taking as an example Amendment No 5 concerning the criteria for determining which countries will be subject to the visa requirement .
The way in which this issue is dealt with , viewed in terms of the existing Article 100c , will be significantly different once Article 62 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam has given the Community the additional authority to draw up the list of countries whose citizens will not be required to be in possession of a visa .
The prospects for achieving total harmonisation of visa policy , something which Parliament wants , moreover , therefore mean that we have to look again at the issue wearing our Amsterdam-tinted spectacles , so to speak .
I do not , however , wish to be absolutely negative about the possibility of accepting the amendments Parliament is proposing as part of the new consultation on the following regulation .
The prospect of the now imminent entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty will bring about profound changes with regard to visas ; new powers will be transferred to the Community in relation to the measures to be adopted in these sectors .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has set definite time-limits , while the recent Commission and Council action plan on the area of freedom , security and justice actually provides for more rapid adoption of some visa-related measures .
The Community must shoulder the obligations its new powers bring with them , and the Commission will have to assume its own responsibilities without delay .
I can assure you that the work Parliament has done as part of this new consultation will not have been in vain .
I am also certain that some of the proposed amendments will be largely taken into consideration in the new proposal for a regulation that the Commission has included in its own programme of work , on which Parliament has recently delivered its opinion .
I shall conclude , Madam President , with a reference to the question that has been raised concerning Bulgaria and Romania .
The inclusion of a third country on the common list of countries whose citizens have to have a visa is based on an assessment of the main criteria involving the risks to security and the threat of illegal immigration .
Having said that , the assessment made at the time the regulation is adopted is not set in stone .
And with that in mind , the Community and Bulgaria and Romania have on several occasions in recent months had the opportunity of discussing this problem , which has a variety of implications .
From those various contacts , through the association councils at ministerial level and through correspondence , it has become apparent that Bulgaria and Romania are making considerable efforts , not least with the help of the Union and supported by the PHARE programme , in a whole range of important areas , with a view to the decision that will have to be taken on their inclusion in the common list .
Without entering into detail , I would just mention the strengthening of controls at external frontiers , the conclusion of readmission agreements with other states , security of travel documents , the fight against crime and so on .
The progress that has been made is , I assure you , being closely monitored , thanks to the presence of experts in the field .
The view of the European Parliament will probably be a decisive factor as far as the Commission is concerned , at the proper time , once the Amsterdam Treaty has entered into force .
Thank you for that speech , Mr Monti , and for the explanations you have given to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0020 / 99 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council ( 8956 / 98 - C4-0537 / 98-96 / 0200 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations ( Rapporteur : Mrs Baldi ) .
Madam President , it is once again time for us to discuss important health and environmental questions at an hour that is scarcely popular either with those responsible for the report or us who are involved in the debate .
It is a remarkable coincidence that in Strasbourg environmental work always seems to take place on Tuesday nights .
In every other way , the report we are discussing tonight is very important .
It concerns many citizens of the European Union , since it deals with the classification and labelling of dangerous preparations .
The topic is particularly relevant for Finland , Sweden and Austria , for whom the problem of regulating chemicals was a matter of concern in their membership negotiations .
Transitional arrangements were made for all three countries allowing them to retain for a time their own legislation on chemical preparations , which was more stringent than that in force in the Union .
I have to admit that I had serious misgivings during the first reading of the directive .
The position adopted by the rapporteur and then by the Commission was , in my view , far too lenient , bearing in mind the dangers associated with chemicals .
Consequently , we had a fairly intensive discussion on the subject at first reading and , as a result , the outcome now looks quite promising .
Many of the earlier amendments have considerably sharpened up the wording of the document , thereby bringing into focus the health aspects for European citizens .
It is particularly important from the point of view of those people who have to work with these types of chemical preparations every day .
The obligation to provide safety data sheets means that information is available both on the components of the preparations and on how they should be handled .
It is essential that everyone has access to these data sheets , regardless of the size of the enterprise - everyone is entitled to a safe working environment .
Classification and labelling should not only be carried out where the danger is apparent or life-threatening , but also where the preparations are allergy-forming , cause irritation or are harmful to the environment .
In other words , the rapporteur has done a good job and deserves to be congratulated .
The classification of preparations is not an easy subject to discuss , but Mrs Baldi has certainly succeeded .
Nevertheless , I should just like to bring up a minor point if I may .
Even though it was agreed in committee , I cannot really see the point of Amendment No 1 .
Perhaps we are only further complicating a matter which should really have left Parliament as quickly as possible once a decision had been reached .
But the card has been played , and now it is up to the Commission to make a move .
For the future , let us hope that many more alternatives are found to replace these dangerous preparations , so that we can be spared having to discuss how they are to be regulated and concentrate on finding substitutes instead .
None of these preparations can be said to enhance either the environment or people 's health in the long term .
We must therefore begin by doing our best to find suitable substitutes .
Madam President , the title of this debate is so boring that many people must believe it makes no difference .
But behind the words packaging , classification and labelling of dangerous preparations there are some important rules for the environment and , above all , for the working environment .
In practical terms , the common position means that painters will now have information about what they are working with .
From 1 July 2000 , volatile organic solvents will be labelled for their narcotic effects .
You may ask yourselves whether this kind of information ought not to be a human right .
The improper use of organic solvents was already causing problems 20 years ago .
In Denmark , we call it the painter syndrome .
Now we are going to get the safety data sheets for which Denmark has been campaigning for many years .
We have finally silenced the oil industry , which tried to block the directive with every means at its disposal .
The idea that painters are less intelligent than other people has been dispelled for ever , and can in future only be used in history books as an example of how a debate can sometimes degenerate for economic reasons .
It should be clear to everyone that the EU is developing in the right direction and that the working environment and public health are now being improved , which is the only way to go if the EU project is to have public support .
We will now continue the good work of gaining recognition of the long-term effects of solvents on the sense of balance , hearing and sight , and explaining the effects of hormone-like chemicals .
Chemicals are still on our agenda in the EU .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission , I should like to congratulate Mrs Baldi on a very worthwhile effort .
There has been excellent cooperation on this highly technical proposal .
Thank goodness we have finally reached the last stage before adoption .
The proposal particularly concerns Finland , Sweden and Austria , and it offers an acceptable solution to the difficulties they experienced over their existing legislation on the products in question and pesticides in their membership negotiations .
As we know , this led to temporary transitional arrangements for those countries .
At first reading , the European Parliament supported the proposal 's underlying principles .
At the same time , Parliament had to decide on the 26 amendments , which were also adopted .
The Commission was able to include the majority of these in the common position , and the discussions in the Council also produced results .
In the Commission 's view , the common position adopted by the Council meets both the objectives laid down in Article 100a of the Treaty , namely the establishment and functioning of the internal market and a high level of protection .
Furthermore , the proposal also takes account of the needs of new Member States .
Consequently , the Commission is endeavouring to ensure prompt adoption of the directive .
Now , at second reading , Parliament has tabled three amendments , all of which the Commission supports .
The first aims to change the committee procedure from type 3b to type 3a , which marks a return to the Commission 's original proposal .
It so happens that this was the position we adopted in the Council , but it was unanimously voted down .
We still think that this amendment would make it easier to carry through the directive .
The second amendment , which we also accept , is intended to clarify and improve a particular provision .
The third amendment , which the Commission had already approved at first reading , was as you know rejected by the Council , so we would like to retable this amendment as well .
The Commission warmly welcomes the practical approach adopted by Parliament in only submitting three amendments at this reading .
As I have already said , the Commission finds all three acceptable .
Naturally , I hope the Council will also give its approval , so that we can avoid conciliation .
It is now up to Parliament and the Council of Ministers to make a decision .
Thank you , Mrs Gradin .
I am also sorry , Mrs Hulthén , that there are not more Members here to follow the debate on this very important report , but that is how things are .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The sitting was closed at 0.10 a.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on a point of order under Rule 9 - Code of conduct .
Last month Parliament rightly demanded openness and transparency with respect to the Commission , yet Parliament at the moment is being hypocritical in respect of its own openness and transparency .
What is sauce for the goose should be sauce for the gander .
Rule 9 ( 2 ) and Annex I ( Article 3 ) indicate that declarations of Members ' interests should be available to the public .
At the moment the register is only available in the three working places - Luxembourg , Brussels and Strasbourg .
It is very difficult for me to defend that when I receive questions in my constituency .
If someone wants to look at the register , they have to travel abroad .
Mr President , I should like to ask you whether you will give an interpretation of the Rules to say that ' available to the public ' means that it should be available in Parliament 's information offices .
If you are not prepared to do that , will you refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities because , as a member of that committee , you are very well aware that it was the clear intention of the committee that ' available to the public ' should mean in each Member State ?
Mr Ford , I will check the matter you have raised .
In fact there was an amendment asking for the register to be made available in every Member State but Parliament rejected it .
I cannot give an interpretation against what was clearly the will of the House at that moment .
I will refer the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , as you request , so that it can submit the appropriate proposal , if necessary .
In which case it would be necessary to translate the declarations from Members which , at present , are only available in their original languages .
Mr President , you will remember that I raised that very issue last week in the Conference of Presidents .
I suggested that , given our insistence that the Commission is more open , there is a very simple way in which we can be in the vanguard of actually demonstrating transparency on this issue , and that is by attaching the declaration of Members ' interests to each Member 's particular entry on Parliament 's website .
That would immediately demonstrate to everybody that we were both transparent and prepared in the public interest to put our record completely publicly on the website .
Mrs Green , I agree , but I cannot give an interpretation on a very sensitive matter contrary to what was decided .
It was not decided that these declarations would be public : the House decided to make them available to the public .
The Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities could make this proposal and , if it obtained the necessary majority , that would be excellent and it could be put before the House for ratification .
This would be better and everyone then would have full knowledge of the proposal which , personally , I have nothing against .
Mr President , we all received your letter saying that the Bureau has decided to alter Parliament 's information strategy .
From now on ten or twelve subjects of interest will be selected from the week 's part-session , which Parliament 's press service section will publish .
At present we have a daily report giving information on the previous afternoon 's sitting .
Today 's report focuses on Mr Barzanti 's report , which is most definitely of interest as far as the issue of information is concerned .
I am worried what the impact on Parliament 's profile will be if only ten or twelve subjects of interest are selected from the week 's part-session .
How , for example , will voluntary institutions acquire information on issues the press are not necessarily reporting , and which are not necessarily the main news stories of the day ?
I am rather worried about this , and I will be writing to you on the matter , Mr President . I would like a reassurance that this change with regard to Parliament 's press service will not lead to a situation where citizens are deprived of information on the work of Parliament .
Mrs Ojala , the Bureau took this decision after studying Parliament 's information policy . It takes the view that if Parliament details everything that has been debated in the House , then ultimately of course nothing will be publicised , because the newspapers cannot publicise 30 or 40 different issues .
If we want the media to make the public aware of the work we are doing , we naturally need to select those issues that might be of most interest to them .
This is a purely technical problem involving communication and the transfer of information .
At the same time , the Rainbow will be available much more quickly so that everyone can read it as soon as possible .
Mr President , we should spare a thought this morning for the victims of yesterday 's avalanche in the Chamonix valley which swept away around 20 chalets .
In this winter holiday period , this incident should serve to remind us that the mountains form a specific area which rarely gives the European Union cause for concern .
I propose that this issue be included in the topical and urgent debate during the part-session in March in the context of natural disasters . In the meantime , we should send the victims and their families a message of support .
Thank you , Mrs Leperre-Verrier .
I shall of course be sending Parliament 's condolences to the families concerned .
Mr President , this morning Parliament was besieged by police officers and others , and I have read in the press that Parliament will suffer another round of sieges , this time by farmers , especially from the Alsace region .
I wanted to ask you whether you could inform us what has brought this on , what is happening , and whether you have already had requests from the farmers that they should be received .
It is clear that they wish to submit requests through the Members of this House and that they are not simply surrounding Parliament for the good of their health .
It would be interesting if we had a briefing on this matter , as farming is going through a critical phase and we have debated these problems on several occasions , both last week and this .
Mr Ephremidis , it would seem that they are not going to perform any gymnastics because they are coming on tractors .
Nevertheless , President Santer , Commissioner Fischler , Mr Colino , chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and myself are going to meet them to find out what exactly their demands are .
Mr President , I should also like to know what the European Parliament is planning to do about today 's demonstration .
It is important that we make an effort to listen to the demands of European farmers and that we have a delegation ready to meet them when they arrive .
I think the actions I have proposed would be effective .
It would be a constructive move to meet the farmers who are here and to answer their questions when they arrive at the European Parliament .
Mr Lindqvist , I would remind you that Parliament does not have any forces to maintain public order . That is a matter for the French police here .
We have therefore naturally taken no measures in this respect .
I would ask you all to let the matter rest , now that we have given you information on this issue , since there is nothing to be gained from discussing it any further .
Mr President , on the subject of Article 47 and natural disasters , such as snow and farmers , I would draw your attention to the fact that yesterday in the Netherlands - a country 325 kilometres long - we had tailbacks totalling 975 kilometres .
That is three times the length of our country , with the result that nobody could get in or out .
Could we not at some time , Mr President , discuss road pricing and how to relieve road congestion in Europe under the topical and urgent procedure ?
Mr Wijsenbeek , I am sure you are well aware of the procedure for topical and urgent debates .
If you believe that this matter is urgent , you should ask for it to be included in a forthcoming debate .
Mr President , I should like to ask for your advice .
Yesterday I had a question down to the Commission and today I have a similar one to the Council .
In fact , it was so far down on the list that , naturally , it was not taken .
This morning I received the reply to my question , and it was the greatest fudge and cowardly reply I have ever heard from the Commission .
Mr President , what recourse have we in this Parliament to such cowardly responses to serious questions ?
My question concerned the absolute destruction caused by the seals in the North Atlantic fisheries .
It has now been conclusively proven scientifically and yet we here in the European Union are not capable nor even have the courage ...
Mr Killilea , I do not know what we can do .
However , what we cannot do is to go into the issue now , as this is not the appropriate occasion .
Mr President , I find it interesting that Mr Killilea quotes scientific evidence .
However , on another issue : I should like to know under what criteria you agree to meet certain demonstrators who come here to Strasbourg ?
Do you take into account farmers on the periphery of Europe - Ireland , Greece , Spain or wherever - who cannot get here ?
Under what criteria do you meet people ?
People in close proximity can come , other people cannot .
Mrs McKenna , what you are saying reminds me of an anecdote .
Once , after a demonstration had been announced , a Spanish minister for the interior said to the British ambassador : ' Do you want us to send more police ? ' The British ambassador replied : ' No , send me fewer demonstrators ' .
Laughter
I do not think that Parliament is providing demonstrators or organising the demonstration .
Therefore , I cannot answer your question .
Before moving on to the objections concerning the topical and urgent debate , I should like to congratulate our colleague Mr Menrad , who is celebrating his sixtieth birthday .
We hope he celebrates many more years with us .
Applause
( The Minutes were approved )
EMU and enlargement
The next item is the report ( A4-0030 / 99 ) by Mr Barros Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on constitutional consequences of EMU in the context of enlargement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report takes as its starting point the undeniable success of the adoption of the single currency after a rigorously applied convergence process .
The achievement of Economic and Monetary Union , with an independent European Central Bank , is a quantum leap for the European Union , leading to the emergence of a genuine supranational political authority with responsibilities in matters of monetary and exchange-rate policies that once belonged to the sovereign States .
However , the institutional establishment of Economic and Monetary Union has been unbalanced , in that the power to centrally manage monetary policy is not matched by any real powers for the Union to effectively coordinate economic policies by means of broad guidelines or any binding multilateral surveillance .
At the same time , the inadequacy of the Union 's arrangements for ensuring transparency and democratic accountability in the activity of the European Central Bank has become apparent .
In order to deal with these problems , my report recommends two approaches : one is to explore in depth the opportunities offered by the existing Treaties , in particular through the interinstitutional agreement already proposed by the European Parliament , and the other is to reform the Treaties , now that the successful introduction of the euro has eliminated the risk that starting the review process might jeopardise EMU itself - the famous ' Pandora 's box ' theory .
The current situation , that of a common monetary authority without matching political authority , highlights the Union 's democratic deficit and also conflicts with national economic and social policies , where a possible clash with centralised monetary policy could undermine that rigorous centralised policy as regards the need to safeguard the overriding aim of maintaining price stability . However , we should also be seeking to guarantee all of the European Union 's policies , including job creation and fighting unemployment , at the same level .
The report therefore recommends that EMU should be accompanied by effective means of establishing and guaranteeing coordinated economic policies in Europe so as to promote solidarity , economic and social cohesion and equal opportunities among all citizens of the Member States . This calls for a constitutional framework , the only elements of which I should like to highlight for the time being are an Economic and Social Union as a counterweight to Economic and Monetary Union , and a new social contract to underpin intra-European solidarity .
This should involve a minimum of social harmonisation : labour legislation , social security , combating social exclusion and creating jobs .
The proposals on Monetary Union are intended to guarantee the independence of the European Central Bank while strengthening its democratic accountability .
The proposals on Economic Union are essentially intended to guarantee effective coordination and coherence between the Union 's economic policies and those of the Member States , by means of a set of binding ' policy mix ' policies .
For that purpose , given the shortcomings of the Stability Pact , the recommendation will have to be replaced by a decision on the annual preparation of the broad economic policy guidelines and the multilateral surveillance of their application .
As far as the institutions are concerned , the report calls for Parliament 's monitoring and codecision roles to be reinforced in all areas of EMU .
It also recommends strengthening the initiative-taking and political impetus of the Commission , whose political accountability would also be improved in that way .
It further calls for improved coordination of the Council 's work so as to give macroeconomic regulation priority over the tendency to centralise all powers in ECOFIN . And it recommends monitoring the formal economic coordination carried out by the Euro-11 Council by means of legitimate democratic machinery , and participation by national parliaments in monitoring EMU .
As far as EMU 's external representation is concerned , the report recommends speaking with one voice - to be decided upon jointly by the Council , Commission and European Central Bank , according to their respective powers in international financial bodies like the IMF or G-8 .
The aim will be to use the power conferred by the euro , a monetary unit that may even challenge the supremacy of the dollar , to economically regulate globalisation in such as way as to promote justice and to challenge the hegemony of the USA .
Finally , I should like to refer to the proposals for new European policies which , according to the report , are vital in view of the introduction of EMU . These are : a guarantee that employment will be the Union 's top economic priority ; harmonisation of taxes ; a social policy promoting and safeguarding the European social model ; and a federal-type budget that promotes economic and social cohesion and helps us to tackle crises or asymmetrical shocks in one or more Member States .
We do not intend to call EMU into question but we want this quantum leap forward to be mirrored by corresponding democratic progress in the political , economic and social fields .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , given the lack of time , I will mention just three issues : the coordination of national economic policies ; the legal framework for supervision ; and the external representation of the monetary union .
On the first issue , the current situation is unsatisfactory .
This is because we were told in Amsterdam not to touch the monetary union title for fear that this would open Pandora 's box from which anything could emerge .
This was just a pretext to hide the disquiet , uncertainty and lack of conviction of many governments .
However , this problem , which was pushed under the carpet then , is now reappearing .
We have one monetary policy for 15 different economic policies .
Clearly , we should try to balance this situation from an operational and functional point of view but this is not being achieved .
We were told that recommendations would be made , represented by the infamous broad economic policy guidelines .
However , we realised straightaway that these guidelines were a disaster .
This was because the representatives of the national administrations and national finance departments all decided to maintain the status quo and refrain from any criticism of the policies conducted by their respective countries .
The result was that these guidelines have been reduced to formulaic and generalised declarations of principle which commit no-one .
This approach was therefore a failure and has resulted in the development of totally divergent and uncoordinated economic policies .
This situation should be viewed in terms of the striking contrast between the US economy which is bursting with health and the languid European economy .
Since the triumphant introduction of the euro , reality , in the shape of inadequate national economic policies , has reestablished its grip .
I do not want to cause a political controversy , but we must recognise that the fact these problems have not been resolved just because once again the majority of those in power are Socialists .
The second issue involves the legal framework for supervision .
There is not yet sufficient awareness in political circles of the enormous changes that the international financial markets have experienced .
Politicians believe that the current system , in which each country organises its own banking supervision , is adequate .
But times are changing .
The Internet and globalisation are now prevalent and the instruments for supervising these financial markets are clearly inadequate , even at European level .
An extraordinary transformation is therefore needed mentally and culturally to cope with this .
Clearly , the current situation in Europe is unsatisfactory and it must change .
I am not alone in thinking this , as reasonable and moderate people like Mr Lamfalussy also share this view .
I cannot go into detail on this issue due to lack of time . Also , I want to briefly mention the third issue of external representation .
We have seen the results of this .
At the moment , the people of Europe are still incapable of speaking with one voice on monetary problems , even though they have one monetary policy .
We keep returning to the same problem of everyone wanting to retain their authority and refusing the Commission the right to speak on their behalf . This means that , in the G7 or elsewhere , we are paying our dues but we cannot make decisions or exercise any influence .
These three issues must be resolved .
I note that the Council is not present .
I know that Mr de Silguy is convinced of the validity of my thoughts , but it is the Council that must be convinced . I believe that the Commission and Parliament would do better to work together in order to try to achieve this .
Mr President , in his excellent report the rapporteur has rightly pointed to the further problems of institutional questions in the context of monetary union but also of enlargement .
We must indeed put far greater intellectual and political emphasis on finding means of resolving these questions , in relation to the international representation of EMU but above all in relation to policy coordination .
On the international aspect I would add that just as the rapporteur said , we must speak with one voice here .
But in this context we must also give the Commission , as the motor of European integration and guardian of the Treaties , equal rights of participation in this international representation .
Parliament must continue to support that .
What is particularly important is that we use the successful launch of monetary union in order to reduce the democratic deficit in the European Union .
It really is time for the European Parliament to be given a codecision right that is consistent with the further democratic development of this European Union ; that right must apply not just to the annual economic report and the economic policy guidelines but also to the whole procedure for determining the excessive deficit and to the deliberations on the stability plans and convergence programmes .
This is particularly necessary with a view to enlargement as well as to monetary union and the form it assumes .
In this connection I want to point to one other matter .
The idea of the Euro-11 Council may be useful and may be very pragmatic .
I am not criticising , indeed I am welcoming the Council 's efforts to improve economic coordination and begin preliminary discussions on the kind of policy mix that can act as a positive incentive to growth , investment and employment .
After all , the crucial point is that today we can no longer just have the European Central Bank responsible for monetary policy , the social partners for wage policy and the states for financial policy .
We need all these players to act together .
The European Parliament must not be kept out of this interplay .
The Euro-11 Council is not an institution enshrined in the Treaties .
So we really do need an interinstitutional agreement .
I very much hope that the German and the Finnish Presidencies will find a procedure for including the European Parliament in these discussions and that we who represent the people of Europe can actually offer some impetus towards achieving a balanced policy mix that promotes employment in the European Union .
This interinstitutional agreement is overdue .
We called for it in 1994 and it must be concluded before the year 2000 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I quite agree that following the launch of the euro we need a more closely coordinated economic policy .
This is urgently needed if we are to round off the whole project and make it effective .
But I would warn against using the term ' counterpart ' .
We do not want a counterpart to the European Central Bank ; rather , we want to complement it .
We do not want a political counterpart that runs counter to the European Central Bank 's search for stability , for that is something that is beyond dispute and irrevocable ; nor do we support the attempts to undermine the Stability Pact through the policy mix .
I think we must make it clear that this complementary policy of coordination is the key to supporting stability , to making stability a prerequisite , to ensuring that stability is not one aim among many others ; it is on this basis that we must pursue a sensible economic policy aimed at growth , progress and employment .
That is a different approach from the one Mrs Randzio-Plath put forward just now .
We also believe that the kind of social contract envisaged is not acceptable as it stands .
We want to see an approximation of social policies , but not to opt for a social contract that acts as a counterpart to the European Central Bank . After all , until now we have been pursuing a sensible social policy based on minimum standards rather than harmonisation , and I believe that is an important aspect that we must not forget !
Mr President , allow me to make a final remark on external representation .
We must emphasise the need to upgrade the Commission 's role , as Mr Herman also pointed out .
European economic and monetary union comes under the first pillar .
It is a Community task .
But the finance ministers are acting as though it were an intergovernmental matter , in terms of both external representation and the role they are taking upon themselves with the Euro-11 Council . That is why Parliament should now make it clear that we will not allow a Community task to be watered down into an intergovernmental task , just to flatter the vanity of the finance ministers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , anybody reading the title of this report would think it was concerned with the constitutional aspects of EMU in the light of enlargement .
But that does not seem to be the case at all , because there is just one reference to enlargement , and then only indirectly in Recital A. The rapporteur is not really concerned with enlargement and its consequences for EMU or vice versa .
The rapporteur has used this report to argue for an enforceable and compulsory policy mix of social , fiscal and economic measures which must be as mandatory as the measures on EMU .
I do not doubt that the rapporteur believes in all good faith that growth and employment are things which can be decreed , despite the wealth of evidence to the contrary .
I and my group do not share this belief , and a large majority of us will consequently be voting against the Barros Moura report .
That said , I should like to clarify our position .
We support the European Parliament 's increased and more on-going involvement in determining global guidelines .
It is just that we do not want guidelines to become directives .
We therefore support the proposed interinstitutional agreement .
We are in favour of social convergence , but we do not believe these minium standards can be imposed from above .
Finally , we most certainly support strict and clear rules of jurisprudence .
But we do not believe that a Council of Ministers - even if it is made up of wise men - can bring employment and prosperity to Europe by means of an enforced policy mix .
Mr President , despite the welcome I would give to the report by Mr Barros Moura , to be frank , I feel there is still much to be done and improvements to be made .
I have three remarks to make in this respect .
Firstly , you say that there is no point in calling into question the foundations of Economic and Monetary Union .
However , in my opinion , the current economic realities , combined with social tensions and social and national conflicts , will result in the contract being redefined .
In particular , there is a fundamental structural division in the legal framework and in our institutional procedures between the economic sphere and the social sphere .
This is causing the social sphere to be marginalised .
Moreover , you are only considering the basic minimums .
In this respect , there is one point in Mr Herman 's opinion which I particularly support : the reunification of the procedures for coordinating employment policies with economic policies .
This would be a very important step in the right direction .
You also accept the budgetary stability pact in its current state .
In my opinion , we must recognise the need for public expenditure to be increased in order to finance development .
This does not involve the budgetary deficit in itself , but rather the financing of development .
Lastly , with regard to the statutes of the European Central Bank and the European System of Central Banks , you are only considering limited improvements .
I believe that we need a kind of framework directive to regulate the European System of Central Banks .
Secondly , and more briefly , you are staking everything on the coordination of economic policies .
However , as has been said , there is a lack of will , content and means .
In my opinion , we need a greatly improved democratic method .
The role of the European Parliament in debating economic and social policy choices will become essential , in coordination , I hope , with the national parliaments .
This cannot be left , as you propose , to a simple consultation and debate on a single text from the Commission .
Finally , will the relationship between the European Parliament and the European Central Bank involve the Bank 's policy being legitimised by Parliament or a political force being established to counterbalance the ECB ?
We need a dialogue within a political framework so that the EU policies which serve social and sustainable development objectives will necessarily be involved in monetary policy choices .
The work must therefore continue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when this House gave its assent to the third stage of monetary union on 2 May last year , many speakers maintained that this common currency would lead almost automatically to political union which , thanks to its own internal logic , would remove the imbalance between economic and political integration in Europe .
For those with the insight to realise it , that was a dangerous illusion even at that time .
I believe that today it is clear to us all that it was an illusion .
Anyone who thought the common currency must and would necessarily lead to a common economic policy , then to an employment policy and finally to a social union is now disappointed .
One employment summit after another has failed .
The economic players of European integration will not manage to create a political Europe : they cannot because many people are far too interested in creating a market Europe and not a political Europe .
Mr President , there is a good deal to welcome in Mr Barros Moura 's report .
Whatever Mr Voggenhuber says , EMU will certainly have great political consequences .
It is premature to expect to see an immediate and fully fledged economic and social union after five weeks .
There will be great political consequences from EMU which have very often being underplayed or even denied by its proponents .
Mr Barros Moura is to be congratulated for highlighting those political consequences .
He is also to be congratulated on seeking to ensure that EMU will not widen the democratic deficit more than is absolutely necessary .
No doubt it will widen : an independent and barely accountable central bank publishing its minutes someway down the line seems to me to be utterly undesirable .
However , Mr Barros Moura makes various sensible proposals for ensuring that the democratic deficit is not too greatly widened .
Nevertheless , I have several concerns about the report and I speak here on behalf of the other British Labour MEPs .
In particular , we do not welcome the proposal to enshrine the euro-X Council in the Treaty .
Already four EU members are not actually members of Monetary Union and , as enlargement proceeds , other members will join the European Union without taking on the euro .
We must be wary of institutionalising a two-tier Europe in the way that entrenching the euro-X Council in the Treaty would .
We also do not accept the need to harmonise taxes by qualified majority .
Already , not only in Britain , but across Europe there is great scepticism and concern about the effects that monetary union will have and it can only be a success if it proceeds by consensus .
To try and force people into tax harmonisation in this way will certainly not help achieve that consensus in the United Kingdom .
For that reason also , the reference to a federal style budgetary system was decidedly unhelpful : anybody here who knows anything about British politics knows you must never use the ' f ' word in a European context if you are trying to persuade people to get more closely involved in the European Union .
For those and other reasons the British Labour MEPs will be abstaining on Mr Barros Moura 's report .
Mr President , as spokesman for the Group of the European People 's Party , I would like to close this debate by saying , on behalf of my group , that we are going to support the report by Mr Barros Moura .
I believe that this report and our support for Mr Barros Moura prove that the consensus needed on the implications of Economic and Monetary Union does exist .
I also believe that the decision of 2 May is of great significance .
As far as Spanish people are concerned , for two centuries 2 May has represented the rebellion against the French .
However , I believe that from 1998 on , 2 May will mean something else : it will mean that we are building Europe together .
In my opinion , the most important element of the report by Mr Barros Moura is that it looks to the future .
There is no doubt that the way forward is fraught with difficulties , since we are building something that is completely new .
I think it was Baron Lamfalussy who said that in the process of building a single currency there were more ' ifs ' and more conditionals than in the famous poem ' If ' by Rudyard Kipling .
There are clearly many ' ifs ' along the path towards the creation of the single currency .
Mr Barros Moura outlines the problems we are going to face in the future .
He does this very well in respect of the role of the European Parliament and the new European policies .
I realise that there are many things that Mr Spiers does not like - he seems to me to be more Old Labour than New Labour .
However , Mr Spiers , it will happen in the end .
Whether we like it or not , we will eventually have to bring our fiscal policies more into line with each other , and decisions will have to be taken by qualified majority .
In an enlarged Europe with 28 or 30 Member States - which is the issue Mr Barros Moura raises - it will be impossible for decisions to be taken unanimously .
Clearly , what we really want is consensus , but decisions will have to be taken if we want Europe to work .
This House has always led the way on the issue of European integration and I am sure that it wants Europe to work .
I believe that many of the points made by Mr Barros Moura are useful and will be useful in the future .
We will therefore support his report .
Cooperation on the euro requires self-discipline , which prevents certain acts of stupidity and forces countries to show more consideration to each other .
It is not a threat to employment .
It will benefit employment and social stability .
It is a safeguard against acts of stupidity carried out in the past to the detriment of prosperity and stability , especially by some social democratic governments .
But it is still the Social Democrats who believe they can protect us against the effects of the euro through new centralised control instruments .
That is complete nonsense !
On the contrary , the euro is what protects us against old-fashioned social democratic policies of devaluation , deficit and interference in the operation of central banks .
For those of us who come from a country which has lived with fixed exchange rate policies for 17 years , this has been the backbone of the prosperity , stability and employment we have enjoyed during that period .
We look forward to being able to join the euro and so enjoy its full benefits .
Mr President , when we adopted EMU and the euro we thought that , with the euro , politics was making a come-back in Europe , and I believe that Mr Barros Moura 's report proves this .
I think that it proves one thing above all : that the Amsterdam Treaty has already come to the end of its useful life and it is time that we took steps to revise it .
This is in fact what Mr Fischer said the other day in Parliament , and it is now being said by others in the German Presidency .
I read in the press , Mr President , that there are committees of wise men already working informally on revision of the Treaty .
I think that the European Parliament should be preparing rather more officially for this new revision , with all of us participating in it .
I think that Mr Barros Moura 's proposals are very good ones and I wish to highlight those relating to the interinstitutional agreement , which could give a political interpretation to the existing terms of the Treaty , to control of the Euro-11 Council - it is hypocritical to allow it to decide on policy and for us not to say anything on the matter - and to the Community 's policy and the pact on employment , without which neither the euro nor EMU has any legitimacy in the eyes of EU citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Amsterdam Treaty has been mentioned today , yet this Treaty was not even allowed to mention the institutional consequences of the transition to Economic and Monetary Union .
We are now considering this issue and not before time .
If we failed to do so , we would be allowing the intergovernmental approach to sneak in by the back door , which is something we do not want .
At first glance , I feel that there are three essential aspects to this issue .
Firstly , as stated by Mr Herzog , we need a closer link between the broad economic policy guidelines and the employment guidelines .
We have been calling for this for some time in this House .
Otherwise , the social sphere will remain an appendage of the economic sphere , which is not the best way to resolve the matters facing us .
Secondly , the external representation of the euro zone is clearly only just beginning .
This was a matter of urgency and that meant that a solution was cobbled together which is not satisfactory in the long term .
A more substantial solution must be found . Thirdly , the transition to EMU and the changeover to the euro will force us to adopt qualified majority voting , both in taxation and in the whole social sphere .
I now come to the crux of the matter .
The institutional consequences of the changeover to the euro cannot be analysed solely in the context of enlargement .
They must also be considered in the wider context of the institutional reform needed .
In this dual context , the existence of the Euro Council is positive because it ensures an element of effectiveness which we need .
However , it is just being created and we must think about the future .
We must therefore strengthen the democratic control of this body .
Given its effectiveness , it must be controlled and we must determine how it interacts with this House .
It must also be included in the overall institutional mechanism with regard to enlargement .
The essential issue in the reports by Mr Barros Moura and Mr Bourlanges is the interlinking of these two questions .
The ECOFIN Council cannot become the dominant Council and the General Affairs Council must regain its coordinating position .
If this means that it no longer deals with foreign affairs , then so be it .
However , we do need a Council to coordinate foreign affairs , the economic and financial situation and employment , but this role cannot be played by the ECOFIN Council .
Mr President , the report we are debating is moving towards greater centralisation of the economic and monetary policy of the Union and of the Member States which , in my view , goes beyond the ambitions of the architects of EMU , who of course are not in this Parliament .
It reinforces the institutional expression of a multi-speed Europe and , in the name of a single economic policy , it aims to bestow on ECOFIN characteristics of an economic government and , on the general guidelines of economic policy , a legal substance which will be compulsory for Member States .
These are choices which strengthen the policies of imposing a centralist Europe , and which reduce to zero the possibilities of Member States to shape their own economic and social policies . These are choices which give rise to concern among working people and the public at large , who are suffering the consequences of the choices made at Maastricht and over EMU and the stability pact .
It goes without saying , Mr President , that , under these conditions , we cannot support the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mr Barros Moura is to be welcomed , coming , as it does , just after the introduction of the euro .
It has come at a good time as it is useful to consider the consequences of Economic and Monetary Union and the imminent institutional reform of the Union prior to the next enlargement .
The Commission broadly supports many of the proposals and analyses in this report .
However , I believe that this work must be extended by looking towards the future , as Mr Méndez de Vigo just mentioned .
And this is the right time given the operating practices of Economic and Monetary Union and the dynamic created by the euro in other European policies and institutions .
In this respect , I would like to mention briefly two points in response to your questions .
The first point concerns the economic aspects of Economic and Monetary Union from an institutional perspective while the second relates to the effects of implementing Economic and Monetary Union on the institutional balance of the Community .
On the first point , EMU has its own unique structure , as several Members have pointed out , because it consists of a single monetary policy combined with separate national economic policies .
This is why we need to coordinate these policies and why the European Councils have for many years been defining the framework for increased coordination of economic policies .
However , this is not a question of establishing counterweights , as Mr Brok quite rightly pointed out .
This increased coordination is based on a whole series of instruments with which you are familiar .
These are the broad guidelines , the excessive deficits and the stability and growth pact . However , along with the Commission , I agree with your rapporteur when he says that the broad economic policy guidelines must be the overall instrument for coordinating economic policies .
The Amsterdam European Council asked for the broad guidelines to take account of the employment guidelines .
And since the Vienna European Council , we have had the prospect of two complementary contributions : one concerning the internal market , the Cardiff 1 report , and the other involving the economic reforms , the Cardiff 2 report .
Therefore , the introduction of the euro has clearly encouraged and is encouraging the development of a genuine European economic policy programme .
It is therefore the content of the broad economic policy guidelines that is important . They will affect budgetary policies , our level of competitiveness , and the exchange rate policy together with economic reforms and structural policies , both in the market in goods and services and in the labour market .
All these elements aim to make our economic policy work to the advantage of growth and employment in Europe .
This is a brief outline of the current legal and institutional framework . As the rapporteur has quite rightly pointed out , it is the Commission 's responsibility to see to it that this work is coherent by ensuring that the various components of this economic policy coordination come together perfectly .
I note with interest your proposal - which was highlighted by Mr Herzog and Mrs Berès - to develop the guidelines for employment at the same time as the broad economic policy guidelines .
Personally , I agree with you but this is a very controversial point , even within the Commission , because it poses various problems .
I am not going to go into detail on these today but this is why , given the failure to fully resolve this problem , we have included the content of the employment guidelines in the broad economic policy guidelines . This will form the work for next June .
To fulfil its task , the Commission is clearly trying to ensure that this work is coordinated . However , the Commission is also responsible for constantly monitoring the economic situation of the Member States .
This is why we are insisting on professionalism , promptness and awareness and these are the instructions and the method being applied , at least in the services under my responsibility .
This is also why the services of Directorate-General II have recently been completely reorganised to allow us to assess the situation of the euro zone as accurately as possible using analyses and forecasts .
We must learn to learn to think in terms of the euro zone .
Furthermore , we are currently thinking of organising economic discussions in Brussels , in the form of study days , in which this House would be involved .
They would take place from this year and could be held at regular intervals , for example , once or twice a year .
They would obviously be run with the help of top independent experts and would allow the debate on European economic policy to be extended . The aim would be to make this policy more visible and more transparent and therefore to contribute to the democratic debate you are calling for .
Your rapporteur asks us to go further and to consider the scope of the broad guidelines , with a view to creating an obligatory policy mix .
You have suggested amending Article 103 ( 2 ) .
However , I would remind you that the current Treaty already provides for the adoption of the broad economic policy guidelines by a qualified majority in the Council .
Nevertheless , I have taken note of your wish and the Commission will consider your proposal with interest . In any event , we understand the reasons behind it .
Nevertheless , this issue must be considered in light of the operating practices of Economic and Monetary Union , which is only just starting out . It must also be considered in light of the respective roles of the Euro-11 and the ECOFIN Council .
I had proposed to you that the Euro-11 be recognised in the Treaty , but my understanding was that Mr Spiers did not agree .
This is a problem which is arising now and which will arise in the future in the light of experience gained .
For its part , the Commission has always been in favour of improving the operation of the broad economic policy guidelines .
These are not a failure , Mr Herman , even if this aspect is not as good or as successful as we would have liked .
We will make more specific , formal proposals on the 1999 broad economic policy guidelines for each Member State this year , and you can expect to receive these in March .
With regard to external representation , an agreement was signed in Vienna .
This must be respected and it is the responsibility of the German Presidency to ensure that it is accepted by our main trading partners and our main international partners .
I have every confidence that the German Presidency will ensure that this agreement by the Heads of State and Government is respected , remembering that this is a minimum and transitory agreement .
The second point that I must briefly mention concerns the institutional balance .
Mrs Randzio-Plath very rightly underlined the democratic deficit affecting the European Union in the context of EMU . I believe that an interinstitutional agreement is a good idea .
This is actually one of two courses set out by your rapporteur and something that was also highlighted by Mr Papayannakis .
The Commission is in favour of this and has always supported the possibility of reaching such an agreement .
In my opinion , the practices already used in this respect should be made official and some of the courses mentioned by the rapporteur should be explored , in terms of both defining and monitoring the multilateral surveillance .
The euro will also have an impact on certain policies .
I am thinking mainly of fiscal policy , if only to prevent the tax race as it were .
I am also thinking of social policy as this House must take part in drawing up the new social contract and in the actions intended to preserve the European social model .
These are areas into which the Economic and Monetary Union will clearly extend , although I am not going to go into them in detail here .
I will end by mentioning the final stage , that is , the new institutional developments .
EMU offers us the option of a method that involves defining precise objectives - transition conditions and deadlines - and ensuring a form of organised flexibility to inspire certain institutional innovations .
This method must be given particular consideration with the imminent enlargement of the European Union in the context of our discussions on the institutional question . There are two key issues involved here .
The first is qualified majority voting .
Mrs Berès is right : if we want to avoid the risk of paralysis in the decision-making system , we must extend this type of voting and bring it into general use .
However , the problem with this , as pointed out by Mr Spiers , is the fiscal policy .
A choice must be made between effectiveness and national sovereignty and in this case the dilemma must be resolved .
The second key issue is the workings of the Commission , the institutions in general , and therefore the Council .
Whatever formula is envisaged , it must respond to the triple requirement of effectiveness , representation and democratic control .
To conclude , I must point out , like your rapporteur , that in my opinion , the euro can now act as a genuine catalyst which Europe can use to become structured , stronger , more developed and enlarged .
Europe still has to be able to adapt and reform itself .
It is in this respect that your report is an interesting and useful element which will contribute to the discussions in the months to come .
Mr President , I must just say something very quickly , not to comment on the debate , but to give Mr Herzog some information .
I am pleased that you recognise that my report raises questions for the future , even if it clearly cannot provide an answer for them at the moment .
I am also pleased with the criticisms made by the Liberals in the House as they reassure me that I have chosen the right economic and social policy .
I would just like to ask Mr Herzog to read Amendment No 11 tabled at my request by the Socialist Group . This amendment deals specifically with the role of public investment expenditure which , when calculating the public deficit , must not be compared to or put on the same level as consumer expenditure .
I appreciate that the Commissioner is being polite and diplomatic , but will he not give an opinion on paragraph 10 of the report ?
Is the Commissioner in favour of the euro operating with common goals , or is he in favour of having a binding common economic policy , as proposed in paragraph 10 ?
That is what I would like the Commissioner to give an opinion on .
The Commission usually says what it is for and what it is against .
Is the Commission in favour of paragraph 10 ?
I hope not , but I would like to have that confirmed .
I believe I gave a clear answer on this .
The broad economic policy guidelines must be as realistic , precise and specific as possible .
The ideal situation would be for these to be binding and obligatory but , as the Treaty currently stands , this is not possible .
We must therefore proceed pragmatically which means initially using the system of group pressure and ministerial pressure in order to succeed in pushing through changes .
This is beginning , as noted last Monday in the ECOFIN Council , with regard to the stability and convergence programmes .
It is in the light of experience that we will see to what extent and in what way we can introduce an additional stage to make the system more binding .
To be too hasty would be prejudicial and would probably be contrary to the objectives set out by those who are in favour of making the guidelines binding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Decision-making in Council
The next item is the report ( A4-0049 / 99 ) by Mr Bourlanges , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on decision-making within the Council in an enlarged Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the main features of the report before us are its aim , its scope , its content and its orientation .
As regards its aim , Parliament , through its Committee on Institutional Affairs , has chosen to interfere in something which is not really its concern . In other words , it has chosen to talk openly and transparently about another institution , namely , the Council .
Some have taken offence at this . However , we consider that this is our duty because Parliament must be concerned with the institutional future of the European Union as a whole and also because scrutiny is always much more thorough when carried out by someone else .
Personally , I would not have any problem with the Council preparing a report on Parliament .
Secondly , with regard to its scope , this report analyses the decision-making process in the Council and , in general terms , the difficulties the Council experiences in its operation .
It does not hope to lay down the full institutional history of the European Union for when this is eventually achieved , but it is not confined purely to the short term . We have tried to define certain changes that must take place in light of the three challenges facing us .
These challenges are the political transition of the European Union , the euro , which requires an economic policy to be defined , and enlargement , which is exerting a quantitative pressure .
In terms of content , in certain sections , the report proposes and recommends institutional reforms affecting the Treaties .
In other sections , less extensive interinstitutional changes and even administrative changes are suggested .
We believe that the Council operates as a whole , regardless of the legal instruments used .
There are certainly only a few reforms that affect the Treaties , but all the changes to be made to the Council 's operation are very important .
The final key feature of the report is its orientation . It aims to protest against certain drifts that are becoming evident , and I will mention two instances .
The first is a drift towards paralysis , linked , in particular , to an increase in the number of participants without the necessary reforms .
And this is related to the whole problem of qualified majority voting . The second is a drift towards the use of informal procedures , ad hoc committees and meetings between staff or between governments , which are tending to bypass the effective , transparent and democratic procedures laid down in the Treaty .
What we want to see is more formality and stricter respect for official procedures .
The report is divided into two main sections relating to structures and procedures .
I clearly do not have time to go into them in detail .
However , with regard to structures , I must stress a point that Mrs Berès rightly made and that relates to the crisis of the General Affairs Council .
The report recommends a very clear separation between the foreign affairs function , which must be carried out by the foreign ministers , and the general affairs function , which is a coordinating function to be carried out by ministers close to the coordinating authority .
This is an important point .
Indeed , there is nothing to prevent the foreign ministers from fulfilling this role , if that is what the Member States want .
With regard to the procedures , we are rather concerned about the limits on the extension of qualified majority voting .
The report makes rather daring proposals on own resources and foreign policy which will perhaps not be accepted by our colleagues . However , we must realise that in the Europe of the future , everything subject to unanimity will be paralysed .
More generally , the report calls on each of us to participate in the logical distribution of roles between the Council and the Commission .
We are currently helping to create two parallel executive structures , which is not advisable .
The Commission must be responsible for proposing and implementing in all areas .
The Council must be responsible for making provisions but does not need to propose and implement , while the Commission must not assume parallel functions of government .
Our message is that we must clarify this distribution of roles .
Mr President , I would like to speak on a point of order .
As Mr Bourlanges rightly pointed out , the Council is at the heart of this debate .
I would therefore like to ask the President of Parliament to tell us who is now representing the Council in this debate .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , the Chair shares your sentiment that the Council should be here today .
However , this was not scheduled , the Council was not informed and is therefore not present .
That is all I have to say .
Mr President , there is no issue of greater importance for the future of the Union as we move to have over twenty Member States , as will be the case in the next few years , than the reform of the decision-taking procedures within the Council .
That is why it is legitimate for Parliament to examine this question .
The very functioning of an enlarged European Union will depend on the answers brought to the questions raised in this report .
We know that as we soon will have 20-something states around the table of the Council any area that requires unanimity will be an area in which the European Union is likely to be paralysed .
If it can take decisions , they will be slow , cumbersome and on the basis of the lowest common denominator .
That is why reform is essential .
Any policy area subject to unanimity will be blocked .
But on top of that the very functioning of the European Union can so easily be brought to a halt by a single government if it choses to do so .
Take appointments : to appoint the President of the Commission , to appoint the Governor of the Central Bank , even to appoint a member of the Court of Auditors requires unanimity in the Council .
A single government may well be tempted to hold the Union hostage .
After all , we have seen this in the past .
The former Conservative British Government , a few years ago , in the dispute over mad cow disease blocked all decision-taking in the Council that required unanimity in pursuit of a particular dispute .
Who is to say that when we have 20-something states around the table that sometime some government or another will not be tempted to use a similar tactic ?
We also saw the difficulty of wrangles over the appointment of the Central Bank Governor recently and over the President of the Commission four years ago .
In both cases a single government was able to hold up proceedings to make the others pay a political price for an eventual concession that was made or a new compromise that had to be found .
It was very difficult .
Imagine that with more than 20 Member States .
That is why the first and most essential reform is a massive extension of qualified majority voting .
Without that , enlargement will be a hazardous exercise and risks bringing us to paralysis .
Yes , we must look also at the question of the weighting of votes in the Council .
There is a proposal to have a double majority system : a majority of votes and a majority of the population or a majority of states and of population .
Mr Bourlanges ' report underlines that that is not strictly necessary to avoid the possibility of a qualified majority being composed of states representing a minority of the population .
Arithmetically that cannot happen .
That is why I - and up until now - my group have always been very reticent about the idea of moving towards a system of double majority in the Council .
The Council should have votes representing the states just as Parliament has a more proportional system representing the population of the European Union .
In this report Parliament is fulfilling its traditional role of looking ahead , being a little bit adventurous , but looking to the future : as we did with Spinelli report that preceded the Single Act , the Martin report that preceded Maastricht and the Bourlanges report which preceded Amsterdam .
We know that there will be new intergovernmental negotiations to reform the treaties on these points .
It is right that we put something forward-looking on the table .
Of course there will be problems on specific points .
My own group has problems and will be tabling amendments and requesting split votes on particular points .
But if it is understood that Parliament is fulfilling its visionary role here , looking to the future , putting the problems on the table , pushing governments to go further rather than being reticent , then there will be an understanding of the role of this report and I congratulate the rapporteur for the tremendous efforts that he has put into it .

Mr President , Mr Corbett has given Mr Bourlanges ' report the best possible praise by comparing it to the Spinelli report .
I believe that the two reports have something in common : they both concentrate on the future and propose courageous solutions .
And that is indeed welcome .
I believe that , just as in the case of this morning 's report by Mr Barros Moura , what we are actually doing here before the Treaty of Amsterdam is ratified by all the Member States is looking to the future , which is one of Parliament 's tasks .
I agree with the comments made here regarding the extension of qualified majority voting .
That is the major challenge facing us , particularly since this report has been drawn up with an enlarged Europe in mind .
Since the accession of the last three Member States the difficulties involved in decision-making have increased .
What will happen when Europe has 25 or 28 Member States ?
We must provide solutions , find ways of preventing paralysis and work to ensure that the European Union does not turn into an intergovernmental organisation .
Our most important task is to defend the principle of integration .
And when we eventually have 25 , 26 or 28 Member States , the principle of integration will only be able to be maintained if decisions are taken by qualified majority .
There is no doubt about this , and we will have to ensure that it happens one way or another .
In this respect , I believe that the report by Mr Bourlanges hits the nail on the head in terms of the sensitive issues to be dealt with .
I am sorry that the Council is not represented here because I think that it would learn from this debate and the points made during it .
The issue of the weighting of votes is one of the areas included in the Protocol on the institutions in the Treaty of Amsterdam . In addition , the German Presidency seems to want to make some kind of proposal in this area .
I believe that we must look at two possibilities : giving new weighting to the votes or creating a simple double majority system , as proposed by Mr Bourlanges .
He is from a country that has always opposed this idea and I think it is admirable that he has considered it in his report .
As a result , and because we believe that this is an important report , my group will vote in favour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I usually defend the unanimity rule , but not this time .
The rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges , whom I respect , but with whom I basically disagree , declares in his latest report that this is a conservative report .
In my opinion , anyone familiar with thinking on Europe will know that while he might be accused of a certain cautiousness , he can scarcely be labelled a conservative .
That is why , now that the debate over who is pro-European and who is anti-European has become fairly meaningless , and now that Eurosocialists are asking for more Europe , we , who are neither on the left nor Socialists , are best placed to propose and actually achieve a better Europe .
A better Europe at institutional level - the subject of this report - quite simply means that the Council should be in charge of Europe 's political management , since that is where the Union of States and the primacy of sovereign States come together .
It should be the European Parliament that supervises the executive actions of the Union , in a seamless and close connection with national parliaments . The Commission should , in our view , be given back its original implementation and administration role , instead of trying to grant it new tasks , new prerogatives and new powers .
The rapporteur also claims that the European Council has become the vanguard of the European Union .
We could not agree more .
But here too the conservative side of this report gives way to the bolder side , with the suggestion that the European Council should meet , whenever necessary , as the Heads of State and Government , when for decision-making purposes it should adopt the procedures usually followed at normal meetings of Councils of Ministers .
I am no Europhobe nor am I Euroallergic .
I think that first and foremost we have to explain to the citizens of Europe , as a matter of urgency , the kind of Europe we have and the kind of Europe we want .
I have already been called a Eurorealist for taking that stance , despite my optimism .
That adjective is not to my liking - but I would rather be a Eurorealist than a Eurocentralist , Eurofederalist or , most certainly , a Eurosocialist .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Bourlanges on this own-initiative report , which makes very interesting , though sometimes quite demanding reading .
I entirely agree that we should be directing our efforts towards establishing a system that is clear and simple , and eliminating any ambiguity as to who has responsibility and authority .
The present confusion over roles , which is all too obvious , is of course to be criticised .
Informal networking and meetings behind closed doors with no democratic control is also unsatisfactory .
Furthermore , we know that the second pillar is unsound , a situation which is totally unacceptable .
On this much we are all agreed .
Might I be permitted , with all due respect , to call into question Mr Bourlanges 's analysis of the situation and the basis of his reasoning ?
He considers that the Member States have reacted to the new challenges with an ' excessively ad hoc approach to the institutional question ... this approach has led to the rampant de-institutionalisation of the Union ' .
But is this really the case ?
On the contrary , I believe that the new Treaty and institutional arrangements go in quite another direction .
However , a much-needed reform which should be implemented is the apportionment of roles , in other words the allocation of decision-making responsibility .
In my view , we should return some of the decision-making that is currently carried out at EU level to the Member States and the regions .
Furthermore , there is no good reason why the European Council should play a less central role ; nor would it be legitimate for the Commission to develop into a ' European executive ' , as envisaged in Mr Bourlanges 's proposal .
The European Union is the sum total of its Member States , and even if unanimity has not always been an effective arrangement , the aim was that it should not just be effective , but also democratic .
I do not say that the Committee on Institutional Affairs was wrong to take an interest in an area which does not really concern it , but let us accept this report for what it is : an intellectual exercise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also have taken this opportunity to welcome the Presidency-in-Office but , unfortunately , I cannot as there are no representatives present .
Firstly , on behalf of the ARE Group , I must congratulate Mr Bourlanges on his important work , particularly as he has managed to include in his report the essence of many suggestions made by his colleagues in the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
My group therefore regards this report as an excellent starting point .
There is currently a lack of transparency in the European Union due , for the most part , to the dual nature of the Council , which can meet as an executive body and as a legislative body .
This situation poses a problem which could worsen with enlargement in that , in its legislative function , the Council operates more like the Congress of Vienna than a real legislative house .
Our fellow citizens must be able to understand the European Union 's institutional system . This is definitely not the case at the moment .
Therefore , the Council must no longer be a gathering of national executives meeting in secret and deciding virtually everything unanimously .
It must become a second legislative house , just like the European Parliament .
We also need to find a new balance for the institutions and this will put an end to the constant strengthening of the Council and the European Council .
The latter must extend its role of laying down general guidelines and providing political impetus for the Union without becoming a decision-making body .
The bases of this new structure mean extending qualified majority voting in the Council .
In the Treaty , there are still no less than 40 articles on which unanimity continues to be the rule . This means that there are many areas in which , given the prospect of enlargement , the European Union is virtually condemned to paralysis .
We feel that the report by Mr Bourlanges can be improved further .
This is why my group has tabled two amendments which we would ask the rapporteur to consider .
The first amendment involves the urgent need to use the Community method to prepare the next revision of the Treaties . It became apparent during the negotiations on the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties that the intergovernmental method was unsuitable , ineffective and even out of date .
The second amendment relates to the opportunity we have to consider creating a new function , that of President of the Union , in order to add a degree of permanence and to allow greater visibility in an enlarged Union .
I hope that these constructive proposals will be adopted by the majority of Members .
Mr President , the report before us today was written by the French chairman of the Europe Movement according to the formula : much more Union .
The June Movement is opposed to union , so we are voting no .
Mr Bourlanges wants many more laws to be adopted by a majority decision in the Council of Ministers , but that means democracy can be outvoted , because the essence of democracy is that you can go to the polls , elect a new government and change the law .
The report 's proposal means that we can go to the polls , but that we as Danish voters will never again be able to change the law .
We can replace three out of 87 votes in the Council of Ministers .
We can replace 16 out of 626 Members of the European Parliament , but we can never again as voters decide to bring in a new law .
We can get new politicians , but not a new policy .
We shall be transformed into an electoral district instead of a nation .
We shall become a national minority , instead of an independent people .
The June Movement does not want to reduce democracy .
Our mission is a Europe of democracies in which each country cooperates closely , but which only adopts common laws on issues which transcend borders .
Air pollution and marine pollution are problems which we cannot solve individually .
Here we need to have binding international cooperation , but they should be minimum rules , giving everyone the right to go further .
The EU should not be able to forbid a country from banning pesticides and colourings which cause allergies .
We want an environmental Europe , but not more union and certainly not a new state , so we are voting against the Bourlanges report .
Mr President , my apologies for being somewhat late - I had another engagement .
To Mr Bonde , I wish to say that he is at the wrong debate .
We are not talking about Europe 's general position ; we are talking about the Council of Ministers .
I welcome the excellent report produced by our colleague , Mr Bourlanges .
It is consistent and very coherent .
The institution where we find the greatest difficulties in decision-making is not the Commission or Parliament - although there are a number of difficulties of which we are aware - it is the Council of Ministers .
Mr Bourlanges spoke about the rampant deinstitutionalisation of the Council of Ministers and that is exactly right .
The Council does not even follow its own rules .
He spoke about the European Council as the ' Tour de France broom-wagon ' .
Indeed , the European Council is becoming increasingly inconsistent , and it is against that background that I very much welcome the overall approach of Mr Bourlanges .
I wish to make two essential points : the qualified majority is a problem and Commissioner Oreja is aware of how the Commission has been fighting to obtain the necessary changes here .
The point about internal coherence relates to the fact that there are too many specialised councils , as Mr Bourlanges said , and the Foreign Affairs Council fails to play its proper role .
The suggestion that we establish a real General Affairs Council strengthens coherence .
I hope that the Commission will also stress this point .
Then we have the proliferation of committees .
Unfortunately , we have a first , a second and a third pillar but as we move towards communitarisation , for instance in the area of Justice and Home Affairs , it makes no sense to retain a K.4 committee of some kind in the first pillar .
It erodes the initiative power of the Commission as well as the role of COREPER , the central body that prepares the work of the Council of Ministers .
I endorse that view also .
Turning to the political committee , we should move in that direction .
But there everything depends on whether the CFSP finally becomes a real common foreign and security policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are supposed to point the way institutionally .
Where do we stand , where do we want to go ?
We are about to see the conclusion of the ratification procedure and the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty .
As we know , the last intergovernmental conference did not manage to resolve some of the important issues relating to the forthcoming enlargements .
So the German Presidency is seeking a procedural decision on the necessary institutional reforms at the summit this June , once agreement has been reached on the key questions of Agenda 2000 at the end of March .
The European Parliament outlined the scope and direction of these reforms in its Mendez / Tsatsos resolution .
In its programme of activities over the past year and a half the Committee on Institutional Affairs has clarified the direction to be pursued .
The result is the three reports we are debating today .
The Bourlanges report contains a resolution that departs from the norm .
It is not a list of demands but an important prospective document .
Its key concern is the need to move to majority decisions in more areas and to adjust the voting procedures in the Council so that it will retain its ability to act even after the forthcoming enlargements .
These tasks derive from the Treaty of Amsterdam and the positions the European Parliament has adopted thereon .
Let me say openly that in my view the significance of some of the details of today 's resolution is a rather more illustrative one .
In the current stage of the European debates , the general guidelines require political authority .
In that way we and Jean-Louis Bourlanges will live up to our view of ourselves as giving impetus to the European integration process .
It follows that the next European Parliament will also have to debate the next round of institutional reforms in more depth .
Here we expect the Cologne European Council to consider our ideas too when it decides the timetable and methods of these reforms .
Jean-Louis Bourlanges has done very good preliminary work in this respect .
Mr President , Mr Bourlanges 's report , which has cast a stone in the stagnant waters of the institutional bodies , is worthy of our praise both for its audacity and its realism .
Time forces me to confine myself to highlighting the effort to drive out the lethargy and to dispel the confusion which , over the years , have stood in the way of a coherent common foreign and security policy taking shape .
Such a policy is a sine qua non for what we have been rushing headlong since March to call the European Union to be a real union of states and citizens .
Not only has the aspiration contained in the original Treaty not been fulfilled by the revision of the Amsterdam Treaty but it has , on the contrary , been undermined .
It has become even more complicated and obscure .
Since the enlargement procedure has begun , it would be dangerous to delay finding a solution to existing institutional indecision .
It is quite symptomatic and yet sad that we have recently begun to hear nationalistic outpourings from heads of Member States .
This regression simply means that individual interests are being supported at the expense of Community interests .
Paragraph 24 of the Bourlanges report contains specific and unambiguous proposals to check this slippery slide .
We may not agree with one or two technical details .
What none of us can accept , however , is to allow the acknowledged inability of the EU to fulfil its supranational role of ensuring international order and peace to be concealed behind a wall of silence .
Mr President , the political testament of Mr Bourlanges , coming just before the end of our mandate , contains some important points .
However , only when the euro is a success and the national parliaments are prepared to provide a good foundation for the Europe of Nations do I believe the time will have come to take major new steps forward .
In the meantime , it remains to be seen whether a common approach to crime , asylum for refugees , the harmonisation of fiscal policy and the creation of jobs is going to be successful .
Nevertheless , European ideas for deepening European institutions and enlargement must be further developed .
But let us not overwhelm the public with too many changes in too many different fields , as this obscures their control over and insight into their own sovereignty , and that is more likely to lead to a rejection of Europe than the contrary .
The Bourlanges report is an interesting intellectual exercise , but we must not force the pace with giant steps but rather take the slow road like Tom Thumb .
That way we will keep the public with us .
At present my group cannot support your report .
Mr President , reforming the Council is probably the most difficult task of all .
In practice it simply means calling on the Council to reform itself .
So I am not surprised to find it was not even present to listen to this appeal and that it seems to be fairly indifferent to Parliament 's reform project .
The Council is the Achilles heel of European democracy , if not the black hole .
That is because of its amphibious nature .
As a European institution it is constantly distancing itself from the national parliaments and the national and European courts .
It is constantly distancing itself from the European Parliament by presenting itself as a meeting of the Member States .
That is why I do not have any real hope that this black hole of democracy can be closed , that we will finally see open legislation , majority decisions , the democratisation of the second and third pillar .
This kind of governmental cooperation is increasingly becoming a democratic no man 's land .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his attempts to at least sketch out the broad lines of reform here .
I also congratulate him on the clever way in which he proposed a revolutionary shift of power in favour of the large states while presenting this as maintaining the existing balance .
That is a particularly successful intellectual proposal .
Mr President , the Bourlanges report subscribes to the view that the Council should become a second house representing the Member States and that the Commission should gradually develop into a genuine European executive .
As I explained in the minority opinion attached to the report , the I-EDN Group considers that such a development would be dangerous and that the Council must continue in its role as a central decision-maker , representing the Member States , and as the hierarchical superior of the Commission .
In fact , one of the lessons we should draw from the recent debates on the motion of censure against the Commission is that the European institutions , which cover many countries , are particularly at risk of becoming cut off from the people .
This is especially true of the Commission , which relies on a European civil service with fairly weak national links .
The remedy must involve carefully strengthening the subordinating link by which Brussels serves the Member States .
This link places the Council in a privileged position .
This is why the individual voice of each Member State must be maintained in the Council by preserving unanimity and why every means must be used to strengthen the Council 's control over the Commission .
On this essential issue , the Bourlanges report is silent .
Therefore , the opportunity to solve one of Europe 's current major problems is being missed . In fact , Europe is heading in the wrong direction towards a superstate cut off from the people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur who , in my opinion , has presented us with a magnificent report that offers a forward-looking analysis of the institutions of an enlarged European Union and of issues that the Treaty of Amsterdam obviously failed to resolve .
I think that his report 's strongest point is its defence of the Community method at a time when there are clear signs of a return to intergovernmental working in the European Union .
I think especially that the rapporteur 's proposals on reorganising the Council 's business are a step in the right direction .
Not only in terms of efficiency , by extending qualified majority voting , but also by restoring the institutional balance provided for in the Treaty , where there has been a shift towards a greater executive and governmental role for the Council , to the detriment of the Commission 's roles in taking initiatives and acting as a political driving-force , which are recognised in the Treaty and which it should continue to play .
That is why I cannot understand the rapporteur 's detailed proposals on the weighting of votes in the Council .
It is obvious that the demographic weight of the different countries should be reflected in their voting power and that a minority of the population should not be able to prevail against the majority .
That would be undemocratic and would be rightly rejected by public opinion in the larger countries .
In my opinion , however , it is in Parliament , with its legislative codecision rights , that the different demographic weighting of the Member States should manifest itself : we shall in any case soon have to change the current proportion of Members per country , in view of enlargement and the plans for a smaller Parliament with 700 Members .
In the Council , given its governmental role , the original balance between small and large countries should be maintained .
We should avoid giving the impression that we are setting up a directing board of large countries - especially four months away from the elections and in the midst of all the anti-European propaganda that we have heard in today 's debate .
One last remark on the content of paragraph 33 . I cannot accept this because it would give greater decision-making powers on the budget to the bigger contributors and is totally at odds with the Community method .
Mr President , the Bourlanges report is excellent , as was only to be expected .
For many years Jean-Louis Bourlanges has spearheaded the process of European integration .
Looking at him , though , perhaps he is not quite as pointed as a spearhead .
But the Bourlanges report is also an important one .
For it reminds us in good time that the Union is constantly facing two tasks : enlargement and deepening .
We have spoken a great deal about enlargement over the past months .
And we have repeatedly and rightly referred to the homework the applicant countries must do .
Let me remind you , for instance , of the debate in this House prior to the Vienna summit .
At the same time we must not forget to do our own homework here in this House and here in the Union .
The European Union must remain able to act , or to be more precise , become more able to act .
Amsterdam has brought some progress in this area , but the opportunity for progress at the last minute was clearly not taken .
In particular , the important questions of decision-making in the Council have remained open .
The Bourlanges report considers these questions and seeks constructive , forward-looking solutions to them .
By and large , I believe it has done so with great success , as many of the previous speakers have pointed out and emphasised .
I believe there are still some question marks in regard to certain parts of the call - however right in principle - for the general introduction of majority voting in the Council .
I am particularly sceptical about paragraphs 28 , 32 and 33 concerning own resources and qualified majority voting .
Let me address a last point that was rightly raised in an amendment tabled by Mr Saint-Pierre .
We must also consider the method of the next treaty reform , and here it is the Community method that is the right one , not the intergovernmental conference method , which is governed only by the power of veto .
Mr President , this is a crucial time to be debating and voting on this report on the Council - an excellent report incidentally .
The European Union is currently at a complex and difficult stage . It is going through a period of evolution , and a lot of balances are being undermined .
So it is becoming one of the European Parliament 's essential tasks to debate the institutions and the way they work .
I am tempted to say that in the absence of real reform and with all the institutional balances fluid , Parliament really must start thinking strategically about the development of the Union again .
The Commission is being weakened . That is a fact .
I cannot say whether there is also a political attack going on against the Commission , but it is certainly being weakened .
The role of the European Council is developing in an anomalous way , as the Bourlanges report rightly emphasises .
Parliament and the Council should legislate in parallel , but it cannot really be claimed that this is really what is happening .
In essence , the whole way the system operates is changing , especially with the enlargement approaching and after the launch of the euro .
The Bourlanges report confronts these issues head on , with a free-ranging , imaginative approach to the institutions .
There has never been a greater need for imagination about the institutions , inspired by a dynamic rather than a literal interpretation of the Treaty , and of course , as everyone knows , dynamic interpretations sometimes go beyond the legislative text . There has never been a greater need to highlight the institutional hypocrisy of those who claim that an enlarged European Union can continue to function without reform of the institutions .
There are many worthwhile ideas in the report but I am not going to highlight what is probably the central point , namely the redefinition of the role of the General Affairs Council , which Mr Bourlanges discusses .
Instead I want to emphasise a point which , in my opinion , emerges from the interpretation of the report .
I believe that attention should be focused on trying to restore the balance between the European Council and the Commission , the two authorities driving policy and legislation .
The future progress of the European Union will largely depend on this balance .
This is a fundamental point .
I think the balance is currently being undermined by both the anomalous development of the Council and the weakening of the Commission .
To conclude , Mr President , I see this whole report as going beyond the old approach of intergovernmental versus supranational .
Redefining the balance between the Council and the Commission marks the end of that approach .
That is where I think Mr Bourlanges has made an extremely important contribution .
Mr President , I did prepare a speech but I have left it aside because many of my points have already been excellently made by previous speakers .
I therefore see no need in repeating what has already been said . However , I must mention two points .
The first is that it has been a matter of regret for a long time , and still is now , that the Amsterdam Treaty did not go to its logical conclusion and effectively prepare for enlargement .
The European Parliament must take some of the blame for this because it did not propose any solutions because of the fact that it was still divided .
Now that this moment has arrived , I welcome the fact that the Committee on Institutional Affairs and its rapporteur have dared to put forward a solution .
I feel that the most important point is that our hands are no longer empty .
There may be better solutions , which must now be put forward , but at least we have a solution to offer .
My second point is that , through the debates within the political groups , between the small states and the large states , a fundamental element of the future of Europe has become evident : within the European structure , each of us as individuals is part of a minority and each of the Member States is part of a minority .
We must therefore heed each other and develop this minority culture which is the future of Europe . To conclude , I believe that with a solution in one hand and a philosophy in the other , this process has indeed begun , and I welcome that fact .
Mr President , regarding the content of the report , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges , for having supported the amendment we tabled . It is an amendment that will make it possible in the future for there to be formal Council of Ministers meetings involving the ministers responsible for women 's rights .
It is an important amendment as it deals with a key problem in Europe today : the traditional exclusion of women from the decision-making process .
I hope that the PPE Group will also support this amendment and that the Commission , which is represented here in this debate , will be sensitive to this issue and support this move .
At the moment , the ministers responsible for women 's rights cannot meet in a formal Council of Ministers .
I therefore believe that by providing for this possibility , we are taking a major step forward in defending the necessary involvement of women in the decision-making process .
Secondly , and from a general point of view , I believe that it is not only advisable but also necessary for us to reflect on such issues given that the European Union is currently initiating a large-scale process of enlargement .
The report by Mr Bourlanges proposes undeniable improvements and I must say that , in my view , he also proposes the correct path to be followed in favouring a Community method that renders the traditional , and until now prevalent , intergovernmental method obsolete .
It is truly shameful that the Council of Ministers is not represented here when Europe 's elected representatives are debating something that directly concerns both it and all Europeans .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not rightly understand the meaning of all this paperwork and its timetable .
Perhaps it is obvious to some , but to many of us it is not .
There has been insufficient preparation for and discussion of this issue , yet it is a very serious matter .
Nevertheless , I believe that an increase in qualified majority voting is appropriate if the work of the Union is to be more effective .
The report contains some conflicting ideas , however , such as paragraphs 35 and 36 .
Paragraph 35 states that Member States with small and medium-sized populations are over-represented and this system should thus be replaced with a reorganisation of the weighting of votes and a double majority .
However , paragraph 36 says that the current balance must not be overturned .
This seems to be in conflict with the previous paragraph .
It is perhaps due to the fact that the rapporteur is actually only referring to the balance that exists among the states with large populations .
At the time of the Amsterdam conference Finland put forward a preliminary proposal for a compromise , whereby all Member State votes would double in number ; however , the larger countries would get two or perhaps more extra votes in the process .
This would also be an acceptable solution for small countries .
Such a model would possibly be a less destabilising solution than the current weighting structure , and would not be too much of an upheaval for the countries with small populations .
The basic position here is that institutional reform will not succeed without also taking the share of the small countries into consideration when the number of votes is being weighted
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the Committee on Institutional Affairs and its rapporteurs for their various reports on specific issues related to the application of the Treaty of Amsterdam or on issues that we will have to tackle in the near future in order to achieve a more effective , democratic and transparent institutional system .
The report by Mr Bourlanges fits perfectly into this context and the vast majority of speakers clearly recognised this .
I would also like to thank him for the educational way in which he presented his report , outlining , as he did , its key aspects : its objective , in case we were in any doubt ; its scope ; its content ; and its focus .
The report deals with an institutional problem that , to my mind , is essential in defining the future architecture of Europe and , more specifically , that of a Union that hopes to become the instrument that peacefully unites the continent .
I am referring to the European Union 's decision-making process in the light of enlargement , an issue that many speakers referred to .
Our task is to devise and build an institutional system that must be based on three key principles , in my opinion .
The first is to ensure the continuity of a process and an institutional structure that has provided extraordinary results in terms of peace , progress and democracy .
The second is to adapt to a changing world that , even as far as public institutions are concerned , requires a high degree of flexibility .
I agree with the idea put forward by Mr Izquierdo Rojo concerning formal meetings of the ministers responsible for women 's rights on issues that directly affect them and that must become a Community responsibility .
This idea is very welcome and I have taken note of it .
The third principle is to ensure that we can organise an entire continent around a single system that must aim to be politically and economically coherent .
I therefore believe that we must initially look at the various aspects of our system with a view to reforming it and implementing the constitutional mechanism that Mr De Giovanni mentioned .
This mechanism is currently being discussed and is in need of clarification .
I believe that we can ask ourselves a series of basic questions here .
Is there confusion between the Council and its various formations , as mentioned by Mr Brinkhorst and other speakers ?

Is there confusion between the institutions that have an executive role ?
This was mentioned by Mrs Cardona , among others . However , I must admit that I totally disagree with the idea that the Commission should merely play an implementing role .
It has another key function , that of initiating legislation , and we cannot forget that .
Moreover , can we talk about excessive bureaucracy in the preparations for the Council 's political decisions ?
Should it not improve its capacity for action , as Mr Rack pointed out ?
The report seems to respond positively to these questions . It also puts forward certain proposals that would undoubtedly improve the current situation .
I entirely agree with the rapporteur 's opinion about the Council 's dual executive and legislative role .
And in this respect , I understand the comments made by Mr Saint-Pierre to the effect that the Council cannot merely be the sum of the national executives .
In my opinion , this dual role - legislative and executive - is only possible from an institutional point of view if we also have a strong Commission . The Commission must be able to carry out its full role and exercise its right of initiative as well as monitoring the application of Community law and , where possible , its implementation .
Without going into each of the specific proposals in the text , I would say that Mr Bourlanges ' comments on the European Council should be given consideration .
And in my view , the European Council must clearly continue with its role of providing political momentum and direction for the entire Union .
In this respect , I also agree with the remark by Mr De Giovanni concerning the need to find a balance between the role of the European Council and that of the Commission .
I recall that during the speech I made when I assumed responsibility for institutional issues , someone asked me if I thought that the Commission should only have a relationship with Parliament and not with the European Council .
I replied that both should be given consideration .
As far as I am concerned , there is to some extent a form of double legitimacy and it is therefore logical to have such a double relationship .
I would now like to look at the issue raised by the rapporteur concerning the need to strengthen the legal aspects of the Council 's decision-making process , including the decisions taken by the Heads of State and Government .
I must say to Mr Bourlanges that I have some doubts here .
Moves in this direction would undoubtedly eventually weaken the noble role of the European Council as an institution that is the driving force behind our major political and strategic orientations . It would risk becoming a body to which we referred even the most minor decisions , as happened in the 1980s .
We must ensure that that situation is not repeated .
I do not need to remind you of the dangers that situation brought with it .
In short , it is clear that we now need to strengthen our institutional system , although it has already reached a certain degree of maturity since its institutions are increasingly subject to the democratic control of this Parliament . Moreover , we need to clarify the responsibilities of the national parliaments within the Community framework .
There are two roles here : the fundamental role of the European Parliament and the role of the national parliaments .
As Mrs Schörling said , we must do this in such a way so as to ensure that we know who does what . We therefore need greater clarification of the issues , something that is often lacking .
I also believe that it is of the utmost importance to do all we can to make the Council more coherent .
This means that both from the point of view of the workings of its various formations and in terms of the participation of the governments , we need to ensure that we can guarantee that its positions in the various bodies are consistent .
This is an issue that several speakers mentioned .
There are other points in the resolution that are particularly important .
Firstly , I fully agree with the basic principle that the power of initiative should not lie with the Council .
The Community system is based on the Commission 's monopoly of legislative initiative , and this is a system that , in general , has worked well .
Despite certain attacks on the Commission 's monopoly , the negotiations during the last Intergovernmental Conference confirmed that this is not only to remain intact as far as the Commission is concerned , but that in certain areas - such as justice and home affairs - the Commission will automatically gain the monopoly after five years .
This principle is probably the most original feature of our institutional system , and perhaps even its cornerstone . We must certainly not relinquish it .
As regards decision-making in the Council , I am of course totally in favour of the extension of qualified majority voting . Most speakers referred to this issue , although some were naturally opposed to it .
I believe that the extension of qualified majority voting does not mean that there will not be certain exceptions .
There must be exceptions that are very clearly defined , specifically as regards what we could call constitutional decisions .
The resolution considers these . In my view , they are only logical , as there are clearly some fundamental decisions that have to be agreed on by all the Member States .
However , as Mr Corbett mentioned a moment ago , the most important question is : how will a Europe with 20 or 25 Member States be able to take decisions unanimously in certain areas ?
It is extremely urgent to give consideration to the weighting of votes , to the composition of the Commission and to the extension of qualified majority voting . As you know , these issues were not resolved at the last Intergovernmental Conference , but we need to find solutions to them in order to comply with both the Protocol on the institutions in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the express wishes of the Member States .
The report puts forward balanced proposals concerning the weighting of votes .
However , I noticed that some speakers , such as Mr Corbett , for example , were rather reluctant about creating a double majority system .
I have also noted the comments made by Mr Barros Moura in this respect .
I would like to end by looking very briefly at two issues .
Firstly , I believe it is important to ensure that the framework for the common foreign and security policy set out in the Treaty of Amsterdam is applied as soon as possible and as willingly and effectively as possible . However , I have noted that some people are pessimistic in this respect .
The second problem relates to transparency .
The Treaty of Amsterdam requires additional efforts in this area on the part of the Union and its institutions .
Each institution must therefore review its procedures and eliminate a whole series of prejudices concerning confidentiality and the secrecy of deliberations . These are incompatible with legislative activity that requires deliberations to be made public .
The Council needs to make significant efforts in this direction , as the Court of Justice has pointed out in recent judgments .
Transparency and the public 's trust in the institutions are an essential condition both for the very existence of the institutional system and to guarantee that it runs smoothly . And this is particularly true in an enlarged Europe .
We can adopt the reforms we want to , but if we do so in secret meetings , or if we give the public the impression that we want to hide the reasons behind our decisions , we will come to realise that we are lacking the important democratic and public nature that all national democracies possess . This is something that we need to bring to European democracy .
I will thus end with three words : democracy , effectiveness and transparency .
And , as Mr Méndez de Vigo very wisely said , we must concentrate on the future and provide courageous solutions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Strengthening EU institutions
The next item is the report ( A4-0034 / 99 ) by Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on strengthening EU institutions with a view to creating an area of democracy and freedom .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this House is today considering the report on strengthening the Union 's institutions with a view to establishing an area of democracy and liberty . This report is the result of the contributions from the Committee on Institutional Affairs and includes the valuable opinion by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , which Mr Goerens drafted .

The initial consideration of this issue stemmed from the contributions by Mr Herzog , whom I replaced as rapporteur .
In replacing him , I hoped to be able to complete the definitive version of the report we are considering today , which takes account of the debates held and includes most of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Institutional Affairs designed to increase the involvement of the general public and social players in the operation of the European Union 's institutional system .
The key aspect of the report is based on the belief that it will not be possible to construct a democratic Europe unless its citizens are recognised not only as being the direct beneficiaries of the integration process , but also - and perhaps , fundamentally - as subjects who actively help to formulate common objectives .
Despite its inadequacies , the Treaty of Amsterdam does offer us some new elements that strengthen the guarantees provided at European level for the respect of fundamental rights . It also reinforces the social dimension of European integration by coordinating national employment policies and incorporating the requisite legal bases for the formulation of European social legislation .
Finally , it enhances the free movement of persons .
In our view , this should all be brought together within an overall plan for a European area of freedom and democracy built on strong foundations . To construct such an area , we will need to specify the common objectives of European society , to upgrade the rights accorded to Europe 's citizens , to reinforce the rights of minorities , to determine the legal instruments for the implementation of such rights , and to provide for citizens to participate in the creation and enrichment of this area .
The report sets out three major objectives here : freedom of movement , social rights and European citizenship .
As regards freedom of movement , I would like to point out , in particular , that security and justice must be accompanied by the necessary democratic and judicial guarantees .
As far as social rights are concerned , the concept of European integration is based on solidarity between the Member States . As a result , enlargement to embrace the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should not be regarded as an extension of the internal market but as a duty imposed by the requirements of solidarity .
As regards European citizenship , I would like to highlight the final proposal in the report that calls for the Treaty to bring all the rights conferred on citizens within the ambit of a specific title .
I believe that if we approve this report by a wide majority , we will be contributing to the much-needed construction and reinforcement of an area of democracy and liberty within the Union . I would therefore urge you to vote in favour of this report .
Finally , allow me to thank those who tabled amendments to the report . As I mentioned , I generally tried to incorporate them , except in two cases : when the amendments did not conform to the vision of European integration that I support , or when they introduced points , albeit legitimate ones , regarding competitiveness , which I felt did not belong in this report .
I would therefore like to thank you all .
Mr President , we are indebted to Mr Gutiérrez Díaz for this excellent report .
As he has just said , the area of freedom , security and justice introduced by the Amsterdam Treaty represents the Union 's most ambitious forthcoming programme of integration .
And because of the way it connects with daily life in families , cities and businesses , the programme is also arousing great public interest .
Furthermore , it establishes vital links between the roles of this Parliament and the national parliaments .
I think this five year transition phase does involve Europe 's entire parliamentary system , but during transition there must also be pressure to start applying the community method and the codecision procedure as soon as possible to a field as vital as this to integration .
In a sense this programme has already begun to form part of our legislation and it is natural that it should become the focal point of the wider vision which inspires this report - the establishment of a European area of political freedom and democracy .
Encapsulating the catalogue of fundamental rights and social rights in a single vision , and developing programmes for freedom , security and justice is exactly the right way to set about promoting and actually achieving the concept of European citizenship introduced at Maastricht .
Indeed , this is the essential constitutional institution on which to build the very idea of a European public and political area , an area where rights and duties - all rights and duties , with no special emphasis on any one - are balanced in the European Union 's framework for inclusive democracy .
Mr President , that is why we should vote for this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every citizen of the European Union should be entitled to live in an area of freedom and democracy .
That is what the report is endeavouring to safeguard .
There is a great deal in the report about social rights , but rather less when it comes to establishing a legal base for them .
Up to now , we have held fast to the idea that in Europe , citizens should enjoy the same rights as the citizens in the countries in which they work .
At the beginning of paragraph 14 , however , the rapporteur proposes that citizens should be provided with guarantees at European level equivalent to those provided at national level , which in some cases would be absurd .
Therefore , we strongly support the indents calling for an improvement in cross-border coordination of civil legislation .
We would also stress the need for the mutual recognition of judicial decisions .
Observance of the Union 's pension provisions is abysmal .
They should be made more effective , so that citizens are granted pension rights irrespective of their place of residence or work .
In that respect , the rapporteur is right .
However , we should be wary of any change that would lead to the adoption of a rate based on the highest common denominator , which would in turn lead to a very high level of taxation .
It can be difficult to reconcile social legislation of this kind with the overall objectives , for example stimulating employment , reducing unemployment and enhancing the quality of life , because of the different levels of development and economic progress that obtain in the various countries .
Sometimes social rights that are appropriate in one country are inappropriate when translated into another country 's social and economic system which is based on a different set of priorities .
Imposing social rights on others may lead to a hypothetical quality of life , but in reality only serves to undermine the general well-being - this is always so where the welfare system is financed through taxation .
We should approach the problem from the other direction , by ensuring that the Union has in place the right structures for strengthening competitiveness and providing a climate that is conducive to business development . After all , it is enterprises that will generate a better quality of life and , as a result , an improved social welfare system .
The main aim of the report is to strengthen citizens ' rights , and in particular to protect them against crime .
It is essential for the Union to make progress in this respect , particularly in view of future enlargement .
In this context , we have tabled an amendment on the incorporation of Schengen into the Treaty .
Accordingly , we should like to see an end to the Council 's tortuous decision-making process during the five-year period with regard to certain legislative issues .
What is needed in that area is a clear and unambiguous taking of positions , just as Mr Bourlanges has done in his exemplary and practical report .
Mr President , I should like to compliment Mr Gutiérrez Díaz on his report which covers a wide range of issues .
Originally it did not quite do justice to the crux of the matter which is the strengthening of the institutions involved in the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
After the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force that will be one of the major achievements of the Intergovernmental Conference .
These areas of asylum , immigration and border controls are now going to be common policies .
However , this has come about at a cost .
Member States have watered down the role and the competence of the European Union 's democratic and judicial institutions , notably the European Parliament and the Court of Justice , and also the decision-making procedures for a period of at least five years .
This undermining of the Community must not create a precedent .
Rather , it must be reversed .
Against that background , I tabled amendments and I should like to thank Mr Gutiérrez Díaz for accepting them .
The key points are that the unanimity requirement stands in the way of efficient and rapid action in this field .
Action in the field of freedom , security and justice must be accompanied by the necessary democratic and judicial guarantees .
The Council must start applying the Community methods in full .
Ultimately the Treaty must also remedy the very bizarre position of the United Kingdom , Denmark and Ireland which have opted out of the new policies , although , in fact , a country like Denmark will apply the policies as they stand but on an intergovernmental basis .
For the time being - and this is a point I have always emphasised very strongly in this hemicycle - there is the continuing failure to incorporate Schengen into the first pillar .
We still do not have the final division between the first and the third pillar .
Against this background , the report has now developed these concepts and my group will vote for it .
However , I hope that we see it only as the beginning .
We have only started the common area .
The final development will take place in the coming years .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Gutiérrez Díaz on an excellent report .
Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam provides a legal basis for the action necessary to prevent discrimination on the basis of disability , age or gender , among others .
How much weight Article 13 will carry in the future very much depends in the long run on political will .
Take the guidelines on employment , for example .
There was sufficient political will there , and hopefully this will also be the case with Article 13 .
I am happy to see that the Commission has embarked on preparatory measures as a result of Article 13 .
I also hope that Germany , as the current presidency , and its successor - my own country , Finland - will be active in the Council in exploiting the opportunities presented by Article 13 .
Our citizens have considerable expectations .
It is also important that the European Parliament has a major influence on what is contained in Article 13 in practice .
Mr President , the gradual creation of an area of freedom , security and justice has constantly been held up as one of the successes of the Amsterdam Treaty .
This is logically linked to the idea of supporting the steps required to achieve freedom of movement with accompanying measures to respond to the citizens ' need for security following the opening up of the borders .
The security summit it has just been decided to hold , and which the Finnish Presidency has undertaken to organise , is also a sign pointing in the right direction .
So I regret the fact that the report we are debating today treats the subject of security in a rather summary manner and is reduced to a report on democracy and freedom rather than on security .
As I find in my daily dealings with them , our citizens take the subject of security very seriously .
The Commissioner has also emphasised its importance .
Of course it is important to take a visionary approach .
But as the representative of the people , the European Parliament would be well advised to attach greater importance to the citizens ' need for security and to focus particularly on looking after their interests within the institutional system .
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty is a good starting-point for achieving a more democratic and open EU with freedom of movement and more fundamental rights for our citizens and a stronger social dimension .
I think there are many sensible things in this report .
The new Treaty opens up a host of new possibilities , but whether or not they are carried out in practice depends , of course , on the political will .
There is no doubt that we in Parliament will have to exert pressure if it is to succeed .
There is no other way .
Some decisions still require unanimity and some countries , including Denmark , still have reservations about participating in supranational cooperation , for example in the area of refugees and asylum .
That is a decision taken after a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty and it should of course be respected , until the people decide otherwise .
I would like to stress that it is also part of democracy that people in nation states can form an opinion on these things on the basis of how they see them , and that only the people themselves can change the decisions they have made .
The rapporteur is very concerned about a multi-speed Europe , meaning that countries opt out of some areas of cooperation , or that a group of countries begin to cooperate more closely .
I too can see that this danger exists , but sometimes it is necessary , not least when more countries join in cooperation , to respect the fact that there may be different speeds within that cooperation .
I also believe that we shall face such a dilemma in future when people have different ideas about what we should cooperate on , but I agree with the rapporteur that a multi-speed Europe should naturally be a last resort .
I think we should be aware that the pragmatic cooperation we need to have , at the same time as our visions , may also make it necessary for there to be different speeds .
Mr President , I welcome Mr Gutiérrez Díaz ' report .
I have known the rapporteur a long time and I know him well .
He has produced a very good report but there are a number of points I find it difficult to agree with .
We must remember that Europe is an area of democracy .
There are 15 Member States with democratically elected governments .
There are also numerous regional governments and local government .
And that is all the democracy we require .
We are in danger of going too far .
I do not believe we need further levels of bureaucracy paid for by the European taxpayer .
However , there are areas where we could bring Parliament and , indeed , Europe closer to the people .
I feel very strongly that anywhere there is a Commission office in the Union there should also be a Parliament office .
This is necessary because the people of Europe can identify with the European Parliament more easily than with the faceless bureaucracy of the Commission .
That has been proved in this Parliament in recent times .
So , where you have regional parliaments or assemblies Parliament should also have an office .
That would go a long way to counteracting the remoteness of Brussels and the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal has been said about the democratic deficit in Europe . As a result of that legitimate and well-founded accusation , the European Parliament 's powers have been increased as each successive new Treaty has been approved .
The democratic deficit in Europe 's institutional architecture has naturally made it essential to strengthen a body with the direct legitimacy bestowed by European citizens .
But sometimes this debate has concentrated too much on the relationship between the European institutions , the balance of power and their operational and decision-making procedures .
The initial success of the introduction of the euro and the resulting dynamics have once again highlighted the economic side of the Union , thus accentuating the delays in other areas , that is the political , security and social fields .
That means tackling institutional reform not so much in terms of distributing powers between the Community institutions , but rather in terms of stressing the link that gives our mandates their legitimacy : the people we represent here .
There is a need for a continuing debate , to which the report by Mr Gutiérrez Díaz has just given a further boost .
We certainly want a more efficient Union , but we also want a Union that is not so much a bureaucratic monster or a complex and impenetrable web of vested interests and influence , as an increasingly important reference point for our citizens .
We need measures to strengthen the rights of European citizens , improve labour relations and social welfare , guarantee genuine freedom of movement , and improve information systems and administrative transparency . These are measures that would help to reinforce European citizenship , which is so often spoken about and so seldom practised .
In addition to these measures to simplify and strengthen people 's rights , I should like to emphasise two more :
first , the need to simplify the Treaties , creating a clear body of law , accessible to ordinary citizens , thus making European law a benchmark that everyone can understand instead of an impenetrable mass of rules and regulations ; -second , we need a charter of citizens ' rights guaranteeing all Europeans that , regardless of the Member State where they were born , live , study or work , they are assured of a set of economic and social rights that safeguard our civilisation and our standard of living .
Mr President , Europe will go no further unless Europeans can feel , experience and desire a Europe that is a genuine area of democracy and freedom .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anyone who has been following the three reports of our three colleagues throughout the morning will be asking themselves what in fact was discussed at Amsterdam about issues such as EU institutions , the democratic deficit , transparency and the rights of European citizens .
The answer is a resounding nothing !

Mr Gutiérrez Díaz is to be congratulated on his report , in particular in respect of a proposal he makes to create a special charter for the rights of European citizens .
However , I have to say to those European citizens who are listening to us today in the public gallery that we turn our minds to them once every five years , just before the elections .
The Parliamentary groups , in particular the two large groups , the Socialists and the Christian Democrats , present them with ideological manifestos which are utterly remote from reality and which bear no relation whatsoever to what they do and to their voting record over their five-year term of office .
It is a great pity that the Council of Ministers appears to be too busy to come here and attend the debate today .
And the citizens of Europe must know that there are just two institutions in the entire world which meet behind closed doors : the National Assembly of China and the Council of Ministers of the European Union .
How is it possible for this to go by the name of democracy and how is it possible that , in the name of this democracy , we call upon you to vote in the June elections !
Mr President , I wish to begin by complimenting Vice-President Gutiérrez Díaz on his interesting and thought-provoking report .
If the Union and its institutions are to continue to develop and become stronger over the coming years , it is vital that the citizens of each of our countries continue to accept the democratic legitimacy of these institutions .
We are all citizens of democratic countries and , as far as I am aware , the vast majority of the citizens of each of our countries accepts the democratic nature of our national governments .
However , at European level serious questions continue to be raised by many of our citizens concerning democracy and the European institutions .
It is important that the European institutions that are directly accountable to the electorate - in other words , Parliament and the Council of Ministers - should continue to have - and be seen to have - the final decision-making authority on issues of importance to our citizens .
It is equally important that the Commission , as the institution charged with implementing European policies , should have a reputation for efficient , fair-minded and even-handed administration of European policies agreed on in Parliament and the Council .
This could be best achieved by first ensuring that the interests and concerns of the citizens of each of our countries are made known at the highest level in the Commission .
The present system , whereby there is at least one Commissioner from each Member State , has worked well in the past and should be maintained .
Those who advocate the end of this guarantee of one Commissioner per Member State , supposedly in the interests of efficiency , risk the creation of a Commission which is remote from the citizens of our individual countries .
This , in turn , would weaken the Commission as a European institution .
In any event , the basic structures of the Union , which existed at the time individual countries joined the Union and which enjoyed the support of the majority of our electorate at that time , should be preserved as far as possible .
Foremost amongst these basic structures was , and still is , the principle that each country should have representation at decision-making level in all the major institutions .
Finally , the Council , the Commission , Parliament and the Court of Justice all have representatives from each Member State at present , a fact which contributes significantly to the legitimacy which these institutions enjoy in each of our countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate Mr Gutiérrez Díaz and the Committee on Institutional Affairs on this excellent report .
In my view , the Treaty of Amsterdam is inadequate in some respects ; it has both good and bad points . However , it has allowed us to make significant progress in the area of citizenship , although it is currently difficult to assess the full scope and implications of this .
The Treaty provides us with the possibility of creating the largest ever area in which people can move and work without any obstacles , with equality and with full respect for their rights and for the foundations of the rule of law .
The Commission presented a communication in July 1998 on the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice .
As you all know , and as Mr Hager just pointed out , during the informal meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Pörtschach , a decision was made to hold a special Council meeting dedicated solely to issues relating to justice and home affairs in October of this year in Tampere in Finland .
I fully understand your concerns over certain issues raised by the Treaty and , in particular , the question of how to establish the conditions required for its implementation .
The Treaty of Amsterdam does not precisely define the objectives to be met by the institutions , as Mr Kaklamanis pointed out .
However , this lack of precision is to a certain extent necessary since an area of liberty can never be fully consolidated .
It can only exist if it is capable of constantly adapting to reality and of guaranteeing freedom and rights along with security and justice , to all people in general and to its citizens in particular .
The definition and implementation of these objectives require democratic participation , which , in the long term , should come to mean full participation .
Unfortunately , as Mr Brinkhorst pointed out , the Treaty specifies that a period of five years must pass before the Commission will have the monopoly of initiative in this area and before it can apply the codecision procedure in decision-making .
Parliament must fully exercise its democratic control in this area by continuing to cooperate closely with the national parliaments . This cooperation is something that Parliament has been building on and that will continue to develop .
In this context , we must make full use of the role of the Court of Justice in order to assert respect for the law as a condition for creating this area .
One possibility here would be for the Court of Justice to sanction the actions of the institutions if they did not respect fundamental rights .
There are limits to the jurisdiction of the Court in Luxembourg , particularly as regards the second and third pillars , but these must be progressively overcome .
I agree with the rapporteur that it will not be possible to build an area of liberty unless we fully respect certain rights inherent in freedom of movement , which are only partly respected at the moment .
We must ensure that we adapt our rules to the reality of civil society .
We have social standards that were perfectly adapted to the type of freedom of movement that existed 20 or 30 years ago , but these might prove ineffective in the future .
Equally , the restrictions demanded by the Member States in days gone by may seem unjustified today .
We need to create an area of liberty like that so skilfully described by Mr Manzella .
In addition , we need to realise that we will only have achieved complete democracy when European citizenship is fully consolidated in that area and fully accepted in our daily lives .
I believe that the key here is to go back to the heart of the process of European integration as it was conceived in the 1950s .
We need to get rid of the feelings of hostility and rejection or even the idea that a European from a neighbouring country is a foreigner , and we must replace them with the firm belief that the process of integration is , above all , a process of solidarity .
I would also like to say that I am convinced that if these principles had formed the starting point for the actions of the Member States , our institutional system would have been able to adapt much more quickly to citizens ' needs . I therefore fully agree with the opinion expressed by the rapporteur , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , in this respect .
Moreover , if these principles were truly followed , the intergovernmental conferences would concentrate more on the common interest and be able to take some of the drama out of negotiations that are so important for the continuation of the process of European integration . At the same time , we would move towards a Union that is more closely linked , that has a greater sense of solidarity and that is more in tune with the concerns and needs of its citizens .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
OCTs , ACP countries and remote regions
The next item is the report ( A4-0036 / 99 ) by Mr Aldo , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on relations between the Overseas Countries and Territories ( OCTs ) , the ACP States and the ultraperipheral regions ( UPRs ) of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the own-initiative report on which the House is to vote is of fundamental importance for the future of the people of overseas Europe which , since the Treaty of Rome of 1957 , have all had different relations , to varying degrees , with the European Union .
The report highlights the structural , economic and social problems brought about by the relations that the European Union currently has with its remote territories , relations that are not very well adapted . However , before looking at the report itself , I would like , in particular , to express my sincere and heartfelt thanks to all those who contributed in any way to the drafting of this report .
In order to ensure that this subject is properly understood and to avoid any misunderstandings , I would also like to briefly explain the origins of this report and the motivation behind it .
When I became a Member of the European Parliament in 1994 , I was struck by the lack of knowledge and the total absence of understanding of the overseas territories .
This was particularly evident in the confusion that existed between the overseas departments and the OCTs until the Hansen ruling that was handed down by the Court of Justice in 1978 . I was also struck by the lack of consideration for the overseas dimension these regions bring to the Union , as well as the failure to take account of their specific characteristics when applying Community law .
For the OCTs , there are anachronistic association arrangements , which have their origins in the Treaty of Rome of 1957 and which ignore the fact that the vast majority of these countries have achieved sovereignty . The OCTs and the ACP countries are constantly lumped together , funding is not adapted to the institutional reality of the OCTs , with their respective capitals , and there is a total lack of partnership and consultation when applying Community law to the OCTs .
As I come from an ultraperipheral region of the Union , I therefore quite naturally set myself the objective of clarifying this issue and removing all those ambiguities and confusions that have tarnished the European Union 's relations with its various peripheral partners for almost half a century . In this respect , I had the unconditional support and encouragement of my political group and of other Members with an interest in the matter .
Therefore , in February 1995 , I invited my political group to visit Guadeloupe in order to see for themselves the reality of the problems that I have just set out , through study days on the European Union 's relations with the overseas departments .
As a result , on 6 February 1995 , in the presence of political and socio-professional leaders from the West Indies , Guyana , and the overseas territories , along with members of the press , I proposed for the first time that Article 227 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Rome should be revised .
Once the French Overseas Minister had taken over , and following various processes and stages of consultation , this led to the establishment of the new Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The aim of this approach was similar to that of the provisions of Article 73 of the French Constitution of 1946 and then of 1958 . It hoped to move the utlraperipheral regions towards an adapted integration , removing their status of legal egalitarianism , through a simplified interpretation of the law that applies to them .
It was from this same perspective that in 1996 , I fought for and obtained a more generalised debate on the European Union 's relations with the UPRs , the OCTs and the ACP countries .
As a result of this , on 8 October 1996 , I requested , as coordinator , that this issue be included on the list of proposals to be the subject of a future parliamentary own-initiative report in the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I was successful in this respect , so with this in mind , and in order to move this issue forward while respecting the European Parliaments 's Rules of Procedure , on 20 January 1998 , I sent a letter to Mr Michel Rocard , who had recently been appointed as chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I asked him to include this issue in the committee 's agenda to discuss the matter of the own-initiative report .
Therefore , following a vote at its meeting of Wednesday , 25 February , the Committee on Development agreed to an own-initiative report on this issue and requested authorisation from the Presidency to draw up the report .
That authorisation was granted by the Presidency at the beginning of July 1998 .
As a result , I have the great honour and the very great pleasure of presenting to you today this own-initiative report that summarises the European Union 's vertical relations with its overseas partners , but also attempts to summarise the horizontal relations between these different entities .
We consider the UPRs to be outposts of the Union in various parts of the globe . They are therefore showcases and the key players in Community action in their respective environments .
The UPRs must play a leading role in Lomé 2000 and must be the driving force behind interregional cooperation .
As far as the OCTs are concerned , we now need to clarify their legal status , especially by doing away with the analogy that is drawn with the ACP countries and all the ambiguities surrounding the system of rights to citizenship and rights of establishment .
The hybrid regime for the OCTs , which is somewhere between integration and cooperation , must in no way be a collection of negative elements aimed at curbing , through lack of knowledge or understanding , the good and intelligent relations that must exist between the European Union and the overseas countries and territories .
The association arrangements must therefore be reviewed , as the original dual nature of their institutions - with autonomy in terms of their national law and their justice system under Community law - means that the OCT Declaration 2000 must give priority to four lines of reform . These include strengthening the human dimension , strengthening the partnership between the political leaders of the OCTs and the European Union , strengthening financial solidarity by setting up a special development fund for the OCTs that would replace the current EDF , and respecting the specific institutional features of each OCT .
In our approach , we must make every effort to preserve the powers devolved to the OCTs through their autonomous status .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my voice in this Hemicycle here today is nothing more than a reflection of the combined expectations of the elected representatives and the people of the overseas territories . To assure myself that the views of the people were the same as mine , I have made every effort to consult the people since I first began to consider this issue , firstly as a regional councillor , a member of the COPM since 1986 , then as a founder member of the Committee of the Regions in 1993 and , finally , as a Member of this Parliament since 1994 .
There have obviously been others before me who have had the opportunity and the honour of speaking for the overseas departments , notably through the Ligios report . It was that report that in 1987 report initially raised awareness in the Community institutions of the problems of the overseas departments and ultraperipheral regions and their specific characteristics , and I would also like to thank and congratulate those people for their work .
Applause
Mr President , the Committee on Regional Policy was consulted on the excellent own-initiative report by our colleague Mr Aldo , and considered the issue of relations between what are known as the ultraperipheral regions and the OCTs or ACP countries close to those ultraperipheral regions .
This is the case for the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean .
The Committee on Regional Policy unanimously decided that here we have countries that are united by geography , history , culture , and often by language , but that completely ignore each other from an economic point of view .
Moreover , there are complaints about how confined the markets are in the ultraperipheral regions .
In reality , we feel that it is absolutely necessary that these neighbouring countries - which are naturally close - should form real regional markets , with a view to achieving sustainable and balanced development .
The European Union must contribute to this by promoting joint ventures , that is , associations between companies from ultraperipheral regions and from neighbouring ACP countries and OCTs in order to develop these regional markets and their exports to the Union or to third countries . The Union will also have to include the ultraperipheral regions , the OCTs and the ACP countries in the negotiations that will lead to the future Lomé conventions .
These conventions must , of course , promote the establishment of the regional markets by doing away with the customs barriers . In our view , these barriers are like the leftovers from traditional colonial agreements , and I would like to draw our colleagues ' attention to this .
Economic exchanges between these countries must be guaranteed so as to encourage them to develop in a harmonious manner . And , once again , there needs to be better understanding between neighbouring countries that are in such close proximity .
Mr President , the Committee on Fisheries welcomes Mr Aldo 's initiative .
It has the advantage of drawing attention to the perverse effects of the diversity of Community action concerning territories that are close in geographical terms , but which have a different status .
We need to avoid a situation whereby membership of the Union means that a territory is subject to a series of ill-adapted constraints and whereby non-membership means that a territory benefits from aid that promotes extra-Community competition to the detriment of our own territories .
The socio-economic balance of all these territories is largely linked to activities that depend on the sea , particularly fishing .
Therefore , our committee unanimously adopted a series of recommendations , which were all taken over by the rapporteur . They are aimed precisely at preventing a situation whereby membership of the European Union is a handicap for our ultraperipheral territories .
Our committee highlights the need for changes in the law to allow the CFP to be applied differently in these regions that are very remote from the European continent . It must be adapted to the opportunities for development offered by their maritime areas that have a strong fisheries potential .
We also emphasise the need to improve equipment , in particular by regionalising the MAGPs . Moreover , we would stress the need to introduce a modulation of the POSEIDOM aid scheme , as although its effectiveness has been proved , certain provisions need to be refined in order to ensure better protection of resources .
Our committee recommends that Community policies for the OCTs should be consistent with the European Union 's cooperation policies for the ACP countries , particularly as regards preferential trade measures and policies on direct aid . They should also be consistent with the GSP measures , especially the drug GSP , and we should reconsider the validity of this mechanism .
Finally , our committee underlines the urgent need for delimitation of waters in the Caribbean , as that is the only means of achieving fisheries agreements in that region . It also calls for stricter checks in Community waters dependent on the OCTs and ultraperipheral regions , as these waters are frequented by many fleets from third countries that are drawing on the resources in an anarchic manner .
We shall suspend the debate on the Aldo report at this point ; it will be resumed in the afternoon .
We have now reached voting time .
VOTES
Madam President , I would like to speak on a point of order pursuant to Rule 101 .
Like all my colleagues who were present in the House this morning , I noted with astonishment the Council 's absence during the debate on the Bourlanges report on decision-making within the Council in an enlarged Europe .
Under Rule 101 , the Council may be present in the Chamber .
As this is a debate on the reforms which must be undertaken in future in the context of the process of major institutional reform which Parliament is firmly demanding and which is at last gaining widespread support , we feel it is imperative that the Council should attend .
It may not be required to do so by any rules as such , but it is surely only proper for it to do so .
Whatever our opinions , we all agree on the importance of this debate and of the ideas it allows us to develop prior to enlargement .
I would ask the President to protest strongly to the Council , on Parliament 's behalf , at its absence during this morning 's debate .
Applause
I can assure you that I will pass on your request , Mr Duhamel , since this is indeed a very unfortunate absence .
Madam President , we are now going to vote on Amendment No 18 .
There is a technical problem here , because I believe it would be a good idea to replace the first part of the original version of recital D with the first part of this amendment . I therefore propose a vote in two parts , the first part up to ' victims of gender-specific persecution ' .
But if the second part of the amendment is not adopted , I would ask that we should vote on the second part of the original version of the recital .
Otherwise this would not make sense .
Yes , that is how we always proceed .
The House is now fully in the picture .
On paragraph 11
Madam President , paragraph 11 poses a linguistic problem in the French language version .
Mrs Pailler put forward an amendment in committee and I pointed out to her that the term ' statut de non-droit ' was contradictory .
We therefore changed it with her agreement .
However , I see today that it is still included in the French version .
You must tell me which text is authentic , and if it is the French text , this expression must be changed once again .
Yes , it is the French version which is authentic .
I propose that we insert ' situation de non-droit ' in the French version to replace ' statut de non-droit ' .
This is also the term that was adopted in committee .
Parliament adopted the resolution
I am voting against this recommendation / common position because I believe it does not adequately address the technical issues involved .
A civil peace corps is an old ' green ' idea for channelling European foreign policy cooperation in a constructive , rather than a military and therefore destructive direction .
The European Civil Peace Corps will be able to call on a core of full-time employed professionals , as well as a pool of mission-specific professionals , including conscientious objectors on a voluntary basis and unpaid volunteers , for specific missions .
It often happens that conflicts flare up again in the wake of a military peacekeeping mission because the causes of the violence have not been addressed .
Facilitating dialogue and mutual confidence building should be a part of every peace mission .
A lasting peace can be achieved , above all , through a genuine process of reconciliation .
It is in that context that a civil peace corps should be able to fill a gap .
I am fully aware that many of those who voted for this proposal believe that a civil peace corps should be complementary to the Union 's military capability .
However , the Green Group , including myself , clearly hope that it will become an alternative .
We have absolutely nothing against the EU taking part in operations abroad , provided that the activities are peaceful and constructive .
Perhaps a successful civil peace corps might persuade some European activists that it is unfashionable and outdated to earn respect on the world stage through a show of military might .
The future belongs to those who promote peace , not war .
I wish to thank the rapporteur for his work on the EU Copyright Directive which is a complex and technical subject of importance to artists in Europe .
The Greens have sought from the beginning to make the protection of the creativity of writers , composers , musicians-performers EU-wide , a priority in amending the Copyright Directive .
In Ireland musicians and performing artists such as BoyZone and the Corrs have appealed for copyright protection for their work .
The rapporteur has my full support in his appeal for a strong directive , protecting the music industry from piracy on the Internet .
The fact is that digital technology can ' clone ' an exact reproduction of the original , leading to an increased risk of piracy on the Internet .
I will continue to support a call for a strong Copyright Directive .
I am personally committed to the protection of the rights of European artists , writers and composers .
Europe 's cultural industries have a great deal to lose if this new directive is not absolutely protective of creative rights and intellectual property .
We share the rapporteur 's view that harmonisation is needed to create a fully functioning internal market for those with copyright protection .
However , we cannot agree with Amendment No 48 , since it would mean that anyone wishing to set up a broadcasting organisation would be required to have a licence .
In Sweden , we have an effective system based on a licensing agreement . In practical terms , it consists of a collective agreement concluded by a representative licensing body .
We would also like to emphasise that , in our view , the Member States should provide for exemptions from the copyright restrictions specified in Articles 2 , 3 and 4 in the case of non-commercial use for the benefit of people with disabilities .
This is best expressed in Amendment No 72 .
We would point out that , in our view , there should be exemption from the restrictions in Articles 2 and 3 for use where the purpose is to make official documents accessible to the public , as set out in Amendment No 69 .
We support the amendments granting exemption from the restrictions in Articles 2 and 3 in respect of the setting-up of a library or archive , for example .
At the end of 1997 , the Commission put forward a controversial proposal for the harmonisation of copyright law in the Community .
It did not believe that national laws were working well or had kept up with technological developments .
The Commission also wished to limit the extensive pirate copying of CDs and CD-ROMs .
In its original form , the proposal meant that a consumer who had bought a CD could not copy it on to tape in order to be able to listen to the music while he was out jogging .
Furthermore , the Commission 's original proposal for a directive ignored the fact that a number of public service stations would have problems if they wished to use CDs as background music for TV broadcasts , and that the visually impaired and people with reading difficulties would not be able to enjoy special offers from libraries .
Special offers made available by public institutions to the handicapped will not be affected by the proposal .
In the light of this , the Danish Social Democrats have endorsed an amendment which ensures that special national schemes will not conflict with EU law .
In this way , it has been possible to secure a well-balanced copyright law which both safeguards the rights of producers to their own output and protects the interests of TV and radio stations and consumers .
At the first reading of Mr Barzanti 's report today , we have abstained from voting on the report as a whole .
We are very concerned that the harmonisation of copyright law in the EU will obstruct free access to information for all social groups , especially people with a visual handicap , for example .
The June Movement regards free access to information as the very cornerstone of democracy . Without opportunities for individual citizens to obtain knowledge and information , the democratic process would become confused .
Nonetheless , we would have liked to support the report in order to protect the interests of artists and safeguard their rights in connection with the exploitation of their work .
Because most of the amendments which we had hoped would safeguard the rights of artists were not adopted , and since most of those which we had either tabled ourselves or endorsed and which would have ensured free access to information for the handicapped and others were also rejected , we chose to abstain on the report as a whole .
We will take the matter up again at second reading .
Issues related to the information society and the Internet are of great interest to me .
Apart from the aspects which imply a radical change in the way our societies are organised , there are still a number of questions about how our legislation and our legal tools are going to have to change in future in this area .
I would therefore like to congratulate our President , José Maria Gil Robles , and Roberto Barzanti for having responded so rapidly to artists ' concerns that their work is too often being used illegally on the Internet .
While it is relatively easy to draw up a report and protecting the concept of copyright is the least we can do , it is not easy to legislate at European level to provide proper protection for the ' victims ' of this plagiarism .
This is an area where we need to show imagination in establishing effective legal protection .
To do this , I believe we must promote measures which are appropriate for the different forms of dissemination and piracy .
Following the example of existing broadcasting legislation , should we not also introduce a user charge levied when compression tools such as MP3 or MP4 are sold ?
However , we have to be realistic , since we have to find common ground with all parties concerned , and in particular with the United States and the producers of this type of software .
Therefore , while I agree on the whole with the rapporteur 's concerns , I question the distinction that is made between analogue copying and digital copying .
In my opinion , digital has already won .
The Barzanti report stems from an important debate concerning the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society .
We believe that the report creates a good basis for further discussion of the protection and exercise of the privileges of rightholders .
If we cannot endorse the report , it is not because we wish to remove the advantages enjoyed by rightholders with regard to the exploitation of their work , but because the proposal adopts an unnecessarily restrictive approach to the definition of rights , which in the worst case would deny artists the right to negotiate for themselves both the scale of payment and what rights they transfer to a producer .
The Scandinavian countries have a long tradition and great experience of solving difficult copyright issues with the help of licensing agreements .
We think that this traditional Scandinavian model involving collective agreements ought to be retained .
At the same time , we take the view that publicly funded institutions which are open to the public , such as museums , libraries , archives and so on , should have the opportunity to participate fully in the development of the information society .
Taken to the extreme , the contents of the report would mean that copyright legislation would prevent them from fulfilling their non-commercial , educational function .
If the report is adopted in its current form , without taking into account a number of proposed amendments , it will for example no longer be possible to record radio and TV broadcasts for short-term use for the inmates of care homes , hospitals , prisons and so on .
We believe that a move in this direction , which does not sufficiently take account of the general public 's need for and right to free and equal access to information , would be disastrous in terms of social development and democracy .
Technological changes are currently weakening certain legal categories .
This is true of the field of taxation , where the Internet is changing basic concepts such as the tax frontier , tax territory and the tax base .
It is also true of the field of artistic and literary property .
Two principles are in conflict here : the right of the author to protect his work and his right to a fair income from his work versus the freedom of the Internet .
In this respect , the European Union is all the more contradictory as one of its fundamental principles is precisely that of free movement .
However , where there is freedom of movement , there cannot be protection , and vice versa .
In literary and artistic works , the Europe of Brussels is finally discovering what it has spent 40 years refusing to see with coal , steel , textiles , cars and agricultural products , namely that freedom of movement prevents real protection .
We want to give the field of culture what we have denied our farmers by reducing customs duties and the common agricultural levy , and we wish to do so by means of an exception .
This is good , but it must be applied across the board .
In itself , the draft directive that we have been looking at includes entirely acceptable elements which are designed to protect authors ' ethical and financial rights .
If we take music , for example , there is no doubt that digital compression technologies , such as MP3 or the new VQF standard that has appeared recently , represent a potential danger to the record industry , even if no scientific study has as yet been undertaken to confirm this .
In France , we have seen only a slight drop in the sale of singles but this may be a mere coincidence .
Another danger that is equally real lies in the solutions that might be introduced .
It would be tempting to place the information society under supervision , then we could control everything .
The European Union makes no secret of its ambitions for the Internet : to transform this information area , this tool of cultural and personal development , into a mere shopping arcade .
In France we have seen the success of Canal + , where a broadcasting monopoly was effectively created .
But nobody pointed out that Canal + developed without any competition .
In France the state has a monopoly on broadcasting .
By penalising the pirating of Canal + decoders , we effectively created a monopoly on reception .
And some people would like to do the same with the Internet ... the best of all possible worlds !
The solution is not only to be found in a directive inevitably restricted to the European Union .
Taking into account the level of market penetration , it is above all American authors who are protected .
European authors , on the other hand , do not have the same sort of guarantee as in the United States , for example .
The concept of copyright is much more restrictive there than in France , for example .
In order to effectively protect copyright and related rights , a better solution would be an international conference on the subject , where sovereign states could defend their own industries and agree to protect other countries ' in accordance with the principle of reciprocity .
A balance must be struck between freedom and ownership .
For the first time in history , freedom is being played against art .
This is a novelty for the artists .
They had been taught by the Left to be defenders of freedom .
Today they are pleading against it for the sake of their right to ownership .
The Internet really is changing everything , even the most firmly entrenched roles .
The Community has certainly taken its time in getting round to harmonising the legal framework for copyright .
In the last few years we have seen open and flexible legislation designed for an increasingly developed world of technology and computers on the one hand , and on the other , old and outdated rules , as in Italy , where the matter is governed by a law going back 60 years .
While there is absolutely no question of challenging the sacrosanct right of authors and editors to have their work protected , we think it is crucial , in regulating individual Member States ' exceptions to the right of reproduction , not to dance to the tune of large record multinationals , for example , to the detriment of small and medium-sized European recording companies .
Article 5 needs rewording to avoid de facto restriction of access to the network for independent operators .
There still needs to be a right of reproduction for scientific and cultural works which are educational rather than commercial , together with a flat rate payment if more than 20 % of the book is reproduced .
This would also make things easier for small craft companies involved in reproduction , and indeed for their clients , almost always university students forced to buy very expensive textbooks even when they only need one chapter , thus feeding an often unregulated lobbyist market obviously speculating on comparative prices .
Until standard criteria which meet the needs of the market are finally established at Community level there is a risk that Member States may embark on different and even divergent paths , seriously prejudicing the much-trumpeted achievement of the single market .
I was sorry to have to abstain from the final vote on the Barzanti report .
Adopting the text for Article 5 ( 1 ) as proposed by the rapporteur and approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs means that quite unjustified authorisations will be required for making technical copies from the Internet , which will simply have the effect of extending the supremacy in distribution of the great American recording multinationals into the digital world .
This is an extremely restrictive measure for European operators , in clear and paradoxical contradiction to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act just promulgated in the United States .
In other words , two different legal frameworks are being constructed as regards Internet accessibility .
In the United States operators ' freedom of access is recognised , while in the European Union , under pressure from the large multinationals and with the pretext of combatting piracy , the scope which authors and independent groups have to express themselves is being reduced .
As the procedure provides for a second reading , considerable efforts are needed to promote an approach that gives greater weight to the legitimate principles of expression and right of access for European operators , who are excluded today .
At a time when incredibly rapid development is taking place in the area of digital technology , we have found that earlier legislation in the field of copyright does not cover this area adequately .
In dealing with this directive , the Conservative Members of Parliament are working to create a balance between protecting the rights of copyright holders who are threatened by digital developments and safeguarding access to information for individual consumers , especially in connection with television and radio .
For me it is crucial that this balance is secured in the best way possible , so that in future , copyright holders will be assured of payment for the use of their work , without severely limiting the range of information available to ordinary citizens .
The creators of intellectual works , and all those who have contributed to their creation , are now virtually defenceless against the use , distribution and reproduction of their work by means of new reproduction and communication technologies .
National laws to protect intellectual property and associated rights together with the corresponding Community legislation , which was inadequate even before globalisation and the implementation of digital technologies , need reforming and supplementing immediately on the basis of the new technological facts .
It is also crucial that measures be taken at national , community and international level to protect authors and composers from piracy and from the theft , use and reproduction of their work . We believe that there has already been a considerable delay in implementing such measures .
Notwithstanding certain objections and reservations we may have , the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is a positive attempt to tackle this problem . It also calls for already existing Community legislation to be brought up to date , by providing legal protection in areas such as reproduction rights , public broadcasting rights and distribution rights , and by providing legal protection against piracy .
Extending such protection to cover not only authors , composers and performers but also producers of CDs and CD-ROMs and radio stations , while positive and logical in principle , must be examined to determine whether all these rights can be regarded as the same . Perhaps it would be better to examine such protection separately to avoid the danger of misinterpreting the term ' intellectual creation ' and the definition of composers and performers .
Finally , the most important , and perhaps the most intractable problem is that of the distribution of artistic works and , more generally , intellectual property via the Internet , and the possibility of reproducing such works using digital technology .
Although the report attempts to tackle this problem , we feel that it can only be solved if we address the more general issue of electronic copying , especially at an international level , and if we combat the new forms of piracy and forgery which are springing up and going unpunished .
The Swedish Social Democrats are delighted that steps are being taken to put an end to unfair tax competition between countries both outside and inside the European Union .
However , we are not sure that the Commission , in its proposal , is going the right way about it .
In our view , the fairest way would be for citizens to pay tax where they reside .
Accordingly , we wholeheartedly support the idea of an exchange of information between states , rather than a model based on a minimum rate of taxation .
Prior to the present proposal , we would have preferred to be able to adopt a position on an exchange of information , as opposed to a minimum tax rate .
Now that this is not possible , we have decided to support the amendment that advocates the highest minimum rate of tax .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament are voting in favour of the EU setting rules on the minimum taxation of interest income from savings .
Until now , people have been able to avoid paying tax on savings deposited in other countries .
This has led to unreasonable incomes and distortions in the market , and has favoured banks in Luxembourg , for example .
The European Parliament has just approved a twin-track approach which means that a minimum percentage of interest income will either be withheld in the individual Member State or that banks and authorities will exchange information across borders so that tax can be collected .
Banking secrecy could therefore be maintained if the first option is used .
The Danish Social Democrats do not see the proposal in any way as a move towards tax harmonisation , but as convincing evidence that the EU can put a stop to the extensive tax speculation in Europe .
The proposal for a Council directive that we are examining today is one of the most important on which we have had to give our opinion in recent years .
We all acknowledge that a guaranteed minimum effective taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments in EU Member States other than the investor 's country of residence is an ideal way to prevent harmful tax competition between the Member States .
Apart from helping to reduce the distortions that are still widespread in the internal market , this widening of the tax base will allow Member States , if they so wish , to reduce the excessive costs that burden labour income and sometimes seriously handicap our businesses , subject as they are to international competition in an increasingly global economy .
The proposal for a directive that we are discussing today is certainly not the last word in capital taxation regimes .
On this point I agree entirely with the rapporteur that a great deal remains to be done in order to achieve an ideal capital taxation system and , in particular , that we need the broadest possible discussions on the issue with the EU 's major partners in the capital markets : the US , Japan and Switzerland .
While we are working on such an agreement , I , like many others , believe that this proposal for a directive is certainly an important step in the right direction .
I would even say that it is the progress we have been waiting for for a number of years .
The Commission has certainly done some excellent work here .
I will therefore be supporting , without any reservation whatsoever , the proposal for a directive as amended by Parliament .
I am delighted with the amendments introduced by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to the proposal for a directive on taxation of savings , which aims to ensure a minimum of effective taxation of individuals ' savings income in the form of interest payments within the Community .
I am particularly delighted that my amendment to reduce the level of withholding tax from 20 % to 15 % has been adopted , for three reasons .
Firstly , too high a rate would harm investment , and therefore also growth and employment .
Secondly , the rate of withholding tax applied in international tax agreements only rarely exceeds 15 % .
Thirdly , too high a rate would make all attempts to limit capital flight completely futile .
The aim of the directive is to prevent capital flight to EU Member States where rates are higher .
So how can we prevent capital from seeking out more favourable tax environments ?
From this perspective , choosing a rate of 25 % , as suggested by the French Government , would be an economic error that would run counter to the objective of fighting harmful tax competition .
In this respect I am delighted with the proposal by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to begin negotiations with neighbouring countries on fiscal matters .
It has also been suggested that these discussions could then be extended to include the OECD members .
This being the case , it is good that the European Union is not making the outcome of these discussions a precondition for implementing the directive on taxation of savings .
There are enough stumbling blocks already without adding others ...
I will therefore vote in favour of the resolution and the proposal for a directive , provided that no amendment is adopted to modify my proposal for a withholding tax of 15 % .
As the House approves the 20 % and does not deem it necessary to first reach an agreement with our neighbouring countries , I am voting against the report .
Tax policy is , for the most part , a national matter .
However , dumping through unfair tax competition where the aim is to avoid paying tax should be tackled by means of European rules , provided minimum rules are applied .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
I voted against the Pérez Royo report on taxation of savings because it is the best way to ensure that savings leave the European Union .
New York and Zurich , which are already rubbing their hands , will be the main beneficiaries of this suicidal relocation operation , Zurich in particular when it comes to European collective investment undertakings within the meaning of the 1985 directive .
To top it all , it is only the collective investment undertakings that are targeted , with the result that the promoters will try to relocate outside the EU in order to continue to sell collective investment undertakings to their European customers tax-free .
This will mean the end of many of the European collective investment undertakings .
You will have promoted tax evasion outside the Community and internal tax revenue will be non-existent .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has turned a deaf ear .
None of my 34 amendments were adopted and my arguments against the ridiculous administrative burden proposed were not heeded .
This enormously expensive red-tape for the paying agents will in itself create competitive disadvantages in terms of management costs and will result in collective investment undertakings leaving the EU .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , like Mr Monti , is also turning a deaf ear to the need at the same time to take measures equivalent to those adopted in a Community directive in third countries that are likely to attract EU capital .
If the directive was introduced it should apply above all to the dependent or associated territories of certain Member States and also where these Member States have particular responsibilities or tax prerogatives .
The real tax havens within the Community are Monaco , San Marino , Andorra , the Channel Islands , the Netherlands Antilles , and so on .
Surely you do not believe that , as Mr Poos , the Luxembourg Minister , has just stated in our Chamber of Deputies , my country is prepared to agree to a fool 's bargain and to be the only one to play the unenviable role of the sacrificial lamb on the altar of rigged tax harmonisation ?
Moreover , do not forget that there can be no question of abandoning our condition that the fiscal package put together on 1 December 1997 under the Luxembourg Presidency should apply across the board .
Long live unanimity !
This is a classic example of tax harmonisation .
First there was harmonisation of VAT and excise duties .
Since then , the European Commission has been dragging out its plans to harmonise corporate tax and above all to harmonise taxation of savings , especially as the single currency has heightened the distortions between many tax systems , with all the risks of relocation and competition between them .
Being a poor loser , the Commission has tried to guard against the fiscal dumping that is inherent in free movement by means of its European Code of Conduct , which is in fact only a cartelisation code for tax authorities in order to maintain the oligopoly .
It is against this background that we have the Pérez Royo report on the proposal for a directive of 4 June 1998 , which clearly aims to set a ceiling on taxation of savings income in order to counter the Luxembourg tax haven .
There would be a dual ceiling : either the application of a 20 % rate of taxation on interest payments or the supply of information .
Taxation or information .
The choice would be between paying the withholding tax and being subject to taxation in the Member State of residence .
This is what we call the model of coexistence : the coexistence of states that apply the withholding tax regime and states that do not .
But that does not solve the problem of globalisation .
Capital moves around , even beyond Europe .
The problem exists for Eurobonds , which may be underwritten by investors outside Europe .
Hence the proposal from Professor Pérez Royo for a multilateral agreement with Japan , Switzerland and the US .
This shows how outdated Europe is : the tax village is becoming global .
In terms of capital , globalisation is complete .
European taxation is therefore obsolete .
It can only apply to taxpayers whose residence is fixed and localised , with the glaring injustice that we all know so well .
Europe without frontiers overtaxes labour income to make up for not being able to tax capital income .
This is why the Europe of free movement is a Europe that deprives people who are permanent residents in favour of nomads .
Britain 's Labour MEPs support the principles behind the Commission 's proposals to prevent tax evasion on cross-border payments of interest to individuals . However , these proposals as currently drafted are flawed and against the interests of employment in Europe 's financial services industry .
The timing of the introduction of a withholding tax directive is crucial .
Unilateral European Union level action runs the genuine risk of creating an outflow of capital to third countries- for example , Switzerland .
Should this happen , then jobs in EU financial centres will be lost to third countries as capital leaves .
In addition , there will be no benefit to exchequers as the taxable interest payments will be outside the 15 Member States .
It is not appreciated that Eurobonds or international securities are included within the scope of the directive .
Such a move would also run the genuine risk of relocating the whole Eurobond market outside of the EU and in particular , the City of London .
British Labour MEPs are acutely conscious of the New York experience of imposing a unilateral tax on such financial services .
For many years , Eurobonds were almost exclusively traded in New York .
The introduction of a unilateral tax regime saw their near total relocation to London .
As currently drafted therefore , this directive poses a direct threat to between 10 000 and 110 000 jobs , mainly in London 's financial services , depending on whose analyses you believe .
Indeed , there are already clear indications of Swiss preparations for any new opportunities that may arise as a result of EU action .
British Labour MEPs will be supporting calls for a multilateral policy development with the other OECD financial centres to tackle this important issue of tax evasion , and for the exclusion of Eurobonds from this directive .
In the absence of such amendments being carried , British Labour MEPs will vote against this directive .
Both the Commission proposal and the Pérez Royo report on introducing a minimum level of taxation on savings income undoubtedly deserve our support .
Especially now , with the single currency and the absence of any exchange risk , this is the only way to rule out predatory fiscal competition .
We must , however , be vigilant about competition in this area from third countries and should therefore demand - particularly via the OECD - that they too should apply minimum levels of taxation .
We recognise that this cannot be expected immediately and must therefore agree with the amendment approved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in favour of a 15 % rather than a 20 % minimum rate , to less the impact of any harmful competition .
We therefore disagree with the rapporteur , who has just told us that he would be voting for the 20 % figure .
Alongside the Code of Conduct adopted by the Council in an effort to avoid harmful tax competition among Member States , the Commission has presented a text , in the form of a proposal for a directive , that is both premature and immature .
It is premature because it lacks a global approach towards tax harmonisation .
Harmonisation of taxation of savings is just one specific aspect of a harmonisation operation that must encompass a number of other areas , of which company taxation is one of the most important .
Harmonising only one part of the tax system is potentially more harmful than maintaining the different fiscal regimes that currently exist .
As a result , the true merit of a directive on harmonising taxation of savings can only be appreciated once the overall plan has been drawn up and approved .
The text is immature because all of its components are largely controversial and their effects on the European economy are not known .
The European Commission and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy set out the principles on which agreement could be reached in time : a withholding tax , coexistence , a common rate of withholding tax .
But the practical application of these principles requires more careful consideration and , above all , solutions must first be found to many specific problems : the definition of a realistic minimum rate of withholding tax ; coexistence , yes , but without the additional untransparent complications of a system of certificates and reimbursements , paving the way for problems in the system ; imprecise definitions of the ' beneficial owner ' and the ' paying agent ' ; potentially negative consequences for the European financial markets if Eurobonds are included in this directive without exemption , and so on .
None of these problems has as yet been resolved and as a result this proposal for a directive can at the very most be considered as a preliminary draft that still requires intensive work .
Some of Parliament 's amendments are a step in the right direction , without necessarily touching on the fundamental problems : the rate of the withholding tax has been lowered ; the role of certain neighbouring countries , which will be the sole beneficiaries of the directive in its current version , is mentioned ; the usefulness of a certain degree of fair tax competition and the subsequent beneficial reduction in fiscal pressure is underlined .
Otherwise , the report remains too close to the Commission text .
Even though the explanatory statement is not part of the legislative text , it contains several opinions with which I do not agree : reducing the problem of Eurobonds to a purely British problem and , above all , the rapporteur 's ideal vision , according to which ' an ideal ( fiscal ) regime should be based on the principle of supply of information to the fiscal authorities , i.e. on the elimination of banking secrecy for fiscal purposes ' .
For these reasons I am voting against the Pérez Royo report .
I can support an effort being made to counter speculation due to the different rules on the taxation of interest on savings accounts in the EU 's Member States , so as to ensure a modest minimum level of taxation .
I can also support the Commission 's thinking as regards a minimum level of taxation , but I would like to stress that this does not mean that the Danish Conservatives endorse an actual harmonisation of tax rates .
I would also like to help bring about a certain exchange of information between Member States to make it possible for taxation to take place in one form or another .
At the same time , however , we must ensure that new EU rules in this field do not encourage pension funds and other financial institutions currently based in the EU area to move to countries outside the European Union .
' It is not necessary to recall the origins of this proposal for a directive , or the importance that the fiscal regime of interest assumes in the functioning of the single market - especially when regarded in relation to the introduction of the euro . '
The first three lines of the rapporteur 's explanatory statement thus crudely reveal that the objective being pursued is to combat the pernicious yet entirely predictable effects of the creation of the euro on certain capital movements .
As a result of the introduction of the euro in the single market , the tax differentials between the various Member States are causing significant capital movements , and attempts are now being made to curb these , for example by introducing a minimum rate of taxation on income from capital invested by individuals .
It is astonishing to note that the effects of the euro on capital movements were not properly understood before it was introduced .
Regarding the report itself , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has voted in favour of the amendments spelling out the need to harmonise the basic principles of taxation with OECD members .
If we introduce harmonisation that is limited only to the Member States of the European Union , it is highly probable that we will witness the flight of capital to third countries .
With regard to the minimum rate of taxation of interest paid , our group voted in favour of the amendment by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which lowers this minimum rate to 15 % from the 20 % rate proposed by the Commission ; a minimum rate that is too high could result in the flight of capital to third countries .
In our view , the opinion delivered by the European Parliament on this subject is the result of a compromise which is preventing Parliament from helping to advance the Commission 's continuing work in this area .
Unfortunately , the opinion is representative of the fact that the right , particularly the PPE Group , is working to ensure that Parliament becomes an obstacle to third-country nationals enjoying the rights to which they are entitled while in the European Union .
A common set of rules defining the rights of third-country nationals and their freedom to travel and reside in the Member States is a precondition for all citizens being able to move around freely .
In this context , it is regrettable that the PPE Group and others are trying to restrict these rights and opportunities .
Not only is it detrimental to the rights and opportunities of a number of third-country nationals , but it also makes it more difficult to achieve the goal of the free movement of persons .
We should like to make it clear that we are opposed to the ranking of people seeking work in a Member State in the following order : citizens of the Member State itself , citizens of the Union and third-country nationals , as set out in Article 7 .
Nor are we able to agree with the view expressed in Amendment No 43 tabled by Mr Nassauer of the PPE Group , in which he calls for the age limit for family reunification to be lowered to 16 .
However , we welcome Amendments Nos 44 and 45 , which place partnerships on an equal footing with marriage in terms of family reunification , although we are concerned that the wording of these amendments to EU rules detracts from the possibility of them being applied effectively in all the Member States .
It is essential to point out at this stage that asylum seekers are covered by existing conventions aimed at protecting them against persecution .
Different criteria must be applied to those wishing to enter the European Union on economic grounds .
The key issue now under debate is whether we should have a strict or a relaxed admission policy .
I would argue that if the European Union admits third country nationals for the purpose of servicing the specific needs of individual Member States ' labour shortages then it would be repulsive to adopt a ' revolving door ' policy by taking no responsibility for the tangible economic input of workers from third countries .
I would further argue for a strict rather than a relaxed admission policy so as to protect the rights of third country nationals by outlining clearly the necessary criteria for admission .
Harmonising Member States ' visa policies with regard to third countries is , in my view , essential as a major step towards improving the safety of travel documents .
The mutual recognition of travel documents is paramount to implementing EU policy on the admission of third country nationals .
From an Irish perspective , the influx of refugees , asylum seekers and immigrants is a relatively new experience for us as a nation .
Mistakes have been made in dealing with this evolving problem by successive governments .
I have to say I am angry at how some of our citizens treat these strangers .
We can at times hide behind the provisions of the Dublin Convention , which states that the first EU country that an asylum seeker enters must process their application for asylum .
Ireland is seldom the first port of call for prospective asylum seekers .
The Irish Government should be bold and courageous enough to bring in an amnesty for existing refugees and asylum seekers in Ireland .
It should then introduce new and uniform rules to deal with new applications in the future .
The Irish people must show some compassion on this issue .
We , more than most nations , have benefited from the generosity of spirit and kindness of other nations in our history , most notably Britain , Australia and the United States of America .
The very fact that Ireland is currently experiencing an unprecedented economic boom must mean that we do not forget our humanitarian duty to others .
Immigration in Europe is one of the areas which we have dealt with least during the present parliamentary term and , as a result , the work done in this area is largely superficial .
However , the Amsterdam Treaty which is to be implemented in the near future obliges us to broadly review the current status quo with a view to implementing new immigration measures .
All this will very probably lead to numerous problems , in view of the current inflow of persons and the inability of the European Union to become an outlet for world poverty .
One of the major difficulties will consist in making the distinction between foreign nationals who have already been resident in the European Union for several years , and those who have just arrived .
Hence the importance of new provisions in the Amsterdam Treaty which differentiate - with a considerable degree of humanity - between short-term and long-term residence , and immigration and temporary asylum policy .
In the face of the numerous political conflicts currently taking place throughout the world - including on our continent - we cannot close our eyes and just turn away asylum seekers saying that they are not our concern .
Significant progress has been made with regard to the idea of collective responsibility of a group of nations .
European legislation must therefore act as a very strict barrier to foreseeable inflows of persons .
The same applies to ' economic ' immigration , the criteria for which must be laid down very clearly .
The European Parliament has always ardently defended very strict international rules that can be applied in practice .
Controlling our migratory inflows is becoming a major issue , particularly on the eve of enlargement when a number of third country nationals will soon become full citizens .
I therefore approve the second Lehne report because it takes into consideration the realities of the world today without being too liberal and causing harm to our own nationals , but leaving the door open to integration that is controlled in terms of the number of immigrants and in terms of time .
The European Parliament needs to find the right balance .
Immigration must not constitute an obstacle to European cooperation programmes , but for all that we cannot refuse positive immigration , nor can we reject agreements with third countries .
Requiring people to have visas creates a number of awkward problems for third-country nationals wishing to travel and reside in the Member States .
As regards common rules for granting visas , we think there are two aspects to be borne in mind . On the one hand , the rules should make it possible for everyone residing within the Union to move around and , on the other , they should be applied in a spirit of generosity that will enable third-country nationals to travel and reside , so far as is practicable , in the Member States .
We do not foresee any conflict between these two aspects .
In this respect , we welcome the committee 's draft report , since it emphasises the need for more latitude in the rules relating to visas .
The draft Convention on rules for the admission of third-country nationals to the Member States of the Union is quite obviously responding to a need : to try to introduce minimum conditions for the crossing of EU external borders in order to avoid wide gaps allowing immigrants to enter a Member State and then move throughout the whole of Europe .
However , this text , which has clearly been carefully negotiated by the Council , has been damaged by the European Parliament 's amendments .
At any rate , it is affected by a structural defect which calls for serious reservations on our part : possible revision would be practically out of the question .
In fact , Article 42 provides that the Council shall unanimously decide on any amendments to the Convention , which might seem logical given that the text will have been adopted unanimously .
However , this provision poses a problem because if unanimity governs the adoption of a text , it ends up being ultraconservative and even intransigent when it comes to its revision .
In fact , the proper rule which should be laid down is that when a text has been adopted unanimously , the failure of one Member State to give its support - by requesting that it be revised - must automatically lead to improvements being made to it .
This is not a hypothetical question .
It is currently being raised in France in relation to the 1979 directive on the conservation of wild birds .
It could be raised tomorrow in relation to the Convention on rules for the admission of third-country nationals , for example , if a signatory country requests amendments to the rules on family reunification .
Nor is there anything extraordinary about this question : no text can remain unchanged forever , and it is normal to provide the means to make changes to it in the future .
Moreover , an additional problem arises in the Convention we are dealing with today : if a country which had not managed to successfully renegotiate a text wanted to be withdrawn by democratic means from part of or all of the text , it would be difficult to see how this would be possible when - as provided for by the Amsterdam Treaty - it would not have the right to re-establish unilaterally certain checks at its internal borders .
We may therefore find it quite strange that governments are pursuing such conventions without having resolved problems as serious as these beforehand and without having taken all the necessary precautions .
Demands relating to the desire to harmonise immigration and visa policies are also made in Mr Lehne 's report .
The rapporteur 's original idea - like that of Mrs Lindeperg , whose report results from the same logic , despite the fact that they belong to different political groups - is that in view of the present difficulties in these areas , the policies can no longer be dealt with at national level alone .
The draft Amsterdam Treaty should therefore allow the simultaneous harmonisation of visa policies , without which the free movement of persons , implementation of a fair asylum policy , harmonisation of immigration rules , action to combat illegal immigration and effective checks at the external borders would be jeopardised .
The report has undoubtedly been produced within the context of the ratification of the draft Amsterdam Treaty .
It establishes a provisional regulation , the Commission having already undertaken to submit a fresh proposal - in the form of a directive - as soon as the amendments agreed in the Amsterdam Treaty enter into force .
However , in the explanatory statement of the proposal for a Council Act , the Commission considers that current economic factors and the situation on the labour market make it impossible to do away with selective admission policies formulated by the Member States for the purposes of paid employment or independent economic activity .
Nevertheless , it persists in believing that it is Europe 's duty to adopt a global approach with regard to immigration policies .
What about the problems experienced by immigrant populations integrating into societies which already have difficulty defining structures for human and social relations , both internally and with other societies ?
What about the economic and social cost of such measures ?
What about the checks I mentioned at the Community 's external borders which we know do not actually exist or are ineffective in certain regions ?
How much flexibility will the Member States have to react to special situations , in view of a safeguard clause providing for an exception whose duration is limited to what is strictly necessary , and taking into account the interests of other Member States which the state keeps closely informed as well as the Commission ?
All these questions remain unanswered today .
Too much is at stake for us to venture into the unknown in this way .
The road to hell is paved with good intentions .
This maxim is too easily applied to the spirit of Mr Lehne 's reports .
Politics is the art of reality , not of utopia .
The generations of this century have been paying too high a price for this since 1917 for us to transform the European Union of tomorrow into a vast Yugoslavia in the name of false generosity .
Madam President , in the Lindeperg report which has just been voted on , the European Parliament calls for the ' upwards ' harmonisation - these are the words used in the explanatory statement - of forms of protection complementary to refugee status .
In fact , the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 , signed by all the Member States of the Union , provides for this status to be granted to individuals persecuted in their country of origin on grounds of race , religion , nationality , membership of a social group or political opinion ; the European Parliament thinks this is too restrictive .
In particular , it would like a broader definition of the recognised causes of persecution - to include gender-specific causes , for example - and of potential persecutors , whose definition would no longer be confined to state bodies .
In addition to a less restrictive interpretation of the definitions of the Geneva Convention , which would open up the way for a complementary refugee status , a temporary protection scheme for displaced persons is being set up at the same time by the European Union , in order to offer a full range of legal structures for reception to all individuals or groups of persons wanting to flee their country of origin for one reason or another .
The proposal which the European Parliament is making with regard to this complementary status seems to me to be completely typical of how it usually acts .
It is announced that the new status will grant rights , without taking the trouble to say which ones and merely giving the impression that they will not be subject to a time-limit .
No attempt is made to ascertain how many new refugees there will be as a result - directly or indirectly - nor how much all of this will cost the taxpayer .
Of course , there is no mention anywhere in the report of what the citizens of the Member States might think about this .
For our part , we consider that this is a completely irresponsible way of doing things .
Of course , the countries of Europe must show concern for the welfare of foreigners who have been persecuted , firstly by scrupulously applying the provisions of the Geneva Convention .
However , this solicitude can take very different forms , one of which being residence on our territories for an unlimited duration , which we would have to reject more or less outright .
Madam President , I am making this explanation of vote not only on my own behalf but also on behalf of the Spanish delegation in the Group of the European People 's Party .
We abstained in the vote on this report and I think that I should give you an explanation as to why we neither voted in favour or against . This is particularly important since an issue such as this is perhaps one that requires us to take a particular stance , which is what the Spanish delegation in the PPE Group is doing .
We are naturally in favour of harmonising complementary forms of protection so that refugees who do not meet the conditions laid down in the Geneva Convention yet who truly deserve protection , will receive it .
That is why we have not voted against the report .
We agree with the rapporteur and the majority of this House about the objectives involved .
However , we did not vote in favour of the report because it contains serious flaws . In addition to its legal shortcomings , it also tries to force an interpretation of the Geneva Convention on us which is totally contrary to international law .
However , it was essentially political reasons that prevented us from voting in favour of the report : the demagogy it uses only serves to harm the interests it aims to protect .
This therefore explains the constructive abstention of the Spanish delegation in the PPE Group .
We should like to thank the rapporteur for his very thorough work on an urgently needed report .
We think there is good reason to focus attention on the serious deficiencies that exist in the Union 's reception procedure for asylum-seekers .
The report deserves praise for the way in which it discusses the measures that will be required to create a workable common refugee policy in which compassion , solidarity and generosity play a major role in determining the Member States ' responsibility for accepting refugees .
With regard to the amendment tabled by the GUE / NGL Group relating to Abdullah Ocalan , we do not believe that the matter really comes within the ambit of the present discussion .
Unfortunately , we note from the amendment tabled by the rightist UPE and PPE Groups that the difficulties which the Council had in reaching agreement on a common refugee policy are also reflected in the narrow attitude displayed by these groups in the European Parliament .
The way in which this matter has been handled shows , yet again , the ideological divide that exists between the right and left in Europe in their approach to a humane and generous refugee policy .
We regret that the same ideological differences have served to deprive Amendments Nos 1 and 2 relating to persecution on the grounds of sexual proclivity of the support they warranted from the European Parliament .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of a report on the need to adopt common rules in addition to the Geneva Convention .
There is a need for European cooperation on refugee questions .
The first step towards a common refugee policy was taken with the adoption of the Geneva Convention .
The next step should be some common rules for people who are not covered by the latter .
These are people who are not being persecuted individually by the State for political reasons , but who need asylum on other humanitarian grounds .
The Member States should have a uniform interpretation of how these people can be assured of proper protection .
It is time for us to start discussing a common definition of de facto and other humanitarian protection .
There should be certain minimum standards with which all the Member States are obliged to comply .
Since the start of the 1990s , the European Union has been experiencing an influx of refugees who have fled their countries of origin for various reasons .
Many of them do not fall into the category of ' refugees ' as defined by the Geneva Convention .
However , the European Union cannot refuse these persons entry into its territory .
In fact , sending them back to their country of origin without further ado would put their lives at risk , or would at the very least jeopardise their moral or physical integrity .
Harmonisation of the policies pursued by the Member States is necessary in this area , and this will be possible as soon as the Amsterdam Treaty has entered into force .
Within this framework , we need to set up an instrument to harmonise the forms of protection complementing refugee status .
I broadly agree with the rapporteur on all these points .
In fact , I believe as she does that the European Union must grant a specific status to persons who cannot claim refugee status within the meaning of the Geneva Convention .
The debate is mainly concerned with the definition of the categories which are eligible for this complementary status .
It seems to me that a number of points still need to be clarified .
One example will illustrate my view : whatever we think otherwise of the death penalty , can a person who at the end of a fair trial is sentenced to death for crimes and offences under civil law , having exhausted all the possibilities of legal redress , really enjoy the specific status I mentioned - as the rapporteur seems to suggest - under the pretext that capital punishment has been abolished by the Member States of the European Union ?
If so , on what terms ?
Can a condemned person be given the same status as , for example , a woman fleeing her country of origin because she has fears of being subjected to sexual violence , or inhuman or degrading treatment ?
This type of question is at the very least worth taking time to discuss in depth .
Complementary status is essential .
I just think that the dossier is not ready yet .
I am therefore voting against this report and urge that the debate be continued .
The June Movement is going to vote for the Lindeperg report to show our willingness to accept refugees .
The Lindeperg report is more humane than the policy which the civil servants and justice ministers are planning .
But , for the record , we should not forget to point out that it should be for the Member States themselves to decide on immigration and refugee policy .
We do not want any supranational cooperation in this area because refugee policy is improved if the people have the opportunity to endorse it .
In the main , this is a balanced document which addresses some very important fundamental issues .
I sincerely hope that the amendments tabled by the Conservative groups are not adopted .
They would only detract from the quality of the report , as the aim of those political groups is not to make life easier for refugees and asylum-seekers .
Consequently , I hope that Amendments Nos 1 and 2 relating to homosexuals tabled by the ARE Group are adopted by the House .
The matter should be taken very seriously , since homosexuals are persecuted in many countries .
Some countries mete out a range of punishments , including the death penalty , for a person 's sexual predilections .
Freedom from persecution or harassment because of one 's sexual predilections is a basic human right .
It is essential that this should be taken into account in the discussions on asylum legislation , as well as with regard to protection for homosexuals .
I cannot endorse the Lindeperg report , because I do not think that asylum policy should be a matter for the EU .
In my opinion , this belongs solely at national level .
Of course , individual countries are morally and politically obliged to comply with whatever international conventions there may be in this field , both in letter and in spirit .
The rich democracies in particular are obliged to take a lead where the protection of the persecuted people of the world is concerned , which includes providing asylum themselves for those who are being persecuted .
However , my rejection of the report on grounds of political principle should not overshadow the fact that Mrs Lindeperg clearly deals with an important matter in a proper and humane way .
An example is her highlighting of the problem that there are people today who in reality are refugees , but who are not recognised as such according to the definition of the term contained in the Geneva Convention .
I would like to point out , however , that it would be a grave mistake for the EU to set about creating an alternative definition of refugees .
That would be contrary to the principle that refugees are protected by an international convention , agreed under international auspices .
At the same time , I could well imagine that an EU agreement on a different definition of refugees would not be seen as an addition to the Geneva Convention , but as a step towards depriving the Geneva Convention of its substance , so that many more people could be turned away - with a clear conscience - at the EU 's external borders .
The general impression of the EU , and not least of its Member States , is not that they want to expand the definition of refugees , but on the contrary that they wish to restrict it .
The Danish Prime Minister said before the Danish referendum on the Amsterdam Treaty that ' a yes to the Amsterdam Treaty will mean fewer refugees in Denmark . '
The report by our colleague Mrs Lindeperg totally misses the main point of the asylum seeker problem in the European Union , which is that we are not in fact facing a real asylum problem at all , but an asylum cheating problem .
That is something totally different .
Everybody knows that just a few percent of asylum seekers in Europe can justifiably invoke the recognised international conventions on asylum .
If the hundreds of thousands of asylum cheaters who arrive every year to benefit from social security in our Member States were systematically and effectively sent back over the borders , then there would be no asylum problem at all in Europe .
You may be shocked by the use of the term asylum cheater .
Yet it has the benefit of clarity , highlights a reality and contains no human condemnation .
There are only two possible approaches here : either you play at being Santa Claus and say ' all foreigners are welcome in Europe and can be supported by us ' , or you must apply the existing agreements to the letter , in which the case the asylum cheaters must be sent back to their own countries : not just because they put the whole asylum system at risk and thus harm genuine asylum seekers , but also because in Europe itself there are many poor and underprivileged to whom we first owe an obligation before we can take all the suffering of the world on our shoulders .
Mrs Lindeperg clearly opts for the Santa Claus policy .
But she is playing Santa Claus at the taxpayers ' expense .
If her proposals for a further undermining of asylum regulations were to become a reality , the final barrier would be down and we would risk being swamped by fortune seekers from all over the world .
This is therefore an irresponsible report - yet another to come before Parliament - that we will not be approving .
The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

Progress on Agenda 2000
The next item is the statement by the Council on progress on Agenda 2000 .
I give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when Mr Fischer presented the programme of the German Presidency here approximately a month ago in his capacity of President-in-Office of the Council , the first priority he listed for this six-month term was the successful conclusion of the Agenda 2000 negotiations by the time of the special European Council meeting on 24 and 25 March .
It is now just six weeks to the day until this meeting , which will be held in Berlin at the request of Chancellor Schröder .
The negotiations on the individual components of the Agenda , which we have been conducting intensively since the Commission submitted its legislative proposals eleven months ago and at full stretch since the beginning of the year , have now reached a crucial phase .
I am glad that at this stage I can now discuss Agenda 2000 with you in detail .
Let me start with a brief outline of the timetable up to the special summit .
By the time of the General Affairs Council and Agriculture Council in just under a fortnight 's time we will have had a first run-through of all the major components of the global compromise to be reached by the Council bodies and Councils .
This first consideration of the key questions , under the aegis of the General Affairs Council , the Economic and Financial Affairs Council and the Agriculture Council , has already proved fairly successful in terms of reaching compromises and consensus on some aspects .
But it also became clear that we still have an enormous way to go and very little time to do so .
The Heads of State and Government will assess the progress made to date , especially the results we hope to see from the Agriculture Council on 22 and 23 February , at their informal summit in Bonn on 26 February .
We expect this meeting , to which Chancellor Schröder has also invited the President of the European Parliament , to provide important guidelines for the further activities of the final phase .
Immediately after the Bonn summit we will , after all , have to start tying up the package that the Heads of State and Government are to finish negotiating on and bring to a political conclusion at the end of March and during April , under the responsibility of the General Affairs Council as the coordinating body .
For the rest , you could regard the fact that Chancellor Schröder has moved the special summit from Brussels to Bonn as a sign of our strong commitment to bringing the negotiations to a successful conclusion .
The German Presidency will do its utmost to achieve that successful conclusion .
We have become convinced that other Member States are also firmly resolved to achieve it and therefore want to conduct the negotiations in a constructive and positive manner .
Everybody realises that a balanced package is the only solution , and that there can be no winners or losers .
Each Member State must have its appropriate say on the final result , but at the same time each must make its contribution to achieving that result .
Everything must be laid out openly on the table .
There can be no taboo subjects !
It is of paramount importance to the Union and thus to all the Member States - and all the partner states realise this - for us to be able to declare the European Union the winner at the end of March ; for one thing is sure , Europe could very easily become the loser .
Putting it off will not make the solution any easier , on the contrary .
If a few months after the entry into force of monetary union , and indeed only a few weeks before the June elections to the European Parliament , we disappointed people 's hopes that we would prove capable of action , the consequences would be very serious .
If the European Union , which since the beginning of this year has become a new financial market with global influence and global responsibility , cannot also resolutely assume the corresponding political responsibility - on the basis also of the Amsterdam Treaty - then too Europe would be the loser .
And if the momentum of the enlargement negotiations is weakened and the date of their conclusion is postponed , the effects would be so damaging as to set us back in our work for a long time .
I hope these and other arguments will prompt all the Member States to make more and even greater concerted efforts .
Meanwhile it is generally realised that , unlike the case of the earlier Delors I and Delors II packages , this time it will not be possible to reach a compromise in the end by making extra funds available .
On the contrary , the unequal burden-sharing that resulted from this kind of approach in earlier cases must be corrected this time , for the sake of the legitimacy and future viability of the European Union .
I do not think any of our partners questions the principle of fair burden-sharing , just as they cannot question the principle of solidarity , which is the constitutive principle of the European Union .
One basic condition for the success of the negotiations as a whole is that the Heads of State and Government decided in Vienna to include all the components of the Agenda in the discussion and only to seek a solution in the form of an overall package .
Everything is laid out on the table .
That means a balance can be found covering every aspect , and the combination of various parameters ensures that the further negotiations will be sufficiently flexible and dynamic .
In many areas of the Agenda , it has proved possible to broaden the basis of agreement over the past weeks .
This applies in particular to the reform of the Structural Funds , where consensus has now been reached on major issues .
I am thinking , for instance , of the reduction of the number of objectives from seven to three , the reduction of the number of Community initiatives and the long-disputed question of coherence between national aid and EU aid ; I am also thinking of the efficiency performance reserve , where gratifying progress was made at the last General Affairs Council .
On other important questions , such as strict adherence to the 75 % criterion for Objective 1 areas and reserving some two thirds of funds for Objective 1 , the discussions have already produced clear majorities .
Here you must not forget that under the Austrian Presidency broad political agreement was already reached on the pre-accession instruments that are so important to enlargement policy .
The same applies to the financial regulation on trans-European networks .
In both areas - structural reform and pre-accession instruments - I held talks yesterday with European Parliament representatives under the informal consultation procedure , continuing those that were begun under the Austrian Presidency .
We attach the utmost importance to this dialogue at political level as a means of concluding the Agenda successfully and on schedule .
In the coming weeks we will therefore carry on with this dialogue intensively and in a constructive spirit .
Mr Fischer gave another assurance to that effect in his reply to the letter from your President , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado .
Dialogue is not a one-way street .
The Council will take account in its decision-making of the positions expressed by the European Parliament during these discussions .
The informal consultation forms part of our endeavour to provide Parliament with comprehensive information at all times , as reflected in our debate today and our offer to hold an exchange of views on Agenda 2000 at any time in an informal political trialogue .
We are well aware that not only the Council but especially you , the Members of the European Parliament , will have an important part to play in resolving the Agenda-related problems in good time .
Our presidency will do all it can to cooperate closely with you on a basis of trust .
Applause
I do not need to remind the President-in-Office of how essential it is to meet the timetable , not only to secure the necessary democratic legitimacy for the Agenda 2000 package but also to allow programmes and policies to be implemented in a timely and effective manner .
We welcome his efforts in this respect .
We , however , need to make progress on our priorities .
Parliament 's priorities on the general framework regulation are , in fact , clear .
As regards the modified proposal on the efficiency performance reserve , Parliament must be involved in decisions on the mid-term review and the reallocation of the national reserve .
What role for Parliament can the presidency and the Council envisage to guarantee effective parliamentary scrutiny of the reserve mechanism ?
Thirty-four pages of guidelines have been produced by the Commission for the operation of regional programmes .
How will these relate to the regulations ?
How will they be discussed in the Council ?
The guidelines underline the vital role of urban areas in the European economy .
Will the presidency demonstrate its commitment to urban areas by arguing in favour of Parliament 's priority requiring continuation of the URBAN Community initiative ?
The Commission 's reform proposal does not contain any contingency plans for unexpected economic and social restructuring in the regions .
Does the presidency agree that it would be wise to set aside some resources under a special Community initiative for unexpected crises to enable the Union to act in such situations ?
Likewise , is the presidency prepared to promote this priority in the Council .
Finally , partnership is a key priority for Parliament in ensuring that the Europe we build and its policies are genuinely inclusive , supporting a People 's Europe .
For this reason , we want a strong partnership pact in both designing , drafting and implementing the new generation of programmes .
Will the presidency back Parliament 's demands in the Council for a strengthened partnership pact , and what concrete and practical actions will the presidency take to ensure that partnership is not just an optional extra but an integral component of all programmes , strengthening the cohesion of a People 's Europe ?
Mr President , having just listened to the presentation by the Council we cannot immediately say that it has provided a great deal of information .
We are in fact very much interested in the Council 's own activities concerning enlargement , and in particular how the Council views the state of progress in the negotiations .
Is it the case , as we often read at present and also hear from the various think tanks , that we are already thinking about discussing accession dates for certain countries ?
There are certain reports to this effect and there is a great deal of optimism , and we have also heard the Foreign Ministers of certain Member States say that it is time to set accession dates .
It has always been the case with the enlargement strategy that both the Commission and the negotiators have said that this would be the wrong approach , that the accession date is a matter for the country itself and not the Commission or the European institutions as such .
The countries themselves must satisfy the rules and conditions for membership and it is our job to encourage progress .
It has always been said that setting dates for certain countries would be an encouragement for them to be rather less energetic in their efforts as it would be seen as a kind of guarantee of membership .
Is there any reason to review that position and now to say it is better to set dates after all ?
What would be the reason for this ?
Do you see any virtue in this ?
Secondly , we are seeing that public opinion is changing , and this is affecting the negotiations .
In some applicant countries public opinion is becoming progressively less positive towards membership of the European Union .
It is perhaps also true that in many cases there is a serious lack of knowledge about the Union , as also in the Member States at present .
Is there not good cause for the Council too to encourage a drastic improvement in information on the European Union in the applicant countries ?
Mr President , first of all I should like to express my appreciation to the German Presidency for taking the trouble to come here this afternoon in order to explain how far negotiations have progressed .
I am pleased that Mr Verheugen has said that everything is on the table during these negotiations .
I should like to stress that fair burden-sharing is one of the important points in this whole negotiating process , and I believe that this must not be ignored when we talk about support for Europe .
Over recent weeks Parliament has voted on the main points of Agenda 2000 .
We voted on structural policy and on agricultural policy .
If my calculations are correct we are planning to spend considerably more than what I read at present in newspaper reports on the Agenda 2000 negotiations .
I believe there is a danger here that we will not reach agreement on the financial perspectives .
If my knowledge of the rules is correct 314 votes are needed , and when I saw the voting pattern on the main points here in Parliament we seemed to be very divided .
I would also warn against assuming in advance that if there is agreement in the Council on drastic spending cuts , Parliament will automatically approve them .
I fear this is not so .
We would then fall back on Article 203 , which would mean that we would be spending considerably more than the Finance Ministers generally want to see or consider desirable in relation to the launch of the euro and so on .
I am a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and I should also like to say something about agriculture .
I would warn against the general view that everything spent on agriculture is a waste of money .
I am not just saying this because of this morning 's demonstration here in Strasbourg .
Too often I hear that half of the European budget goes to 3 % of the population and so on .
I believe we must see this in relation to all tax revenue .
When I look at the tax burden in Europe , approximately 50 % of the gross national product , my calculations tell me that approximately 2 % goes to 5 % of the population .
That is certainly not excessive .
We must of course always ensure that money is not wasted .
We must have no more surpluses and keep production within limits .
But we need to keep agricultural management in Europe basically as it is , and I think the German Presidency would do well to try to achieve this ..
Mr President-in-Office , you have just said that there would be neither winners nor losers in the general agreement that you hope to develop between now and the Berlin summit .
We saw today that there were many French and German tractors in Strasbourg .
If my information is correct , there will also be many tractors on 22 February in Brussels and these will come from all over the European Union .
We understand the farmers ' concerns .
The common agricultural policy is the European Union 's main common policy .
They are worried because they cannot subscribe to the Commission 's proposals .
Moreover , I am very surprised that Mr Fischler is not on the Commission bench , while two other Commissioners concerned with the Agenda 2000 package are present .
The Commission 's proposals are going to bring a drop in prices that will not be fully compensated , but if my information is correct , the Council would favour more moderate reductions in prices but with a reduction in compensatory aid .
I would therefore like you to explain how , when agricultural revenue fell by almost 4 % throughout the European Union in 1998 , you will ensure that there are no losers among farmers when the final package is presented .
I would like to know what the Council 's current thoughts are on this matter .
Mr President , I should like to begin by saying that we obviously all agree that reaching agreement on such an important matter as this should not be put off indefinitely .
But I would also say that a good agreement is better than agreement at any price , we should not seek just any agreement but rather a good one , especially since it will remain in force for seven years .
I must also refer to an underlying problem in this area : both in the original Commission proposal and in the proposals that have been discussed in the Council , we have noted the same thing : a lowering of own resources from 1.27 % to 1.13 % in the case of the Commission proposal - entirely to the detriment of the structural funds and actions .
How can that be acceptable ?
I should therefore like to ask the Council how it can reconcile this situation with the fundamental principle of economic and social cohesion enshrined in the Treaties .
And what can you tell us about own resources , Mr President-in-Office ?
Mr President , I welcome the President-in-Office here this afternoon .
Could he tell us , firstly , what pressure he is under from the Finance Ministers to bring about a deal within the financial limits they require ?
Will he be able in the longer term to bring about a deal under which the European Union will be able to finance the extra support that is required because of the cuts in prices ?
Is it not time to face up to reality and accept that this reform as proposed will not work ?
It will be more expensive to the budget and the consumer will not get any benefit .
The processors and the retailers will eat it all up .
We saw the demonstration here today and know that agriculture throughout Europe is in a serious state .
My problem is that when I go back to my farmers and tell them of 30 % cuts in beef and 15 % cuts in milk they do not understand .
Nor do they want to understand it .
The most recent statistics indicate a 57 % fall in income in my region during 1998 .
This is on top of other serious falls in 1996 and 1997 .
Turning to the regional aspect , I understand that yesterday in Bonn the President-in-Office met my party leader , David Trimble , First Minister Designate from the Northern Ireland Assembly .
I understand that during that time you had discussions with him on support for Northern Ireland under Objective 1 and our position in the future .
As you will know , politics in Northern Ireland is at a very delicate stage at this moment in time .
Could you tell us if you were able to reassure him , that the Council will be supportive to Northern Ireland in the future ?
The fact remains that if the Republic of Ireland and border counties achieve Objective 1 status and Northern Ireland does not , that will be unacceptable .
Mr President , the meeting of the ECOFIN Council of 8 February marked the collapse of negotiations on Agenda 2000 .
A joint text setting out the financial framework is vital to enable finance ministers to allow their opposite numbers in the agriculture ministries to implement the long-debated reform of the common agricultural policy , but there was no consensus .
The German minister , Mr Lafontaine , went too far and , instead of confining himself to the subject of agricultural spending , structural spending and own resources , sought to widen the debate . The result was disagreement and , in effect , a decision to stabilise spending for the period 2000-2006 .
The countries in favour of freezing agricultural spending lined up with the position of the German Presidency , leaving the question of the CAP worryingly unresolved , while outside the Chamber the farmers ' anger is becoming a genuine cause for concern , especially as the next few days will see demonstrators from all over Europe joining those who are here today .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I would like to ask four specific questions .
Firstly , are you working on the basis of the Commission 's proposal or on the information provided by the Austrian Presidency ?
Secondly , given that the Union 's main objectives are to strengthen the euro and create employment , what resources are being set aside for these in the financial perspective ?
Thirdly , as regards the fair distribution of payments , how are you going to remedy the fact that under the agricultural policy , 20 % of farmers receive 80 % of the funds ?
And finally , as regards enlargement , do you plan to divide up the budget in the areas of agriculture and the Structural Funds in particular , and , if enlargement does not fit in with the Cohesion Fund , to separate regional funding too ?
Mr President , I too have noticed that there has been a delay in negotiations in the Council .
If you were to continue at this rate , Mr President-in-Office - and I do not want to level criticism at you personally or at the German Presidency - you are not going to be able to stick to the timetable that you yourself have set .
It is clear that , unlike the Council , the European Parliament after painstaking debate has been able to adopt coherent positions on the issues arising under Agenda 2000 .
Back in November last year , Parliament set out its priorities regarding the general framework regulation . Perhaps I may be allowed to mention a few of them .
Firstly , we said that 0.46 % of Community GDP should be made available for structural actions .
I understand the pressure that is exerted by public opinion in the richer Member States . However , we must not forget that the EU budget , despite all the ambitious targets it sets , is currently equivalent to that of Spain .
Secondly , we said that exactly , and not approximately , two thirds of Objective 1 resources should be made available , and that we must stick to the criteria defined by the Commission for including regions under Objective 1 , one of which states that only those regions with a per capita GDP which is less than 75 % of Community GDP can be included .
Thirdly , we said that priority status should be given to Interreg , and that there should be a special part relating to cooperation with islands and among island regions .
Fourthly , we opposed the efficiency performance reserve , as originally proposed by the Commission .
Proposals for a smaller reserve of 4 % with national top-ups are a move in the right direction .
I also want to make two points in connection with the Cohesion Fund .
Firstly , Mr President-in-Office , I think that we must respect the Treaty , which provides that Member States with less than 90 % of Community GDP must participate in the Cohesion Fund . Secondly , I would like you to tell me to what extent the positions of Parliament will be taken into consideration , as it is obvious that the European Parliament is not prepared to budge from these positions .
Of course , we will discuss and negotiate , but we cannot adopt stances which are completely out of line with these priorities .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I do not know if the Presidency-in-Office is fully aware of the fact that large sectors of European public opinion currently think of Agenda 2000 as a threat rather than as a necessity or an opportunity .
Nor do I know if the Presidency-in-Office is aware that this is largely due to the way in which Austria , and now Germany , are approaching this issue .
In my view , they are putting an overly unilateral slant on the work and giving too much consideration to the pressure of public opinion within their own countries , rather than taking an overall view of the European Union as they should do .
Clearly , the basic problem , in my view , lies in the fact that the ceiling for own resources is insufficient .
However , it is also true , of course , that the debate has concentrated on expenditure and forgotten about revenue .
There is no doubt that we need an agreement that not only guarantees but also develops the principle of social and economic cohesion , together with the relevant instruments .
We also need to have a proper debate not so much on how to reduce those instruments , but on how to increase the contributions from all the Member States fairly .
For example , what is the Presidency 's view of the proposal to include the criterion of relative prosperity in the chapter on revenue ?
Does the Presidency agree with the French proposal for some form of aggressive measures for the Cohesion Fund , which to my mind would be unacceptable ?
Mr President , I have two questions for the Council .
The first concerns the pre-accession aids .
Pre-accession aids are to be coordinated in the PHARE committee without , as it seems now , the presence of the applicant countries themselves .
To what extent can this kind of pre-accession strategy be described as being based on partnership ?
My second question to the Council concerns the regional policy / Structural Fund component in the EU .
How much importance does the Council assign to the principles of partnership in the Structural Fund regulation , especially the participation of the environmental partners , the participation of the environmental NGOs , the participation of representatives of equal opportunities for women and of the social partners ?
Mr President-in-Office , we discovered yesterday evening that we agree to a very wide extent on the pre-accession funds .
Even though the Austrian Presidency already achieved a consensus , that is to say a consensus was already reached during the Austrian Presidency , I do of course have to ask again how far you can still take Parliament 's decisions into consideration .
We saw positive steps in that direction yesterday , but I believe you should clarify once again whether there is in fact still any chance of movement here .
Let me also say a few words on the Structural Funds .
The current debate that centres on the need to stabilise expenditure and ensure fair burden-sharing is certainly right , but we in the European Union have another task before us which must always be given due consideration : it is the question of job creation .
Here I will take up the cudgels for the Structural Funds and for maintaining these policies as far as possible .
Structural aid is targeted at forward-looking development models and economic sectors which have the potential to create new employment opportunities .
Is the Council aware that we must set this as a priority ?
Fighting unemployment and creating jobs is in fact the top priority , and this is reflected in Agenda 2000 too , where it is very strongly emphasised .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , the President-in-Office said that the choice of Berlin as the seat of the European Council is a symbol of how important the Presidency believes it is to bring Agenda 2000 to a conclusion in time to allow this Parliament to complete its legislative procedures before the European elections .
He pointed out that the final agreement should not have any winners or losers and that Europe must be the only winner .
We agree with that .
But he also said that at this stage there will be no additional budgetary resources , and he stressed , in particular , that the budgetary burden should be more fairly distributed .
Up to now , Mr President-in-Office , none of the proposals that the Presidency has put forward in the Community institutions , be they in official documents or in ' non-papers ' , appear to look for a compromise to ensure that this burden is fairly distributed between all those involved . Instead , they only appear to consider the decision to reduce Community expenditure , which is beyond any logical justification .
With all due respect , you are planning a reduction in agricultural expenditure of almost EUR 41 770 million - almost EUR 6 000 m per year - and a reduction in Category 2 expenditure of EUR 47 000 m - almost EUR 6 714 m per year - without any justification , in the light of Commission reports on cohesion . This does not seem to reflect a compromise that has no winners or losers .
On the contrary , there clearly are losers : the cohesion countries who will have to bear the burden of enlargement .
I would therefore like to ask the German Presidency the following question : when is the Presidency going to put forward truly balanced proposals for a compromise in which all the Member States will participate , with each country naturally prepared to make allowances that might enable us to reach an agreement when necessary ?
Up to now , Mr President-in-Office , there has been little progress in the informal negotiations between Parliament and the Council . Parliament merely sets out its views and the Council takes note of them .
We were in the same situation with the Austrian Presidency , and we have very little time left now to conclude important agreements .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , allow me to link the beginning of your speech with the end .
You said that the main priority was Agenda 2000 and ensuring that it reached a conclusion on time , while , at the same time , you said that you hoped for our cooperation .
I think you should have added something there .
It is not that you hope for our cooperation , but that you need it .
The financial perspective forms part of the Interinstitutional Agreement and , by its very definition , the Interinstitutional Agreement is an agreement between institutions .
Therefore , it is not enough for you to reach an agreement with the members of the Council .
You must put forward a proposal that Parliament is satisfied with , and , as Mr Mulder pointed out , it will require 314 votes to be approved .
What proposals can you put forward that might satisfy us ?
Have you already considered some kind of flexibility mechanism or would you prefer us to apply Article 203 ?
You cannot call for more Europe in every way and more policies , try to combat unemployment and proceed with enlargement while providing less funds to do so .
I think that a clear proposal is needed here . And in conclusion , I would like to ask whether we are soon going to see signs that social democrats are in the majority in the Council ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , except for the fact that you once used the term Agriculture Council you have actually succeeded in speaking for 10 minutes without even once really mentioning the reform of agricultural policy ; as the agricultural spokesman for my group I do feel a little hurt .
But I will probably manage to stop myself from asking you your views on voluntary set-aside since you will certainly not be able to answer that question .
But there is one thing I would like to know .
I understand from a major German newspaper that as from the year 2002 for field crops , 2004 for beef and 2005 for milk products , the respective compensatory payments will be reduced cumulatively by 3 % a year and that the intention is to reuse only 25 % of these cuts for special agricultural measures , which means that 75 % goes back into the EU budget .
Let me ask you quite plainly : if this 75 % of aid is removed again , then as I see it that will lead to a spectacular increase in the net contributor position of some states .
That in turn will produce a further redistribution at the cost of those who already pay a large amount into the EU and get far less back .
I would be grateful if a little more could be said about this issue , at least in relation to Agenda 2000 , since it does after all have something to do with agricultural policy .
Mr President , we already had an opportunity yesterday to exchange views with the presidency of the Council on Parliament 's demands in relation to the Social Fund .
But who could know better than you , Mr President-in-Office , that political demands can only succeed if they are repeated again and again ?
Yesterday you announced that the German Presidency of the Council felt great sympathy for our concerns .
Yet I would like to formally ask you again today whether the German Presidency of the Council is also prepared , where necessary , to actually firmly support these demands in the Council , namely the demands that in future 15 % of Social Fund money is allocated to preventive labour market policies and specific aid measures for women , that people who are already marginalised socially are given an opportunity to work through the Social Fund , that the Member States assume obligations in all five intervention areas and that the target groups are designated centrally , and finally that in future 1 % of Social Fund resources for global subsidies is earmarked for local projects .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , we are aware that this is an important time : we are planning for the next seven years before the beginning of enlargement , which will transform so many things .
The atmosphere surrounding the negotiations does not seem to be particularly optimistic . Instead , there is a vague but nonetheless real feeling of renationalisation .
I only want to make a brief comment on the structural policies .
You said that you believe that solidarity is a key ingredient of the European Union .
Solidarity in structural terms is not something that is easily achieved , but it is something that is , in fact , required by the single market .
Will funding continue to be allocated to the structural policies ?
Will the Cohesion Fund be maintained ?
Are you going to accept the budgetary level of EUR 270 000 million proposed by the Commission , which many Members here consider to be a minimum ?
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I hope that you will reply to three questions .
The Commission is proposing , with Parliament 's support , that the current Objective 6 regions be incorporated in a new Objective 1 region . There are excellent grounds for this , as the northern geographical situation , with its long distances and the fact that it is so far away from European centres , puts the Objective 6 regions in a much weaker position than many others .
What progress has been made on this in the Council ?
There has been much forceful discussion on the issue of employment , not least during the German Presidency ; how is this matter viewed in talks on structural policy ?
Will greater importance be attached to the issue of employment in the Objectives 1 and 3 criteria ?
Border area cooperation is often regarded merely as cooperation which is linked to borders .
Is cross-border inter-regional cooperation now to be developed , with border areas being seen as a broader cooperation issue ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would be happy to answer the questions .
I have noted down 83 questions .
Do I have 83 minutes ' speaking time ?
No .
So I will have to try to summarise the main subject areas and give combined answers .
First , all the questions relating to supposed results are pointless .
So far there are none except for the two I mentioned .
There is agreement on the efficiency reserve and there is agreement on the question of the consistency of national aid regions and EU aid regions .
But these two agreements are also conditional on an overall agreement being reached .
Let me tell you at the outset : before the European Council meeting in Berlin there will be no advance agreements on any of the questions you have raised here , simply because the global package has to be made up of many , many components , components that will bring the individual Member States advantages and disadvantages .
The Member States ' assent is bound to depend on the overall balance the package produces for each Member State .
We are talking about a lot of money for the individual states .
Unfortunately , the political majorities in the Council play no part at all here .
During the deliberations each country naturally looks to the needs and interests of its own people and tries to reconcile them with our common European objectives .
I am not counting on us being able to obtain advance results on important individual issues before Berlin because the global package has to balance out the different interests .
Most of the questions in fact suggested that agreement or plans already exist on these issues .
Nor has the German Presidency made any compromise proposal at all at this stage .
After all , our duty as the presidency is not to put all our efforts into pushing through the German point of view ; our duty as the presidency is first of all to sound out where the broad lines of a compromise are emerging and then , when the time is ripe , to propose that compromise .
And that is what we will do .
But at present we are still trying to narrow the options .
I gave you a few examples of areas where we can already see majorities and perhaps also consensus beginning to emerge .
But this process is not complete yet on any single important issue .
One Member of this Parliament referred to public opinion in the Member States .
That is something I take very seriously and which the German Presidency also takes very seriously .
Let me just point out to you that public opinion in Europe is not united on these questions .
I am well aware of public opinion in Spain .
But public opinion in Germany , for example , is quite the opposite of what it is in Spain .
The same applies elsewhere .
So there is no point in telling the presidency about public opinion in a particular country .
We have to concentrate on finding a solution that is acceptable to all and consistent with our European objectives .
Let me confirm quite specifically that one of the objectives of Agenda 2000 - and we treat it as such - is to concentrate available European resources more emphatically on the objective of combating unemployment .
That is one of the key objectives of the whole operation .
The people of Europe see unemployment as the main challenge and expect us to do everything possible to combat it effectively .
Agenda 2000 can make a major contribution towards that .
I also confirm specifically that the Agenda is directly linked to the question of enlargement .
I do not believe that the question of dates is really important at this moment .
In any case there has never been a fixed date for the enlargement process .
Neither the Council nor Parliament , nor the Commission , nor the applicant states ever fixed a date .
Agenda 2000 also establishes the preconditions for enlargement .
If we do not manage to conclude the Agenda by March , that will send out a discouraging signal to the applicant countries .
That is another reason why it is so important for us to conclude the Agenda in good time .
In view of the conditions under which Parliament is meeting today , with farmers and tractors outside on the street , let me point out that agricultural policy forms one component of the global package .
It is not a question of agricultural policy alone .
That policy is a component of it in terms of financial volume , and given the structure of our budgets it is of course the biggest component .
A large majority of Member States are convinced that agricultural policy must also play its part in achieving the overall result , which is to say it must also be reformed , firstly in relation to compatibility with the WTO competition rules and , secondly , in relation to the financing of the European Union after enlargement .
Since the specific question was asked , let me also say quite clearly that the objective of a European agricultural policy cannot and must not be to jeopardise or even destroy farming .
On the contrary , the objective of European agricultural policy must be to preserve farming in all the European regions for the future .
The presidency for its part is convinced that the proposals that are under discussion - after all we are still only at the discussion stage - do not tend in a direction that would allow us to say that farming no longer has a future in Europe .
I can understand that you would like to be able to discuss concrete agreements now .
But that is not possible because , given the negotiating process that is under way , the global package will in fact not be tied up until March .
In cooperation between the presidency and Parliament we opted for a procedure that is now gathering momentum rapidly .
We are meeting more and more often and are also discussing more and more subjects .
We are fully aware that we need Parliament 's assent .
During the discussions in various forums the presidency does indeed point out that when the various national positions are put forward , account must be taken of the European Parliament 's opinion .
However , I must admit that some Member States take this more seriously than others .
And some people seem to think we can just leave it to the presidency to decide how it will then persuade the European Parliament to agree to the results of the special summit .
In any case we are endeavouring to incorporate as many as possible of Parliament 's views in the results of the summit .
That is why I am grateful for all the ideas put forward in this debate in the form of questions .
Let me assure you that we will take account of all these ideas , comments and recommendations in our deliberations .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , on a point of order .
As a Member of Parliament who has sat through this question-and-answer session , I find it particularly unsatisfactory that , after a lot of statements , the President-in-Office has , in the end , such a short period of time in which to answer about 83 questions .
A much better way to hold this sort of debate , which is vital , is to inject some life into it and apply the Brussels format we use to question the Commission on occasion .
At present , it really does not work !
This is a vital subject for European citizens .
This has been a dead debate , where few Members have been able to ask questions , but even fewer have received answers .
I shall bring your comments to the attention of the Bureau , Mr Teverson .
Situation in Kosovo
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Kosovo .
I give the floor to the President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the contrast could hardly be more glaring .
While you , ladies and gentlemen , are discussing how the Member States of the European Union can live together more unitedly under a common European roof , a few hundred kilometres away , in Rambouillet , the issue being discussed is whether they can live together under any kind of common roof .
That shows the strategic challenge Kosovo represents for the Union .
Here we have the single market and the dismantling of borders , there a policy that still regards national borders as a means of fencing oneself off , as a shield .
In line with good diplomatic practice , it was agreed that the Rambouillet negotiations would be confidential .
They are to be held between the parties concerned and not publicly .
So I know no more about them than you , who are well-informed politicians .
That is why at this point I have to confine myself to informing you that as expected the negotiations are proving difficult , that so far both sides are giving no ground at all and that the mediators are currently concentrating on identifying any common areas over and above the differences .
Moreover , progress reports on this kind of negotiations can be very misleading , for the truth is that nothing is agreed until everything is agreed .
The European Union has a key role to play in the search for peace .
With his preliminary work in Pristina and Belgrade , the EU special envoy , Mr Petritsch , made a crucial contribution to enabling these negotiations to take place at all .
He is now conducting the negotiations in Rambouillet together with his American colleague Mr Hill and his Russian colleague Mr Mayorski .
That is a great challenge and one in which Mr Petritsch deserves our full support .
Incidentally , the fact that the negotiations are being conducted jointly by an American , a Russian and a European shows that the European Union has now acquired a certain ability to act in the field of foreign policy too .
We have certainly not reached our goal , but at least we are on the right road .
The European Union reacted to the conflict in Kosovo at an early stage .
Since spring last year it has gradually established a differentiated system of sanctions in response to the brutal use of force by the Serbian security forces .
At the same time it has allocated a substantial volume of humanitarian aid , amounting of over ECU 45 million in 1998 alone .
The EU has supported the independent media to counter the propaganda from both sides .
It has also provided aid for democratisation and the development of a civil society in Kosovo .
Our political objective was always the same : far-reaching self-government for Kosovo together with maintenance of the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and effective protection of all minority rights .
At its last meeting on 25 January 1999 the General Affairs Council again confirmed the European Union 's position .
Let me briefly repeat the key points .
One : the European Union is seeking a political solution .
The use of force , by whichever side , only exacerbates the conflict and inflicts even greater suffering and misery on the people .
Two : in this context the European Union supports the political solution proposed by the Contact Group , which forms the basis of the negotiations in Rambouillet .
Three : the European Union is calling on Belgrade to fulfil in full the undertakings it gave to the OSCE and NATO and to comply with the demands of the UN Security Council .
Four : the perpetrators of the Racak massacre cannot go unpunished .
Their names must be transmitted to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
Five : the European Union calls on the Kosovo Albanians to fulfil their commitments vis--vis the UN Security Council in full .
It condemns KLA provocations that give added impetus to the spiral of violence .
Six : the European Union supports the OSCE Kosovo Verification Mission , which has developed into an important stabilising factor , regardless of all the difficulties it faces , and emphasises that President Milosevic has assumed responsibility for the safety of the mission personnel .
Seven : the European Union is prepared to make its contribution to implementing a negotiated settlement .
That applies also and in particular to reconstruction .
Eight : the people of Kosovo must know that the European Union is prepared to help them along the road to peace .
On 25 January 1999 the General Affairs Council extended the mandate of the former Spanish Prime Minister Felipe González as EU Special Representative for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia until January 2000 .
I want to thank Mr González for his willingness to continue with this difficult job .
At the same time I call on the Belgrade leadership to cooperate with Mr González and to make full use of the opportunities this offers it in relation to the European Union .
Peace and stability in Europe not only demand a successful negotiated settlement in Rambouillet , although that is of course the conditio sine qua non ; peace and stability in Europe also mean that we must regard the conflicts and problems in the former Yugoslavia as a challenge to which we have to find the right , which means the European , answer .
We must strengthen the democratic , pluralist elements in the societies concerned .
We must promote and develop regional cooperation .
We must establish cooperation and pre-accession structures that match up to these countries ' European vocation .
Above all , of course , we must establish peace in this region and show how the people of this region can coexist .
The European Union offers its support to that end .
However , the responsibility for this lies with the warring parties .
They must realise that nothing is to be gained through force whereas much is to be lost and that there is no realistic alternative to finding a compromise solution at the negotiating table in Rambouillet .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
I now give the floor to Mr van den Broek for the Commission .
Mr President , naturally the European Commission is also pleased that the parties have acted in response to the urgent call to begin peace negotiations in Rambouillet .
Many more efforts will be made to reach an agreement , the presence of the Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in Rambouillet being seen as a sign that they are ready in principle to find a solution .
Pressure must however remain at a maximum if an acceptable and workable result is to be achieved .
As you will know , Foreign Ministers Robin Cook and Hubert Védrine regularly attend in order to help keep the momentum of the negotiations going .
The European Commission is also represented in Rambouillet and is contributing to negotiations on the economic and reconstruction aspects of the draft agreement .
Next weekend there will probably be a further meeting of the Contact Group at ministerial level .
The aim will be to appraise the results to date and to discuss what points require extra effort or attention .
For its part , the European Commission is making the necessary preparations for its contribution to the process of reconstruction following a possible agreement .
In December and January a so-called ' damage assessment ' was carried out on the Commission 's initiative , looking at the damage to houses and the basic infrastructure , although it was not possible to visit all the areas because of the fighting .
Rough estimates currently put the number of homes damaged to some extent at about 30 000 .
Initial calculations estimate that it will take EUR 330 million to repair them .
The Commission is planning to hold an international donors conference shortly after a peace agreement is reached .
But of course neither this nor reconstruction are possible until there is an agreement and a clear will by the parties involved to live together in peace .
Given this necessary conditionality , the actual reconstruction work can of course only begin when the security situation in the field permits .
It is encouraging to see the growing consensus among the Member States and other countries to support a possible agreement with an international force on the spot .
That will help further guarantee the reconstruction work .
The most important objective of the reconstruction work is of course to allow the thousands of displaced persons and refugees to return to their original homes .
The financial resources made available by the Union for this year are limited .
It will certainly be possible to make a start on reconstruction , but the budget lines available for this , which is in fact the budget line for the reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia , is also needed to pay for the reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
The Commission will return to these matters as soon as we know what the international contribution to the reconstruction work is to be and the time-frame involved .
Humanitarian aid through ECHO , to which the President-in-Office of the Council has already referred , will be granted in the meantime .
We also want the European Union 's activities to be very visible , which is only possible by coordinating and presenting all our activities as effectively as possible .
To this end , the Commission 's presence in Belgrade and soon also in Pristina must be increased and assured .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , on behalf of my group I certainly support the statements by both the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner .
I believe I may say without any arrogance but with a certain pride that it was my group that kept pointing out that we need both : the offer of talks and the threat of force .
Some people , here in this House too , wanted us to use force sooner ; but that would have been wrong .
As is becoming clear , there is still a possibility of achieving what is - I hope - our common aim through talks and mediation .
I do not exclude the possibility of failure , as at any conference , which would then make it all the more necessary to use force .
But the opportunity that now exists really must be used to the full .
The President-in-Office of the Council named names .
I am glad that a European representative is playing a prominent role .
And I take a personal pride here , for before becoming ambassador in Belgrade Wolfgang Petritsch was a colleague of mine and he really is doing a splendid job here , which is much appreciated .
But I am concerned not with personalities but with the matter itself .
And that is the importance of having a European Union representative playing the most prominent part here .
Secondly , I consider it just as important that not only the Americans but the Russians too are involved .
People often disregard the fact that we also need to remind Russia and the Russian Government of their responsibility for this continent .
Given that it does have that responsibility , Russia must play its part in finding the solution , to ensure that it is a lasting solution .
On behalf of my group let me also repeat that we are against borders being forcibly redrawn in today 's Europe .
If any changes are to be made , they can only be made on the basis of a final consensus , not by force , not unilaterally .
If necessary , troops will have to be deployed , as the Commissioner said , to ensure longer-term security .
I have no illusions about a solution being found overnight and I would ask everyone in this House to remember that it is not just Kosovo that is under threat now , but that the entire region will be under threat unless we find a sensible solution : FYROM , and Albania too .
It is most important for the European Union to urge Albania in particular to listen to the voice of reason and the voice of consensus .
It is important to have Albania as a whole on our side , not a divided and divisive Albania , if we are to achieve a common solution here .
In that sense I fully endorse the statements by the President-in-Office and the Commissioner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my dear Mr Verheugen , we did nothing about Kosovo in the early days .
We have known what is happening in Kosovo since 1989 .
We took no notice ; we only took notice when we ourselves triggered the KLA movement .
Those are the facts and anyone who denies them has not been watching the story unfold .
Today we applaud ourselves and pat ourselves on the back for providing so much funding , which we would never have had to provide had everything not been destroyed , had the West intervened sooner .
Our group also supports the Rambouillet negotiations .
And I am glad the Europeans are playing a more important role , but as always , of course , they are too late .
I hope they are not entirely too late , but I believe we should realise that we could have made an earlier start , for instance last October .
Many people would not have died in Racak and elsewhere if we had done in October what we are doing now .
NATO 's threat of air strikes must be credibly maintained .
Here I am addressing some Members of this House who are against this .
With the unconstitutional destruction of the autonomous status of Kosovo in 1989 Milosevic set in motion the disintegration of Yugoslavia as a whole , after which he stirred up nationalist resentment with his Kosovo propaganda .
He is now facing the end of his pointless policy of violence against the Kosovo Albanians and will try to extend the 15-day deadline by any means possible .
He does not and cannot want a solution to the Kosovo conflict forced upon him by the West .
For then he would lose all international significance and would finally have to govern his people .
And then his political mediocrity and incompetence would very soon become apparent .
The long-overdue prosecution in The Hague would then also become inevitable and our countries would have to produce the evidence in their possession .
So the NATO threat is indispensable .
Should an interim solution be found in Rambouillet , as we hope it will , it would have to be safeguarded by ground forces to protect the Albanians and Serbs in Kosovo .
But even if no solution is found , air strikes alone cannot secure our objectives .
We will need ground forces then too .
We are all hoping to see results , but at the same time we expect the West and NATO to show their steadfast resolve , otherwise we will bear responsibility for throwing away this last chance !
Mr President , I think that this is the time for hope , hope that the negotiations in Rambouillet lead to positive results .
Parliament has often called for effective international action on Kosovo . Unfortunately , it has come too late for those who have already died , those who have lost their homes and their belongings , and those who have become refugees .
Nevertheless , we must support the efforts made and the substance of the plan proposed by the Contact Group .
If we do not want these problems to spill over into other countries , the solution to the conflict must undoubtedly allow Kosovo to enjoy broad autonomy within internationally recognised frontiers .
This is the first thing that must be done .
I think that three very clear points must be taken into consideration .
The first is that we must continue to exert pressure on the parties involved to persuade them to reject the use of violence as a means of achieving their objectives .
Secondly , if NATO is going to carry out military operations , the international High Representative should clearly be European , as is the case in Bosnia where excellent results have been achieved .
Thirdly , as Felipe González has pointed out on many occasions , we must not forget that President Milosevic and the absence of democracy in Serbia are the main causes of these conflicts . If we do not get rid of them , further conflicts are bound to arise in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that the European Union has acted with too little effect and too late .
But the difficulty is and remains that if the Council is divided no unanimous action is possible .
Parliament was also divided in its opinions .
So let us not condemn others when we are facing the same difficulties ourselves .
I believe it is a good start that work is now being done towards a political solution .
The whole question is whether or not the present offer of extensive autonomy - comparable to that of Montenegro - will be sufficiently convincing for the Albanians after all that has happened and after the radicalisation which has taken place within the various movements there .
My question remains : what about the big stick ?
There is always agreement that pressure must be kept up , and I share that view , but how can we apply pressure on the KLA to honour its commitments ?
It is not only the Serbs who fail to keep their promises .
The KLA is also guilty of this , as we have seen .
We therefore believe that a solution must be sought in a common approach to the whole of the southern region of eastern Europe .
Mr President , history teaches us that it is hard to tell who is good or bad or cruel or kind in the Balkans .
Likewise , historical accuracy requires us to recognise that , for the Serbs , Kosovo is their original homeland , just as Israel is for the Israelis .
If anyone wonders why intervention in the Kosovan tragedy has come so late , I would cynically suggest that it probably suits some people to destroy and then rebuild .
All the same , we welcome the attempt to resolve the conflict through diplomatic negotiation guaranteed by the international institutions . Yet we cannot deny that the European Union 's role is too weak and it hardly amounts to a common foreign policy when some Member States take a view of the Balkan question which is the complete opposite of the position of other Member States , including their view of history .
The complex Balkan question has its roots deep in time , in the history of these people , and in their traditions and cultures .
There is one incontrovertible fact which must never be forgotten in trying to find a way out of the present tragic situation . The integration of the two civilisations - Muslim and Orthodox - is becoming impossible because the nature of each is so strong and the two cultures so diverse .
So the aim must be coexistence .
That is becoming vital unless we want to see the current conflict perpetuated - and where there is conflict there is also violence , ethnic cleansing , genocide , abuses and violations of human rights .
Europe can no longer tolerate such an explosive situation , rooted more in ethnic than geopolitical considerations , continuing to develop on its doorstep .
That is why we believe that coexistence , respecting the different values and cultures , must be the goal .
This kind of conflict cannot be resolved by war , nor can the Belgrade Government restore peace to the region by arming the police .
But the Kosovans cannot be allowed to use the profits from drug-dealing to buy arms to perpetuate the war .
Uprooting people from their land and the land of their fathers , where their identity is rooted , will always be a source of new tragedies and future conflict .
The best way to ensure peace is to find means of making coexistence possible , with guarantees for both parties .
So we think the most appropriate political and institutional solution would be the widest possible autonomy for Kosovo within a constitutional framework which guarantees it , backed by the international institutions and the European Union .
In turn , Europe can and must contribute to economic development in the region and become , both for the Serbian people and for the people of Kosovo , a reference point for a peaceful and balanced Federation .
Mr President , despite the intensive effort by the international community , acts of violence remain the rule in Kosovo .
The OSCE observer mission is not having the desired effect .
The dreadful massacre in Racak on 15 January marked a new low point in the conflict between the Kosovo Albanians and the Serbs , and it ended the uneasy cease-fire which was imposed in November .
It is not only the Serbian forces but also the KLA , which is proving increasingly effective in its guerrilla tactics , which are responsible for this daily violence .
As a result , several thousand people have again been forced to flee their homes .
There is and was good cause for the international community to be more active in its intervention .
Brutal violence , the ethnic cleansing of the civilian population and the destabilisation of Yugoslavia must be stopped .
Those who commit all these crimes must also be brought to justice .
My group strongly supports the Contact Group and the proposed draft peace plan , with a transition period in order to establish substantial autonomy for the Kosovo region . This is a precondition which my group has always supported .
The talks in Rambouillet are a final attempt to arrive at a workable solution without military action by NATO .
Parliament also therefore supports NATO 's preparations for intervention as a way of applying pressure in order to ensure a successful outcome to the negotiations .
I would add that it is also important for us to prepare to send troops as part of the implementation of any agreement .
During the talks pressure is being applied to the Serbs and to the Kosovo Albanians to agree on a solution to the conflict .
In order to prevent the Rambouillet talks from playing into the hands of the KLA , it has quite rightly been made clear to the Kosovo Albanians that the only way of having a NATO peacekeeping force in the area is for them to make genuine efforts to reach complete agreement with the Serbs on interim autonomy for Kosovo within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
It was in March last year that the conflict broke out in full force .
That is nearly a year ago . It is time all the parties to the conflict reached agreement .
We therefore also call on the European Union and its Member States to play a clear and active role in ending this conflict .
We should like to express our support for the action of the British and French Governments and also express our appreciation for the efforts of the German Presidency .
As the European Union we are taking the lead .
Let us continue to do so .
I say again : this is not about Kosovo 's past but its future , and the future of the people who live there .
It is not a question of being right but of being put in the right .
Mr President-in-Office , there is no question of breaking the confidentiality of the Rambouillet meeting , the negotiations were obviously secret .
But perhaps you could tell us a bit more because , having heard that a start has been made but it is an uphill task and there are difficult issues , we do still need to know that , if Rambouillet fails , there is a fall-back plan for resolving the problem and dealing with the aftermath .
As has been said , we cannot rely solely on the parties involved acting responsibly ; that would mean Europe 's policy had failed again .
The Commissioner mentioned the idea of a peace-keeping force possibly being stationed in the area .
But the broader and more important question the German Presidency needs to confront is the creation , at last , of a general framework for the whole of the former Yugoslavia . Fires are being lit even now in Macedonia .
The newspapers say nationalist tension is breaking out again in Brisco between Muslims and Serbs , and the situation is heating up .
The European Union as a whole needs to succeed in implementing a policy across the whole area .
What guidelines are there , beyond mere emergency intervention , beyond mere stopgap solutions to a difficult situation ?
What general guidelines does the European Union intend to pursue to establish a genuine peace process for the whole area ?
That is the question , and we hope that Germany will be in a position to launch the debate on this issue .
Mr President , like Mr Bianco we too would have preferred to have had answers from the Minister and the Commissioner to the questions raised and the reservations expressed by many people about the opening of these negotiations .
Naturally , everyone in this Chamber hopes Rambouillet will succeed in defusing the Kosovo time-bomb , but plenty of people in this same Chamber can see in the political-military approach some alarmingly counter-productive factors liable to make that bomb explode , with an inevitable chain reaction of associated flare-ups .
The threat of military intervention - assuming it can make either party to the conflict less intransigent , which is not necessarily true - would prove counter-productive once it ceased to be a threat .
NATO aircraft would be KLA aircraft to all intents and purposes and would also involve the prospect of an intervention force .
Such a force could only be commanded by the OSCE , with a NATO component and a UN mandate , and it should obviously include men and resources from the Russian Federation .
And then there is the problem of Albania , which continues to provide a means of transit for massive arms supplies to the rebels .
But the stress should be on diplomatic , political and economic pressure , and the imminent deadlines that were rashly imposed on the Rambouillet negotiations should be extended to leave no alternative unexplored which might eventually be acceptable to the two parties involved .
Mr President , I have to say by way of prologue how refreshing it is to hear a government minister admit he does not know any more about a situation than we do .
I welcome the statement by the President-in-Office .
We have to recognise that , although frequently in these debates about Kosovo it is all doom and gloom for Parliament , tremendous progress has been made , and two points in particular should be reinforced .
The fact we have negotiations now is largely due to European Union leadership .
At long last we are taking effective action and I congratulate the German presidency on the progress made , and indeed the British Foreign Secretary and French Foreign Minister also .
Secondly , as the Socialist Group has always demanded , we have managed to keep the Contact Group together and , indeed , have now got Russia actively engaged in pursuing peace .
This is very important and we must not do anything to undermine the cohesion of the Contact Group .
Of course the background of the NATO military threat has been absolutely essential , as we in the Socialist Group have always insisted .
Clearly our next great challenge will be if these negotiations drag on .
We have set a timetable .
Inevitably negotiations go on beyond a timetable but we clearly must not be sucked into the kind of manoeuvring we have seen in the past with one side or the other deliberating dragging on negotiations for much too long .
We must be clear that we are ready at literally 24 hours ' notice to carry out the threats that NATO has made to bomb Yugoslavia if it is not prepared to reach appropriate conclusions in the negotiations .
We must be clear that we are not going to commit ground troops until there is a political settlement .
We should not send one soldier from the European Union or from NATO to risk his life unless we , as politicians , have delivered a political settlement .
In doing this , we must put particular pressure on the KLA .
It has been very easy for the KLA to provoke the Serbian forces into inappropriate responses in order to win international sympathy .
We must make it clear to the KLA that they can gain only if there is a political agreement which will give them a large degree of autonomy .
Only then will we as a European Parliament sanction the sort of reconstruction effort that Commissioner van den Broek has indicated .
We have to ensure that , in condemning the Serbian side , we are equally tough on the Albanian side and do not , out of sympathy for one side or the other , provoke a worse situation than exists at the moment .
Finally , we must , I think , as Mr Wiersma has said , avoid the trap of constantly reciting history in this dispute .
We have to look forward to a system of government that would allow the Balkans finally to be at peace , enabling economic reconstruction to go ahead and prosperity to be built for the future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , we thought of having this debate after the Racak massacre , but I do not really think we can make a major contribution today , with the Rambouillet Conference still going on .
All the speeches we have heard have been interesting , but it is difficult for us to speak at a stage which is quite properly secret , as you said , Mr President .
But not everything needs to be kept secret .
Of course secrecy is right at diplomatic conferences but , for instance , the Council and the Commission could help the European public understand who is helping the combatants when fighting breaks out .
Why do we always have to wait two , three , four , or even five years ?
Why do we only find out who is supplying the weapons by reading about it in the newspapers ?
Why do we not improve prevention , given that informing the public is a means of prevention ?
Having said that , I support the work the presidency has done .
I think it is important for the European Union to take the initiative and demonstrate to the public that it has a greater political role than it had in the past , even though our humanitarian role , our aid for democratic development and our support for the growth of civil society remain the priorities .
These are all extremely important , but they do not add up to actual political weight .
I do not want to condemn the European Union entirely , of course , because I think its role is on an upward curve .
But the point I want to make is the same one as I made last time we debated the situation in Kosovo .
We are not dealing with a great area of peace , serenity , tranquillity , progress and economic development which just has one rather serious recurring problem of inter-ethnic conflict .
No , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , we are looking at a part of a larger problem .
The strategic limitation of our operations - and I mean the operations of the European Union , the United States , Russia and all the other countries involved - is that we persist in looking at one piece of the mosaic , and forget that even if we were to succeed in finding a solution to the Kosovo problem , there would still be the Balkan question .
That is the point .
We need a Rambouillet which lasts for years , involving far more players . We need a standing conference with Albania , Bosnia , Serbia , Croatia and Bulgaria participating .
I know that is very difficult , but we should be looking at the whole Balkan scenario , because the situation will not be resolved even if - and we hope it happens as soon as possible - a solution can be found for Kosovo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want briefly to address three aspects that were brought up during this important debate .
First : what can the European Union actually do ?
We should realise that we have neither the political nor the material capacity to resolve the Kosovo conflict by ourselves .
It was necessary for various institutions , namely the Contact Group , the European Union , the OSCE , NATO and the United Nations , to work together in close coordination , which they managed to do , by using their great political prestige and all their energy , and that is a special achievement .
Five different international levels had to be coordinated .
That was the only way to create the necessary political , legal and military conditions for this initiative .
And in fact all this was achieved in less than ten days .
Mrs Pack rightly asked why nothing was done earlier .
The question should really be handed back to her , because the government I represent here was not in office at the time .
But I would have liked to see an earlier German Government ...
Heckling by Mrs Pack
Yes , it was a German Government !
I would have liked to see it put forward this initiative .
So I do not know why it did not , but we are now in the present time .
It has happened now because , as it turned out , the agreement the American special envoy Mr Holbrooke reached with Milosevic last autumn did not hold up because Milosevic did not keep to it .
Let me make it quite clear again : the European Union was not in a position by itself even to provide the necessary military backup , to build up a credible military threat .
It does not have a single soldier it could have used as a threat .
So we should not just keep saying that the European Union has simply gone on making mistakes in Kosovo .
You must realise that it is not exactly an easy task to get these institutions to work together , to keep the Russians and Americans in the same boat , to make the Contact Group effective .
I could also make a few comments on the difficulties in the Security Council , on the need to gain Russia 's support ; but most of that has already been addressed .
The second point I wanted to make is this : once an interim agreement has been reached , which is of course what Rambouillet is all about , it needs military backup .
What I am talking about is the military backup for an agreed settlement .
I am not talking about military intervention against the will of the warring parties .
That is an entirely different matter .
What we are seeking is an agreement now in Rambouillet , which would initially be a three-year interim agreement .
During that period it will certainly need the military backup of a SFOR-type operation .
A number of European states have already declared themselves willing to make ground forces available to that end , including the UK and Germany , but others too ; so it is highly probable that we can set up a sufficiently large and also robust operation .
We must use the time between the Rambouillet agreement that we hope to reach and the expiry of the interim period to prepare a Balkan conference that will do what several speakers have called for , namely look at the overall picture and finally move away from a policy that focuses only on one issue and forgets that all these individual issues are interrelated .
It is the presidency 's intention - and this forms part of the EU initiative that the UK , France and Germany jointly put forward - that we work towards that conference with the aim of establishing stability , security and cooperation throughout the Balkan region .
That is a very , very ambitious project .
We will only achieve it - and this is my third point - if we can define a clear and convincing strategic perspective for that part of Europe .
I said this morning during the discussions I held with the Council of Europe on behalf of the presidency and I repeat it again : the situation we are facing is a confrontation between two different concepts of Europe .
This Chamber here represents the Europe of the 21st century , the Europe of integration , of peace , of democracy , of human rights and therefore also , in the final analysis , of man 's prosperity and personal welfare .
The Europe we see before us in Kosovo , in Bosnia and sadly also in other parts of Europe remains imprisoned in the atavistic attitudes of the 19th century .
We must make it clear to those people that they have the choice of joining the modern , forward-looking Europe of integration , or remain imprisoned in the conflicts , the blinkered attitudes , the nationalism of the 19th century , which can only result in misery , oppression and the loss of human lives .
But we must at least make it clear to them that they have this choice .
That means we must also be willing to offer the prospect of integration into Europe , and do so with all the institutions and instruments available to us .
It is certainly a very long-term prospect .
I am speaking not of years but quite certainly of decades .
But even the longest journey requires a first step .
The time has come for us to take this step .
I am in fact confident ; and as for all the business about secrecy in Rambouillet , well , those happen to be the rules .
You know that and it would be naive to believe that we could have genuine negotiating results , interim results so early on , or that , if there were any , we could present them here .
But let me put it this way : the fact that the delegations are still talking , that they have come in the first place , that there was no game-playing at the outset - for example , we won 't sit in the same room , or so-and-so cannot participate , or we will only talk under such-and-such conditions - the fact that the negotiations have been going on since Sunday does suggest that the participants are looking to achieve results .
In a few days ' time the Contact Group will present its evaluation of the results so far ; then it will be time to decide the further procedure .
I would definitely contradict the speaker who protested because the negotiations were being put under such time pressure .
A major component of the chosen strategy is to put the warring parties under the strongest possible pressure , which includes the pressure of time .
I firmly believe that a negotiating approach that allowed the warring parties to play for time would fail .
So there is a certain element of pressure , and it is very strong .
You must remember that they were not prepared to come to the negotiating table in the first place ; they only did so in response to a very strong and severe threat and ultimatum issued by the international community .
Part of it was that the negotiations must produce results within a given time frame , which was deliberately made very short .
In summary I want to say that we Europeans may now have shown an improved ability to act in foreign and security policy .
Mr Swoboda was right to say that it is an initiative in which the European Union has played a prominent role , which shows what we can achieve if we are creative and use our imagination .
Mr President-in-Office , may I cordially ask you not to forget that when you come here you are not a German minister , but the President-in-Office of the Council who speaks for the Council . I have always spoken my mind to the gentlemen of the Council - and apart from once they have always been gentlemen - of whatever political persuasion they happen to be , without regard for party politics .
If I have a complaint to make against the Council , I will do so , and you are now representing the Council for six months .
Next time it will be a Finn , and I will not treat him with kid gloves any more than I do you .
You are here not as a German minister , but as President-in-Office of the Council , so please do not be so touchy and do tell your people back home that we are not attacking the Germans here , but the presidency !
Mr President , speaking as an Italian , and since you referred to the countries involved in the problems of the Balkans , I just want to say that , as well as France , Germany and the United Kingdom , Austria and Italy are also involved and they are crucial countries in the area .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
OCTs , ACP countries and remote regions ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0036 / 99 ) by Mr Aldo , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on relations between the Overseas Countries and Territories ( OCTs ) , the ACP States and the ultraperipheral regions ( UPRs ) of the the European Union .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Aldo , on behalf of the Socialist Group , on producing a brilliant report for the Committee on Development and Cooperation , a report he pressed for and felt very strongly about .
In today 's debate we are looking at an issue that is important for the development of territories which are very diverse in terms of legal status and levels of development , but which at least share a geographic location .
Overseas countries and territories , ACP countries and ultraperipheral regions do in fact differ and the Union has rightly established a range of instruments for them .
To be frank , I am not entirely convinced by everything in Mr Aldo 's report .
But I think we must support its basic political message , which is the need to deepen relations between the three different groups through intensive decentralised cooperation , with a view to achieving harmonious territorial development .
The report essentially deals with the outlook for the ultraperipheral regions and OCTs , and that is what the European Parliament is expressing its opinion on today .
But I do think it is absolutely vital to involve the countries of the Caribbean and the Pacific fully , to listen to their ideas and their requests and make sure that any initiative is in their interests too .
The full involvement of all interested parties in the consultation and decision-making process is very important .
The report also deals with issues relating to commercial regimes .
Here it is essential to proceed with great caution , because even recently difficulties have arisen from abuses of the special rules relating to OCTs .
The aim of encouraging the commercial integration of UPRs , OCTs and ACP countries is undoubtedly laudable , but its implementation must respect the special position of the ACP countries and take place in the context of the definition of new , broader rules linked to the new post-Lomé Convention , the new GSP , the CAP reform and the WTO rules .
At the same time , the interests of all European farmers must be taken into account in the context of the common organisations of various markets .
As a whole , however , this own-initiative report sends an important and positive message . Closer external cooperation and more refined instruments will mean that even those territories of the Union which are geographically most marginal can find new roles and embark on new development paths , which will also benefit neighbouring developing countries .
That is an important message , and it has our full backing .
It is the reason our group will vote for the whole report as approved in committee , although we still think some specific points need further study .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the report by our colleague Mr Aldo is a significant text .
It is significant due to way in which it was prepared , because it affirms the natural desire of the regions , countries and territories concerned to establish regional partnerships . It is also significant because of the proposals that it puts forward .
During a fascinating meeting , the Committee on Development and Cooperation listened to representatives from the overseas regions and overseas countries and territories .
That was a new experience , but it was a fundamental moment in Parliament 's understanding of the problems , needs and plans of Europeans from other corners of the globe .
Such a dialogue was necessary and must be continued in as many contexts as possible . Indeed , the report makes proposals in this respect and we support them .
As I said a moment ago , this report affirms the natural desire of the ultraperipheral regions and the overseas countries and territories to establish regional partnerships .
This is obviously extremely important for them , for their development and for their future . However , it is also , and perhaps above all , essential for the Union , because the Union will be involved in each of these partnerships , adding a particularly important dimension to its cooperation with the ACP countries .
To some extent , this is recognition and affirmation of the Union 's global dimension , of its economic role , but also , and above all , of its political importance .
We should not only accept these partnerships ; rather , we should support them and help them to develop .
In order to achieve this , the rapporteur makes several proposals .
In the time I have available , I would like to mention just one of these : the establishment of devolved units of the Commission in the ultraperipheral regions and the establishment of offices or contact points in the overseas countries and territories .
This suggestion comes , notably , from local elected representatives in an ultraperipheral region , and I would thank the rapporteur sincerely for having included it in his text , thereby giving it weight and strength .
However , this suggestion must not just be wishful thinking .
If Parliament adopts it tomorrow , we will have to closely monitor its implementation .
Little by little , it will become an essential element of the cooperation between the Union and the ACP countries and we will have to pay particular attention to this .
Mr President , the committee adopted this report by a large majority and I think it is the result of lengthy discussions .
It describes the pressures on island regions that are remote and isolated from the economic centre of the Union .
It points out that there are three different kinds of subregions , which must be consulted , must be involved in the decision-making ; and here I believe the reference to new ACP negotiations is important .
The reference to trade , to the generalised system of preferences and to the need for a coherent policy is one of the key points of this report and a key to the future negotiations .
We should support the concrete demands set out in relation to telecommunications , research and development , education and training and the prevention of natural disasters .
I believe we all agree on the need for regional integration .
However , the use of the term ' Caribbean Europe ' on page 11 of the report reflects both the problems that exist but also , in my view , a problem we have been carrying around with us since colonial days .
Would it not make sense to consider these three subregions together , to give them independence , to link them into a regional association through a new treaty and to help them in that endeavour , so that we can finally be through with this episode of old colonial history ?
That is a thought and an idea worth considering , because I find this demand , and the very term ' Caribbean Europe ' , quite incomprehensible !
I am in Europe , I am in this economic area , I am in this trade area , which we want to shape and control democratically .
And the people of other regions want the same .
Do we not want to support regional developments ?
Our resolve for the future should be to pursue this idea further !
Mr President , the June Movement can only applaud the fact that the Committee on Development has taken the initiative to produce a report investigating the connections between the Overseas Countries and Territories , the ACP States in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , and the ultraperipheral regions of the European Union .
It is important that the projects supported by the EU in these areas are coordinated , and that the EU takes more account of them in its own policies .
There is an advantage in promoting decentralised and regional cooperation among the OCTs themselves and with the ACP States , because this can help promote their development .
It is therefore important to enter into a dialogue and to develop an equal partnership which respects each of the partners ' characteristics .
We neither can nor should sit in Strasbourg and dictate what this cooperation should be aimed at .
In the first place , that is unworthy .
Secondly , the countries themselves naturally have the best understanding of the local conditions .
However , as the Committee of the Regions points out , we can encourage cooperation financially in areas such as research and development , technology transfer , education and culture , the improvement of sea and air connections , environmental protection and access to information technology .
And we should also ensure in the negotiations on international trade that we maintain the trading privileges enjoyed by the OCTS and the ACP States .
In that way , we shall also promote the thing on which all our discussion of development should be focused , namely the fight against poverty .
Mr President , I think that we must begin by clarifying what the actual aim of the Aldo report is .
It does not try to define the status of those regions of the European Union that are outside the European continent .
Their status has already been defined .
The ultraperipheral regions form part of the Community territory and have equal rights .
The citizens of those regions , including myself and Mr Aldo , are therefore voters and can be elected representatives within the European Union .
We live in regions that are situated far from the continental heart of Europe but we are members of the European Union in the same way as any Community citizen . The only difference is that we live further away .
There is clearly a certain ambiguity as regards the British , French , Dutch and Danish overseas countries and territories , as some of these regions still seem to be evolving . Nonetheless , they too are still territories of the European Union .
The ACP countries are independent and are sovereign states .
No-one is trying to regulate their status or to assimilate them .
On the other hand , the Canary Islands - where I am from - clearly form part of the European Union and will continue to do so as they have been a part of Spain since the fifteenth century .
The purpose of the Aldo report is to use the European Union 's potential in these far-off regions to help to promote one of the EU 's aims , namely development aid .
The ultraperipheral regions - and perhaps to a greater extent the overseas countries and territories - have a relatively low standard of living compared with the Community average , although it is still much higher than that of the ACP countries .
The proposals in the Aldo report are aimed at establishing a relationship , and this is of particular importance for the region where Mr Aldo himself lives , the Caribbean .
The geographical distribution there rather affects the situation and the status of each of the regions .
I believe that these are positive proposals , as Mr Vecchi said .
They probably need to be examined in more depth , but the fact that the Commission is using these regions as platforms for development aid operations is a positive step . This is a way of promoting a certain degree of integration between those regions and their less developed neighbours .
This report by Mr Aldo is an own-initiative report and is clearly not binding .
The Commission could therefore use some of the points and proposals made by Mr Aldo as a basis for specific proposals that would allow both the ultraperipheral regions and the overseas countries and territories to play a serious role in its work to support development aid in the rest of the world .
In this respect , I believe that we should welcome this excellent report by Mr Aldo .
For me , it represents at least the beginning of one aspect of the Community 's action in the area of development aid .
Mr President , the debate on the report by Blaise Aldo has the merit of being politically expedient .
The ACP countries have often shown their support for an increase in regional cooperation in the fields of politics , economics , trade and culture . This was particularly evident last spring during the meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Mauritius .
The European overseas territories are increasingly calling for greater consideration so that they can participate in a developing world with a globalised economy .
We must remember one basic fact : the overseas territories are not territories of the Union , but their inhabitants are Community citizens and we must never forget about them .
The Union 's ultraperipheral regions enjoy a specific status , which has been incorporated into the Treaty of Amsterdam as primary Union law . If they are capable of making the most of their geographical situation , they will be able to play a role in the future development of the Union 's relations with ACP countries , for example , within the framework of Interreg .
There are many examples of interregional cooperation , including Réunion in the southern Indian Ocean , the French overseas departments in the Caribbean and the cooperation between the Canary Islands and certain countries in western Africa .
These cases demonstrate the possibilities offered by cooperation ; we cannot ignore them . Three weeks ago , the general secretariat of the ACP Chamber of Commerce met in the Canary Islands with a view to establishing its headquarters there .
This is just one of the many examples of cooperation .
For these and other reasons , we are going to vote in favour of the Aldo report .
The Commission is aware of all the points we have made . I would therefore like to end by asking the Commission for its opinion - given the absence of a legal basis - on how we could bring all these elements together so that three different entities might be able to cooperate and help each other .
Mr President , the Committee on Development and Cooperation welcomed this own-initiative report on relations between the overseas countries and territories , the ACP countries and the ultraperipheral regions of the European Union .
Blaise Aldo , the rapporteur , has completed a significant report , and I congratulate him on his bold conclusions .
Mr Aldo has shown us that we had a duty towards these regions .
They are strong in their originality and in their diverse cultures , identities and statuses . They are true representatives of the European Union in the world , as they are also outposts in the Caribbean , the Indian Ocean , the Atlantic and the Pacific , and they embody the European model in their values of democracy and freedom .
Moreover , our cultural and historical links with them mean that we must support and cooperate closely with them .
Despite our trade agreements and our specific programmes , we had never succeeded in holding a global discussion on the future of these regions and on their relations with the ACP countries .
At a time when the Union is engaging in a threefold process of renewing and renegotiating the Lomé Conventions , it was fitting to review its association with the OCTs and to implement a form of adapted integration with the ultraperipheral regions .
I believe that the discussion led by Blaise Aldo comes just in time , as it is becoming essential for the European Union to promote harmonious economic and social development in these regions and to help them to integrate into the international and commercial system and face global competition .
With this in mind , I would just like to highlight three points from the Aldo report .
The first is its political dimension , with the establishment of a forum for dialogue between the European Union and the OCTs .
The second is its economic dimension , with the establishment of a European Fund for developing economic and social projects . And the last point is the establishment of representative offices of the European Union and contact points to promote training and information projects for individuals or whole populations .
I naturally support the rapporteur 's proposal to maintain the current trade arrangements , in other words , free access for products from the OCTs , under conditions that would not harm the interests of the ACP countries .
To conclude , I believe that the Commission should pay a great deal of attention to the Aldo report , so that this document might result in specific proposals .
Mr President , when I look at the globe and consider the regions we are discussing , it almost makes me feel dizzy to think about the problems around the world that we are tackling from here in Europe .
First and foremost we have special obligations towards the ACP states .
The rapporteur , whom I congratulate on his work , pointed out in his explanatory statement that developments in these regions , in the OCTs , are not particularly positive , in spite of favourable conditions .
I do not know whether we are taking the right approach to changing this situation .
On the one hand he proposes a range of administrative measures , on the other a range of financial measures .
I would like to see more emphasis put on the regional approach to which some previous speakers have repeatedly referred .
For I believe that is where the best chances lie for development , that we must exclude the long-distance approach from the outset and focus more on cooperation within these regions .
Although I am a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I still have a few problems with some of the paragraphs and sections of the report .
First there is the question of enhanced Union citizenship which it discusses ; but that is after all tied to very definite conditions . Then there is the question of a special fund under the Community budget .
Here I fear that we would to some extent be restricting ourselves , tying ourselves down and losing flexibility . Thirdly , there is the idea of setting up offices or contact points in all these countries , which I also see as an added administrative burden without any obvious benefits .
Mr President , I too would like to stress the importance of the Blaise Aldo report , for which I thank him .
He is right to call for attention to be paid to these regions which have just been described , and he looks , among other things , at the issues of trade and equal treatment with the ACP countries .
As regards the funds , I also have questions like those raised earlier by other speakers such as Mrs Günther .
But I am not yet convinced that this is the best solution .
It is also striking that it is largely the French who are conducting this debate and , unfortunately , I find that I am the only Dutch person to speak on the subject , despite the fact that the Netherlands Antilles are also concerned .
It is very noticeable too that there are no Englishmen present , yet they also have overseas regions .
There are two kinds of overseas regions .
There are the Overseas Departments and there are Overseas Territories .
The Overseas Departments are exclusively French .
We say in the Netherlands that the Overseas Territories are a sort of poor relation in that they are treated rather differently , and it is on this that there is now a major conflict again .
This sometimes results in bizarre situations .
The Netherlands Antilles , for example , have Sint Maarten , while the French have Saint Martin .
That is simply the other side of the island .
On our side there is the airport , while the French side is European territory .
It is amazing that no graduate student in the Netherlands or France has written a thesis on what this means for Europe 's border controls and the like .
Finally , Mr President , I believe that we must also look at the treatment of the Overseas Territories in relation to the Overseas Departments .
If these Overseas Departments have such a special status , what does that mean for the Overseas Territories ?
I should like to know whether in the future as a follow-up to the Aldo report - which I repeat is very important - the Commission will also turn its attention to this matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am standing in for Mr Mendes Bota who is unable to be with us .
The possibility of a new tripartite regional set-up - with closer economic , social and political links between overseas countries and territories , the ACP countries and the ultraperipheral regions of the European Union - could not have come at a better moment .
Mr Aldo 's report opens up new avenues towards a new type of development aid , a new model that differs considerably from traditional aid , as provided for until now in the Lomé Convention , the old EDF or in bilateral agreements between rich countries and developing countries .
At present there is a dangerous decline in world solidarity .
In 1997 state aid and private credits in the OECD countries earmarked for cooperation fell by 41 billion dollars , to 324 billion , the lowest level for a decade .
We need to reverse that trend and these regional and sub-regional partnerships could prove to be an investment with a visible return for all interested parties .
The institutionalisation of the OCTs and the ultraperipheral regions of the EU as special partners under the Lomé Convention , particularly by including them in the new Joint Assembly , deserves a warm welcome from us .
By the same token , we also support , overall , the very diverse range of proposals and ideas contained in the draft legislative resolution in this report .
With special reference to the ultraperipheral regions of Madeira , the Azores , the Canary Islands , Réunion , Guadeloupe , Martinique and French Guiana , we should stress that they are not only furthermost frontier of the Union but also genuine strategic centres for strengthening trade relations with various regions around the world , as well as local beacons of democracy and freedom in the Atlantic , Indian and Pacific Oceans .
The European Union should set up delegations in those regions with decentralised powers to coordinate support actions as part of the regional cooperation debated here today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Aldo , on his excellent work and the impassioned way he has imparted his own experience in this report .
There are certainly parts of the world where ACP states , overseas countries and territories of Member States of the Union , and ultraperipheral regions which are an integral part of the European Union coexist in one region .
The Third Lomé Convention , covering 1984-89 , first introduced the idea of strengthening cooperation between these three groups with differing status .
Now , in parallel with the negotiations for the Fifth Lomé Convention , which opened on 30 September 1998 between the European Union and the ACP group , and the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , the future of the ultraperipheral regions and overseas countries and territories will begin to be considered .
Undoubtedly we need to take a keen interest in these territories and distinguish them carefully .
One point the rapporteur highlights , and which I particularly want to stress , is the fundamental importance of disaster prevention .
This has also been stressed by the group on climate change for the small island states , which I chair in the Joint ACP-EU Assembly , because these territories are particularly vulnerable and need our assistance , especially as the activities vital both to their economies and to social welfare principally develop along the coastal strip .
Mr Aldo has looked at these problems in great detail and I think he should be strongly supported , especially as a report along these lines is to be approved at the next Joint Assembly .
Mr President , my colleague João de Deus Pinheiro deeply regrets that he is unable to address you this afternoon .
I am very honoured to replace him in the debate on this matter , as the Commission welcomes the work that has been done by your Committee on Development and Cooperation , thanks , in particular , to its dynamic rapporteur , Mr Aldo .
It also welcomes the work carried out by the committees that were consulted for an opinion and their draftsmen , Mr Castagnède and Mr Souchet .

This work resulted in an own-initiative report that is very detailed due to the wide range of subjects it covers , including financial , trade , humanitarian and geopolitical issues . It is also complex due to the various types of status to which it refers : the ultraperipheral regions of the Union , the four overseas departments , the Canaries , the Azores and Madeira , the 20 countries and territories associated with the European Community , and the ACP states , with which the Union is currently negotiating a future partnership agreement .
I would like to add that this is a bold own-initiative report , and I think that that is the best compliment that can be given to Members .
It often goes very far in asserting certain concepts that have yet to be realised .
Examples of these are the decision to do away with the unanimous procedure governing the association of the OCTs , Article 136 of the Treaty , or the establishment of free trade areas in the Caribbean and the Indian Ocean , involving ACP countries , overseas territories and overseas departments .
Other examples include the establishment of a special fund for the development of the OCTs , to be included in the budget , and the plan to give a voice to the OCTs through some sort of involvement in the ACP-EU Joint Assembly .
Elaborating your ideas , coming up with revolutionary concepts and drawing up daring proposals are the most important contributions your institution can make to help the Commission and the Council .
The Commission , for its part , has also entered into extensive discussions on the 20 OCTs .
The results of this will be submitted to Parliament , through its Committee on Development and Cooperation at its meeting in April .
The Commission plans to consult local leaders on the results of its discussions .
The ideas taken up in your own-initiative report will be very useful to the local representatives involved during these consultations .
Finally , they will also be of great use to the Commission as it will have to draw up proposals following these various consultations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Coffee and chicory extracts
The next item is the report ( A4-0054 / 99 ) by Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to coffee extracts and chicory extracts ( C4-0023 / 99-96 / 0117 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I hope my presentation will be sufficiently brief to allow us to settle this matter .
Parliament has been called upon to give its opinion on the joint plan , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a directive on coffee and chicory extracts .
I would like to point out that this is one of seven proposals on food products .
Along with coffee extracts , chocolate , honey , fruit juices , jams , tinned milk and sugar were originally the subjects of a joint debate that took place in October 1997 .
However , these were separate proposals for directives that were naturally inspired by the same idea of simplification in order to facilitate trade . But those seven proposals had varying results .
Only the one that we are discussing today managed to come this far .
The political and technical obstacles , as well as the differences in opinion between the institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - have , in my view , been overcome to the complete satisfaction of Parliament .
Indeed , after a Council common position in which Parliament 's three amendments were rejected due to an unfavourable opinion from the Commission , Parliament then confirmed the amendments at second reading .
That was in September .
Two months later , the Council rejected the amendments again , which meant that the Conciliation Committee was convened .
What do the amendments involve ?
Two of them - one a recital , the other an article - aimed to keep the principle of limitation of the range of nominal weights available on the market in the directive .
That appears to be a technical matter .
In fact , it is a little more than a technical matter . The purpose is , in fact , to prevent any confusion for consumers and unfair competition for producers .
Needless to say , these amendments were widely supported both by consumers ' associations and by producers ' associations , which is unusual .
The third amendment related to the method of analysis of the free and total carbohydrate content , for which the European Parliament wished to apply Standard ISO 11292 of February 1997 , which is the most modern method available .
At technical meetings and in a tri-partite meeting between the Council , the Commission , Ken Collins , chairman of the Committee on the Environment , and myself , it became apparent that the disagreement was not a political one , and was based more on methodology than on substance .
We therefore gave our agreement to a compromise , which was endorsed in the Conciliation Committee in December 1998 . This compromise alters the common position of the Council by first of all introducing a new recital into the text .
This recital announces a Commission initiative , to be introduced before 1 July 2000 , that aims to introduce a range of nominal weights for coffee and chicory products in horizontal directive 80 / 232 on weight ranges .
Parliament 's aim is thus clearly achieved by a different method , but what matters is that we achieve the same result .
Secondly , paragraph 1 of the annex to the directive includes a clear reference to the methods of analysis of the carbohydrate content which allows the use of the most modern methods , but without making the text rigid by limiting it to a particular method .
Here , the Commission 's concerns , which we found to be legitimate , were taken into consideration .
I will conclude by saying that the political balance of this conciliation is , in my opinion , entirely satisfactory .
Moreover , it has been unanimously approved by the Committee on the Environment , and I feel that it is essential that Parliament votes in favour of it .
I therefore call on the House to support this report .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work on a subject which he has presented so clearly .
This has become a rather technical dossier in which it is hard to see the wood for the trees , but it nevertheless deals with a subject which is of concern to people in their everyday lives , namely their cup of coffee , or at least what appears to be coffee .
People rightly expect us to also take these matters seriously and deal with them thoroughly , which is what has happened in this case .
At second reading we adopted a number of amendments with which the Council did not immediately agree , but in the end conciliation has produced a good result .
Everything finally went so smoothly that the official Conciliation Committee became no more than a formality .
The PPE fully approved the present result in the Conciliation Committee , and we will also of course do the same here in the plenary .
I would just like to add that I hope that progress will also be made on the other six proposals to which the rapporteur has referred in principle , including chocolate , and also the other points in the package originally submitted to us , and that here too we will ultimately arrive at a satisfactory result .
I would like to know whether the Commissioner has any idea of the timing .
When can we expect something , Commissioner ?
Then we will have a better idea for planning our own work .
Mr President , I just want to make two comments .
First , I want to congratulate the rapporteur and also Mr Collins on the very good result they have achieved .
We have an excellent compromise that really can be supported in all good conscience .
Secondly , in the case of chocolate , it depends upon whether the Council can make up its mind to adopt a sensible position .
That is not entirely out of the question , although we will have to wait and see .
Thirdly , this is the shortest speech I have made so far !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0020 / 99 ) .
Question No 1 by Roy Perry ( H-1253 / 98 ) Subject : Media ownership concentration
Does the German Presidency plan to address the ramifications of increasing media ownership concentration , in particular when this leads to dominance in other economic spheres , i.e. sport ?
I should like to welcome Mr Verheugen and ask him to reply to Mr Perry 's question .
Mr President , Mr Perry , let me preface my answer to your question with the following .
As President may I specifically state on behalf of the Council that it attaches the utmost value to protecting freedom of expression , of which the freedom of the media is one of the most important factors .
The Council is profoundly convinced that freedom of expression is a cornerstone of democracy and of the other individual freedoms , as stated 50 years ago in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
That is why the Member States and the Community check very carefully , within their sphere of responsibility , that access to the media is assured in all areas of society , taking account of the variety of political and religious convictions .
As regards consulting the Council on questions of media ownership concentration , let me point out that to date the Commission has not submitted any proposal on the subject to the Council .
Of course the Council would consider any such proposal in detail .
In this connection , let me draw the honourable Member 's attention to the fact that the question of concentrations between undertakings comes under the Community 's competition law , specifically in this case Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 4064 / 89 of 21 December 1989 on the control of concentrations between undertakings .
Responsibility for applying that regulation lies with the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
I , of course , like all democrats , totally share the views expressed about the necessity of a free press in democratic societies .
The problem I am seeking to address in this question is that concentration of media ownership sometimes causes problems with freedom of the press , particularly when that concentration of ownership stretches beyond just ownership of newspapers and into other economic fields .
Many European citizens are concerned when they see , for example , the takeover of Manchester United by BSkyB , the extension of the ability of broadcasters to strike deals with particular football clubs and the proposals for a European Super League .
All this could be challenging the freedom of sport to operate as it has up to now .
I would like to think that when a report comes from the Commission the Council will address that issue .
Mr Perry , I fully sympathise with your concern .
But let me point out again that this matter comes under competition law .
We have definite legal bases for this within the European Union and the Commission is responsible for applying this law and implementing the regulations .
This matter has to be dealt with in the Commission and that is the appropriate procedure .
Let me repeat that the Council is prepared to consider the matter if the Commission puts the appropriate proposal before it .
Question No 2 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-1254 / 98 ) Subject : Depopulation of the Swedish countryside
Not since the 1960s has there been greater depopulation of the Swedish countryside .
The population has declined in some 210 of the 280 municipalities in Sweden , mainly in inland central and northern Sweden .
Membership of the EU was to have strengthened regional policy so that the country as a whole could be developed .
The reality has turned out to be different .
The present trend is unacceptable .
Can the Council hold out any hope for those regions in Sweden which are now severely affected by depopulation ?
Will the approximately SEK 4 billion refund on Sweden 's annual membership fee of SEK 21 billion increase or decrease in the future ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Lindqvist 's question .
Mr Lindqvist , the Council is aware of the problem of depopulation , especially in certain parts of the Union , and has always attached great importance to measures to maintain a viable population structure in rural areas .
As for aspects related to the reform of the common agricultural policy , during the deliberations on the Agenda 2000 proposals the Council envisages formulating a European agricultural model that will have to be further developed in the future , namely the model of a multi-functional , sustainable , competitive agriculture that exists throughout the Community , which means also in regions that have the kind of specific problems to which you refer in your question .
The Council acknowledges that rural development policy has a fundamental role to play in endeavouring to make use of every means of preserving viable rural structures throughout the European Union .
Under EU regional policy Sweden currently receives structural aid for its least populated regions .
Until 31 December 1999 the Structural Funds , the financial instrument for fisheries guidance and the European Investment Bank will each continue to make their respective contribution to achieving a priority objective , which is called Objective 6 .
That objective is to promote the development and structural adjustment of very sparsely populated regions .
As is also provided in the second recital of Protocol No 6 of the Swedish Act of Accession , these rules are currently being reviewed in the context of the Commission 's proposals on reforming the Structural Funds .
For the period from 2000 to 2006 the Commission proposes continuing the fund aid for Objective 6 regions under Objective 1 .
As for the progress of discussions within the Council , I can tell you , Mr Lindqvist , that in addition to this Commission proposal there is another one from the Member States , on which no decision has yet been taken .
It proposes that the existing Objective 6 be retained and the aid measures continued .
This will be decided on in the context of the global package of Agenda 2000 , on which I reported to you during this afternoon 's debate .
Thank you for that reply .
Today 's demonstration by French farmers in support of their livelihood and their very survival provides a graphic example of the situation in this part of Europe .
The same problems exist in Sweden , particularly in the north of the country .
Three or four farms close down every day .
It is the small farms with 15 to 20 cows whose owners are forced to give up and move to the cities , above all to Stockholm , Malmö and Göteborg .
There has not been such a dramatic migration away from the inland communities since the 1960s .
Of the 279 local authorities that exist in Sweden , 211 - all of them in the interior of the country - have lost part of their population .
I have a supplementary question concerning Objective 6 .
Could the Council provide more information on whether Sweden and Finland are to remain as Objective 6 regions , and will the Objective 6 criteria be included in the new framework for Objective 1 ?
I would appreciate an answer to this question .
Mr Lindqvist , we are fully aware of the problem .
I myself was informed of it in detail by the Swedish Government in Stockholm last Sunday . Let me repeat that in addition to the Commission proposal there is another one that will be decided upon .
Only when it has been decided what funds will be available in future for structural aid in sparsely populated areas , and not just , as you rightly said , in Sweden and Finland , but also in other parts of the Union , can the decision be taken on the concrete shape of such a programme .
Will the President-in-Office assure Parliament that it will be able to have full details of every subsidy from the agricultural funds , so that we can do something about the fact that 80 % of the farmers receive 20 % of the subsidies , while 20 % of the farmers receive 80 % of the subsidies from the EU , and about the fact that these 20 % together receive less in income than we as consumers and taxpayers pay in subsidies , i.e. that a large amount of money disappears somewhere between the two ?
Mr Bonde , I do not think I need tell you how the present system of the EU common agricultural policy came into being and how it has developed . It is based on decisions that were taken in years gone by .
At this moment we are about to embark on a reform of European agricultural policy that is aimed at making agriculture in Europe more competitive , more productive , more sustainable and more ecologically acceptable .
The Commission 's proposals to that effect are on the table and what I have just said holds true here : within the Council , the Member States have very different ideas about the final shape of the reform of agricultural policy .
Some Member States even think we should not make any changes at all .
I am expecting the Agriculture Council , which will be meeting from 22 to 24 February , to give us the first insight into the agriculture ministers ' view of the future of European agricultural policy .
It is too soon to do so today .
I cannot answer this question today because the relevant decisions have not yet been taken .
I appreciate that the President-in-Office cannot anticipate the outcome of the structural fund reforms , but would he draw the attention of the other members of the Council to the fact that there is serious concern in this House that the Commission proposal for Objective I - namely applying the strict criterion of 75 % of GDP is unfair to some regions of this Community .
On the regional question , if you take the Highlands and Islands of my own country , Scotland , you will find that it is a very rural area in danger of greater depopulation .
At over 75 % it would seem to be the very sort of area that we should be defending in this reform .
Yet if we stick to the Commission 's strict 75 % it will lose out .
Mr Martin , I am happy to do what you say and draw the Council 's attention to this fact .
You will not be surprised if I say that one Member State has already done so and is doing so very insistently , which means that the Council is very well aware of this problem .
I must add , however , that the deliberations to date show that a broad majority within the Council is in favour of an extremely strict application of the 75 % criterion for Objective 1 regions .
That is partly because there are of course also a number of areas that come just below that threshold and a few that are just above it .
The trend as I see it at present is to continue to apply this criterion strictly .
But the Council is fully aware of the problem .
I will see to it that Parliament 's and your concerns are taken into account during the further deliberations .
We should now be taking Questions Nos 3 and 4 together , but as the author is not present , Question No 4 lapses .

Question No 3 by Christine Oddy ( H-0001 / 99 ) Subject : Amnesty International and the European Union 's human rights policy
Is the Council of Ministers aware that Amnesty International has marked the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with the publication of a report on EU human rights policy ?
What steps is the Council of Ministers taking to evaluate this report with a view to using its main recommendations to flesh out EU human rights policy ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Oddy 's question .
Mr President , Ms Oddy , the Council attaches great importance to the human rights activities of non-governmental organisations .
It pays great attention to the NGOs ' opinions and recommendations and seeks contacts and exchanges of experience with them .
The same applies to the question of fleshing out the European Union 's human rights policy .
In that respect let me point out that in December 1998 the then presidency of the Council distributed the Amnesty International report referred to by Ms Oddy to the CFSP Working Party on Human Rights .
The Council agrees with Amnesty International on the importance of seeking constantly to further improve EU human rights policy .
In that endeavour , the Council will also pay attention to Amnesty International 's proposals .
The Council would refer you to the declaration published on 10 December 1998 on the occasion of the 50th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which was subsequently confirmed by the European Council .
The declaration of 10 December contains a range of operative proposals and the Council will be discussing their formulation in the coming months .
On 25 January 1999 the General Affairs Council confirmed this .
The follow-up to the operative proposals in the declaration of 10 December 1998 forms an important part of the presidency 's work programme .
It includes the question of an annual EU report on human rights .
The work programme also gives high priority to the endeavours to gain recognition of the EU 's positions on human rights policy in relation to specific countries and issues in the framework of the United Nations .
That includes the important questions of the reform of the UN human rights mechanisms and preparations for the world racism conference .
As I have been war-wounded getting here and fallen over I shall expect a better answer than I got from the Commission yesterday .
I should like to know about the EU code of conduct on arms sales .
I should like to know whether a common list of military equipment is adopted in that code , how many licences have been refused and what progress the Council and Member States are making in this area ?
As I said , I shall expect a better answer than I got yesterday , which was dreadful .
No I cannot and , above all , I will not do so , for major reasons of principle .
I cannot see that this supplementary has any relevance at all to the original question that was put .
The presidency could not be prepared for this question .
I am not about to give you an answer on such a sensitive matter off the top of my head , so to speak .
I am quite willing to give you a written answer .
But , as I said , I cannot see that the supplementary has any relevance to the actual question .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Mrs Oddy , you cannot come back on that again .
You are well aware that during Question Time , you can only have the floor once .
Mr Verheugen has offered to respond to you in writing .
You will therefore be able to have your question answered by him in that way , as he has promised .
However , in accordance with the Rules , I must now continue with the next question .
Question No 5 by James Provan ( H-0004 / 99 ) Subject : Humanitarian aid to the Russian people
In the resolution on humanitarian aid to the Russian people , adopted by Parliament on 19 November 1998 , attention was drawn to the outbreak of tuberculosis in Russian prisons , where up to 15 % of the prison population are carriers of the disease .
Will the Council instruct the Commission to propose an action plan to combat the danger that Russian carriers of tuberculosis might infect other sectors of the Russian population , neighbouring peoples and , sooner or later , European Union citizens ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Provan 's question .
Mr President , at its meeting in Vienna the European Council reaffirmed the EU 's solidarity with Russia and its people during the current economic crisis .
For that reason , on 17 December 1998 the Council adopted a comprehensive programme to supply agricultural produce to Russia .
Since 1991 , ECHO has spent ECU 50 m on humanitarian aid for Russia .
A sum of ECU 4.8 m remains from the allocation for 1998 .
After checking where the people were in greatest need , it was decided to concentrate on trying to resolve the problem of tuberculosis , especially in the prisons .
The Commission and the Council therefore entirely share the concerns expressed in the European Parliament 's resolution of 19 November 1998 and the concerns voiced by Mr Provan .
With the new outbreaks of tuberculosis in the developing countries , prisons became the main breeding ground for this disease .
Russia has the highest rate of imprisonment in the world , 1 % of the total population .
Russian prisons are overcrowded .
In many penal institutions up to 10 % of inmates are infected .
That is why the Commission decided to use the lion 's share of the ECU 4.8 m remaining from the 1998 budget , namely ECU 4.24 m , for projects to stem the tide of tuberculosis .
As you know , the ECHO aid is dealt with by NGOs in the EU , the United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organisations .
Thank you very much President-in-Office of the Council for a very full reply .
I am concerned about tuberculosis and I am glad to know that the Council is making a major proportion of the funding available to that end , because it could be a serious problem .
Regarding the other aspects of agricultural products that might be going to the Russian people at the present time , I believe that part of the programme is going to allow the food aid that is sent there to be sold on the local market at existing market prices .
The main problem , however , is that the people do not have the funds to pay for it .
There is insufficient funding in the economy at the present time , and that is a major problem .
What assurances can the Council therefore give us that any produce that is sent from the European Union to Russia will in fact find its way to the actual people who need help ?
Mr Provan , you have addressed a very grave problem and one which the Council in fact considered at length during a very serious debate .
Indeed we are facing the dilemma of on the one hand recognising a humanitarian obligation and wanting to help , while on the other we know that in the country we want to help we come up against structures that often stand in the way of achieving the purpose of the aid .
The Council has therefore laid down a political guideline for the Commission , to the effect that when these products are supplied to Russia , it must be ensured that they do indeed reach those who are in greatest need , that this does not disrupt any remaining food supply structures that still work and that it helps promote a viable policy for securing future food supplies to the people .
That was the Council 's intention .
It has proved extremely difficult to apply these political conditions in relation to practical aid .
That is why I am persuaded that the Council will have to look into this whole issue again at once .
Question No 6 by Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos ( H-0006 / 99 ) Subject : Security in Cyprus
Given that the EU , and some Member States in particular , had raised objections to the initial plan of the Cyprus Government to site a surface-to-air missile system , consisting of S-300 missiles , on the island and subsequently congratulated it on its decision to cancel the plan , how does the Council feel that Cyprus should improve its security ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Dimitrakopoulos 's question .
Mr Dimitrakopoulos , in the European Union 's view , the way for Cyprus to improve its security is to continue seeking a political solution to the problem of the division of the island .
Here Cyprus can continue to count on the full support of the European Union and of the entire international community .
The European Union takes the view that there are already far too many weapons in Cyprus , producing a real risk that each new build-up of weapons on one side will immediately be matched by the other side , which will lead to less rather than more security .
For this reason the European Union welcomed the decision by President Clerides , which Mr Dimitrakopoulos mentioned , not to site S-300 missiles on the island of Cyprus .
That decision sent out an important signal about reducing the excessive number of weapons in Cyprus and the European Union hopes both sides will take further steps in that direction .
The decision not to site those missiles has removed one of the sources of tension on the island .
The Council believes this can promote progress towards a just and lasting solution to the Cyprus conflict .
The European Union strongly endorsed UN Security Council Resolutions 1217 and 1218 and fully supports the ongoing efforts of the UN Secretary-General 's Deputy Special Representative for Cyprus .
Mr Dimitrakopoulos , the Council 's principal demand to the Turkish side in Cyprus is that it should finally be willing to take part in the accession negotiations .
As you know , the European Union 's political strategy here is to start the accession negotiations with Cyprus , in the hope that they can act as a catalyst to help resolve the political problem and in the end indeed resolve it .
So far this hope has not been fulfilled , but we still make the same very clear demand to the Turkish side to take part in the negotiations .
In any case , of course , we call on the Turkish side to keep a low military profile and to help defuse the situation by taking steps towards disarmament .
I cannot tell you anything about the possibility of Cyprus joining NATO , or about deliberations within NATO on the potential membership of Cyprus , since I represent the presidency of the European Union and not the NATO Council .
Mr Sánchez-Neyra , the Council has not deliberated the matter to which you refer .
Nevertheless I can provide you with some information .
The Council reaffirms the position it adopted in regard to the agreements reached at the EU-USA summit in London in May 1998 .
At that time the Council said that for legal reasons and reasons of principle it firmly rejected secondary boycotts and laws with extraterritorial and retroactive effect .
The Council welcomes the new measures taken by the US Government .
But even if they reflect a more flexible attitude on the part of the US towards Cuba , the Council regrets that the American embargo on Cuba remains in place .
Such actions are not the best means of promoting democracy and respect for human rights .
The Council still believes it right to seek a dialogue with Cuba , as we stated in the common position of December 1969 , and to support a process of peaceful transition to a pluralist democracy , together with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and sustained economic recovery in Cuba .
The EU still regards the implementation of the agreements of the EU-USA London summit of 18 May 1998 as a priority .
But in spite of the efforts of the US Government , to date there is still not the kind of progress that would lead the USA to radically review its sanctions policy .
I would like to thank the presidency for its assessment of these measures and to put a supplementary question .
You are aware , Mr President-in-Office , that it was agreed at the Transatlantic Summit between Commissioner Brittan and the Clinton administration that the European Union was to withdraw the complaint it had filed with the World Trade Organisation . As you know , one of the other agreements was that the United States would amend Title IV of the Helms-Burton Act .
When speaking before Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Brittan confirmed in response to a question I put to him that if the United States Congress did not amend Title IV , the complaint might perhaps be lodged once again with the World Trade Organisation .
Does the Council share this view ?
If so - and I will end here , Mr President - when would the deadline be ?
Yes , Mr Sánchez-Neyra , the presidency does share the Commission 's view on this question .
I cannot tell you anything about time-frames at this point because the Council has not taken a decision on this .
I personally think it should happen at the time of the EU-USA summit in June this year at the latest .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for the information you have provided . However , I would like to give you some new information which was received this week by a group of Members from all the political groups who form the intergroup against the blockade affecting Cuba , and , of course , against the Helms-Burton Act , which is exacerbating the situation still further .
During a meeting , the Cuban authorities showed us a letter from farmers in the United States who are putting pressure on Mr Clinton to allow them to sell directly to small Cuban firms or relatives of Cubans in Miami , within the context of the recent flexibility measures introduced by the United States Government .
Mr President-in-Office , you have just said that the situation will have to be assessed in June . I would ask you to bear in mind that the paradox might arise that North American farmers are able to sell to Cubans without any problems , while Europeans continue to find it very difficult to trade and conduct a normal relationship with Cuba because of the Helms-Burton Act and the blockade , which , as you know , is illegal and contravenes United Nations resolutions .
Mrs González Álvarez , I am extremely grateful to you for that information and would in fact be most obliged to you if you could , as you say , put the relevant documents at the Council 's disposal so that it can take account of them in the appropriate decision-making processes .
I would not like to make any political assessment at this moment , before actually seeing the documents . I am sure you will understand that .
But this course of events you have just described ought also to be considered at the EU-USA summit in June at the latest .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Questions Nos 8 , 9 and 10 will not be taken because the subject to which they refer is included on the agenda of this part-session .
Question No 11 by Esko Seppänen ( H-0016 / 99 ) Subject : Wassenaar Arrangement
At the beginning of December it was decided that cryptographical goods should also be subject to the Wassenaar Arrangement .
The EU is not a party to that Arrangement , but plans are now afoot for the EU to adopt a Directive on the subject .
What are the Council 's grounds for not allowing free trade in cryptographical goods , and does the Wassenaar decision accord with the WTO Agreement ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Seppänen 's question .
Mr President , Mr Seppänen , under the Wassenaar Arrangement , cryptographical goods always were subject to export controls .
At their plenary meeting on 2 and 3 December 1998 , the 33 contracting states of the Wassenaar Arrangement merely decided to review the rules on export controls for encryption techniques ; these are known as cryptographical goods .
The aim was to relax the export controls and ensure that cryptographical restrictions did not become entrenched .
Those contracting states that are also EU Member States were particularly concerned to avoid any rules that would further restrict free trade .
It is true that the European Union as such is not a contracting party to the Wassenaar Arrangement .
At present there is an integrated system in which the Council , the Commission and the Member States exercise their respective responsibilities , with a view to protecting the Member States ' fundamental security interests and fulfilling their international obligations .
The Council is currently preparing to implement the Wassenaar decisions .
To this end it will amend Council Decision 94 / 942 / CFSP and adjust the list of dual-use goods subject to export controls pursuant to Regulation ( EC ) No 3381 / 94 , which is the dual-use regulation in question .
The Council hopes the revised list can enter into force on 1 April 1999 .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , did I understand correctly that you mentioned a decision taken at a meeting on 2 and 3 December 1998 at the plenary meeting of the states participating in the Wassenaar Arrangement to ease trade restrictions in respect of cryptographical goods ?
If you did , you are wrong .
The licensing process was made much tighter at that time , and the Member States of the European Union went along with demands mainly from the United States to make the prevention of espionage more difficult .
Cryptographical goods are used specifically for protection against Echelon and other spying activities carried out by the USA .
Was I right in thinking that you said the trade in cryptographical goods has become less restricted , and do you think that this licensing arrangement for trade in cryptographical goods is generally in line with WTO regulations ?
Mr President , yes Mr Seppänen , you understood me correctly .
Let me repeat : at the plenary meeting on 2 and 3 December the Wassenaar contracting states decided to review the export control rules on encryption techniques .
So these are the cryptographical goods you mentioned .
Under the new rules the export controls have been relaxed .
And that was precisely the aim of the EU Member States , namely to prevent cryptographical restrictions from being entrenched in these new rules .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Mr Seppänen , you cannot speak twice during Question Time .
Moreover , your speech is not being interpreted . It is therefore impossible to continue with this discussion .
Mr Rübig wishes to put a supplementary question .
Mr President , I wanted to ask about the quantity and quality of these systems in the future .
Has the Council carried out any analyses ?
Mr President , Mr Rübig , I am genuinely sorry I cannot answer this very specialised question offhand .
I will have to give you a written answer .
Mr Rübig will await your response in writing .
Questions Nos 12 and 13 should now be taken together , but as the author is not present , Question No 13 lapses .

Question No 12 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0017 / 99 ) Subject : Harmonisation of the OSPAR Agreement to stop further radioactive pollution by nuclear plants of the seas surrounding the EU
What action will be taken by the Council to ensure Europe-wide harmonisation of the agreement to stop further radioactive pollution by nuclear plants of the seas surrounding the European Union , in particular Sellafield and La Hague , drawn up at the meeting of the ministerial working group of the OSPAR Convention on the protection of the seas held in Dublin last month ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs Ahern 's question .
Mrs Ahern , at last year 's conference of the contracting parties to the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic - the OSPAR agreement - held in Lisbon , the OSPAR Commission adopted a strategy on radioactive material , in the form of a political declaration .
The goal of that strategy is to prevent the pollution of the marine environment from ionising radiation .
This is to be achieved through the continuous and substantial reduction of discharges , emissions and losses of radioactive material with the aim of keeping their environmental concentration close to the background values for naturally occurring radioactive material and keeping them virtually nil for man-made radioactive material .
In pursuing this aim , account was also to be taken of the legitimate uses of the sea , technical feasibility and the radiological effects on man and organisms .
By the year 2020 discharges , emissions and losses of radioactive material are to be reduced to a level where any concentration increases above the already existing concentrations are virtually nil .
The OSPAR working party on radioactive material that is responsible for implementing this declaration met in Dublin from 19 to 22 January 1999 .
The contracting parties agreed to report by autumn 1999 on the measures they had respectively planned to reduce discharges , emissions and losses of radioactive material .
The Council wishes to point out that the question raised by Mr Fitzsimons primarily concerns bilateral relations between two Member States of the European Union and therefore falls within their terms of reference .
At the same time the Council would specifically remind him that the nuclear plant he referred to is subject to the Community 's legal provisions relating to health protection , in particular Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom , which lays down stricter standards for the protection of workers and the general public against ionising radiation .
The presidency-in-office of the Council can also inform you that the German Government is currently holding intensive negotiations with the UK on the continued operation of the Sellafield reprocessing plant .
I will be happy to report to you on this at a later date , once these talks are concluded .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if he thinks that fuel reprocessing at Sellafield can possibly be compatible with the commitment to reduce emissions to zero , or virtually nil as he puts it ?
I note what he says about the intensive bilateral negotiations currently taking place between Germany and the UK and , indeed , I believe France over emissions .
Since 1994 significant increased emissions have been documented from THORP , and this cannot possibly be compatible with the commitment to reduce emissions to zero .
While I am very pleased to hear about these intensive negotiations , I would also like to make the comment that , according to recent scientific journals , there is no question of compensation being paid .
Mrs Ahern , in your supplementary you have linked two entirely different matters , which really have nothing to do with each other .
The current talks between the German and UK Governments on Sellafield have nothing to do with the decisions OSPAR took in Lisbon .
They are two entirely different matters .
There is no link between them .
I do not have any way of judging to what extent the operation of the plant to which you refer is or is not compatible with the provisions .
As I said , this autumn we will be receiving reports from the contracting states on what they propose to do in order to achieve the objectives laid down in Lisbon .
Is the President-in-Office aware of the continuing concern of people , in particular on Ireland 's east coast , about the safety of the accident-prone Sellafield plant ?
Is he willing to bring this concern to the attention of the Council with a view to encouraging the British Government and British Nuclear Fuels to cease operations at Sellafield and , in particular , to stop the reprocessing of nuclear waste ?
I would ask the President-in-Office if he could provide a clear timetable as to when the reprocessing trade will be brought to an end .
This is a matter of great concern to most citizens .
Mr Hyland , obviously I cannot provide a timetable of this kind because the Council is not currently considering the question of bringing nuclear technology in Europe to an end or the question of when the reprocessing technology will come to an end in Europe .
That is a matter for deliberation in the Council .
As for the concern of the citizens , I believe that the Member States concerned should make these concerns known to the Council .
It cannot be the presidency 's job to discuss a Member State 's problems if that Member State itself does not wish it .
I have a very brief question on the issue of Sellafield .
Perhaps the President-in-Office could comment on these remarks from the deputy chief executive of the Radiological Protection Institute of Ireland printed in The Irish Times .
He says : ' they do not pose a significant health risk ... and have been dropping for some time ' .
Could the President-in-Office comment , please .
Mr President , I cannot comment on that quotation because the Council has not considered this matter .
Question No 14 by Jan Andersson ( H-0019 / 99 ) Subject : Conditions for Swedish adoption of the common currency
The introduction of the euro at the beginning of the year has lent urgency to the debate in Sweden on its possible future adoption of the common currency , the timing of which is one of the principal issues .
Here it would be valuable to clarify the implications of the qualifying periods for joining the ERM on the date Sweden might adopt the euro .
Does the present position of the Council rule out Sweden 's adoption of the euro at an earlier date than that implied by the qualifying period for it to join the ERM ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Andersson 's question .

Mr President , Mr Andersson , pursuant to Article 109k ( 2 ) of the Treaty , at least once every two years , if not sooner , at the request of a Member State with a derogation , the Council shall decide which Member States with a derogation fulfil the necessary conditions for the introduction of the euro on the basis of the convergence criteria in Article 109 .
In relation to Sweden , that means that in May 2000 at the latest the Council will review the derogation agreed for Sweden in May 1998 .
If Sweden wishes to adopt the euro at an earlier date , it can do so .
Many thanks for your reply .
The fact that Sweden is not a member of EMU has nothing to do with the Treaty , but with public opinion which has prevented a decision on whether to join .
However , there has recently been a sea change in people 's views .
There is a continuing debate on whether countries would have to have been in ERM II for two years , and my question also refers to this , since events may move quite quickly in Sweden .
There could be a decision next year following a referendum .
If that turns out to be the case , would Sweden be obliged to be in ERM II for two years before being allowed to become an actual member ?
Or would it only be necessary to fulfil the criteria relating to inflation , interest rates and so on ?
Mr President , I cannot make a political judgment here because this is a purely Swedish matter .
In legal terms , in terms of the Treaty , I can certainly give a positive answer .
Mr President , I apologise as I refer not to this question but to my own question , No 18 .
I am in the middle of an emergency meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I wish to apologise to the President-in-Office as I will not be here to take his response .
If possible , could he give me a written response ?
Thank you , Mr Crowley .
In any event , when we come to your question , I will call your name . If you are not here , then in view of the explanation you have provided , I will ask the President-in-Office to answer your question in writing .
As the author is not present , Question No 15 lapses .
Question No 16 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0027 / 99 ) Subject : Third pillar and illegal immigrants
What is the position regarding the problem of illegal immigrants who are smuggled into an EU Member State which does not have diplomatic relations of any kind with the countries of origin of the illegal immigrants , thereby leaving that State in a quandary over what to do with them ?
In Greece , for example , this intractable problem is apparent with immigrants mainly from Rwanda , Sierra Leone and Myanmar who have been held in police cells or prison for some 7 months and have been poorly or humiliatingly treated .
Could dilemmas of this type be dealt with at Community level by enlisting the help of those Member States which have diplomatic relations with the countries in question ?
Should there not be specific provisions within the third pillar to deal with such cases , which would take into account the principles of human rights , fundamental freedoms and respect for private life ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Papayannakis 's question .
Mr President , Mr Papayannakis , the Council is aware of the problems arising from situations such as those described in your question .
The responsible Council bodies have taken them into account when they discuss the problems facing Member States that want to deport people to certain third countries .
Deportation to third countries does indeed call for good cooperation with the state in question so that the necessary formalities can actually be completed .
In particular , the identity of an individual must be determined before he or she can be provided with the necessary re-entry documents .
If there are no diplomatic relations or there are only restricted diplomatic relations , that is of course an obstacle to this cooperation .
Mr President , I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply , but the real point of my question was this : Greece has diplomatic but not consular relations with the countries I mentioned , such as Rwanda , Sierra Leone and Myanmar .
These countries do not have embassies in Athens , and I imagine that this must be the case in other countries as well .
The upshot of this is that illegal immigrants who have been arrested cannot be set free or expelled ; nor can they be sent for trial , which means that they stay in police custody for months , and I regard this as unacceptable .
Could not the Council intervene , possibly via the consular authorities of these countries in another Member State , so that these people can be given the documents they need to solve their problem ?
Otherwise we end up with something resembling a Kafkaesque impasse .
This is my question to the President-in-Office and I would ask him to intervene , if he can , in such cases .
Mr Papayannakis , I find it very difficult to answer a question concerning a problem that Greece has with certain other states .
To my knowledge what normally happens is that a state that does not have diplomatic relations with a particular other state can be represented in that state by a protecting power .
I do not know whether this is the case for Greece , but if not , the most obvious solution would probably be for the Greek Government to request representation from another state that does have diplomatic relations with the states concerned .
Mr President-in-Office , I just want to ask whether this problem that is facing Greece is not also connected with two other issues . One is the question of common measures to combat illegal immigration , the other is a fair distribution of the personnel burden as regards asylum applicants and other immigrants .
So long as no progress is made on these issues , I fear we will not have a common approach on other such issues either .
So my question is : on what is the Council focusing in this area in order to adopt a common approach on these two issues ?
Mr Posselt , as you know , we do indeed regard this as an important and fundamental issue .
But it is not directly linked to this very specific Greek problem .
I really cannot tell you how the immigrants from Rwanda , Sierra Leone and Myanmar actually get to Greece .
But the basic problem you have raised is one that is currently being discussed in depth in the Council , and the Council intends to cooperate more closely in this area and to take decisions and decide on joint action here at the latest by the time of the special summit to be held in Tampere in Finland during the next six-month presidency .
Question No 17 by Bernie Malone ( H-0028 / 99 ) Subject : Access to transport for people with disabilities
Does the Council agree that the needs of people with disabilities should be mainstreamed into regulations for structural funding of Member States ' transport systems , in the light of the recent protest made by Mr John Doyle of Bray , Co Wicklow , Ireland , outside Heuston Station in Dublin after it was revealed that CIE had spent IEP 8.5 million of EU funding as part of an IEP 26 million investment on the acquisition of 150 buses which did not provide for disabled access .
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Malone 's question .
The Council shares the concern expressed by the honourable Member and by Parliament as a whole in relation to the quality of life and especially the mobility of disabled citizens .
Access to public transport plays an important role in this context .
The Council 's concern in this regard is also reflected in the new Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty , one of the aims of which is to prevent discrimination on the basis of disability .
As for the special case to which Mrs Malone referred , I am sorry to say that the Council is not aware of it .
But since it obviously concerns an EU Structural Fund measure , I would suggest that she address this question to the Commission , which is responsible for ensuring the proper implementation of EU structural policy .
This is one of those rare occasions when cynical politicians get outraged .
It happened when I saw disabled people protesting in the rain outside the transport company because of the fact that new buses had been acquired with EU structural fund money and that they were not accessible .
There are buses that are accessible .
They are in use in London . So this is disgraceful .
I hope that the presidency will bring it to the attention of his colleague , the Irish minister for public enterprise , Mary O 'Rourke , and to try to force her to take the needs of disabled people into account in all EU funds expenditure .
She will probably tell you that the shape of our roads is inadequate .
One of the excuses the minister has given is that there is a dip in the roads and the types of buses available in London would not possibly be suitable .
I do not find that to be an acceptable explanation .
Mrs Malone , I would very much like to tell you what I think about this , because I really have very specific views , which I am sure are not very different from yours . But as you know , I cannot do so .
All I can tell you at this point is that the Commission would have to check whether in the case you describe there was any infringement of the provisions on the use of Structural Fund resources .
It is up to the Commission to do this ; the Council cannot do so .
Presumably today 's Question Time will , as you hoped , raise European public awareness of this issue .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .


We should now be taking Question No 18 by Mr Crowley , who was with us earlier and asked Mr Verheugen to answer his question in writing .
Mr Hyland , the Council is aware that European tourism will be a very important industry in the next century .
On 6 June 1996 the Commission submitted a proposal for a decision on a first multiannual programme to promote European tourism .
The subject has been considered several times since then .
The Austrian Presidency took it up again and at its meeting of 7 December 1998 the Council once again considered the multiannual programme to promote European tourism on the basis of a document drawn up by the Austrian Presidency .
In spite of the presidency 's proposal to shorten the duration of the programme and to reduce the budget funds allocated to it , some delegations continued to raise objections .
Let me point out that if no consensus is reached the German Presidency proposes the following : continuation of the work on this programme , taking account of the recommendations made by the High Level Group on Tourism and Employment , and renewed consideration of the subject in the light of new developments .
Does the President-in-Office agree that rural tourism must be prioritised in the context of the broader EU tourism package and that agri-tourism must be promoted and developed as a means of sustaining farm families and rural communities ?
Would he agree that rural tourism requires additional funding under the proposed new operational programme for tourism ?
I am sure the President 's heart is in the right place when it comes to promoting rural tourism .
Mr Hyland , I am sorry to have to tell you that there is no agreement in the Council on any of these questions .
On the contrary , there is much dispute about them .
Unfortunately my personal view in this regard is of no significance .
But you can guess what it is when I tell you that I myself represent a rural constituency in the German Bundestag .
Let me say again : the German Presidency will continue nonetheless to try very hard to achieve the consensus that is still lacking , and will certainly continue to keep the matter under consideration .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 20 to 24 and 27 lapse .
Question No 25 by Mrs McIntosh will not be taken because the subject to which it refers is included on the agenda for this part-session .
Mr Papayannakis wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , I had asked , with the agreement of Mr Alavanos , to take over his question .
Is that not possible ?

Mr Papayannakis , to reach such an agreement with Mr Alavanos , the Rules state that a written request must be received from Mr Alavanos before the beginning of Question Time , asking that you be allowed to deputise for him .
We have not received any such request from Mr Alavanos .
Therefore , under the Rules , you cannot deputise for him .
Question No 29 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0074 / 99 ) Subject : Provocative statements by UK spokesman on Cyprus , Sir David Hannay
Statements made by the UK government spokesman on Cyprus , Sir David Hannay , advising the Greek Cypriots to follow the Swiss model , which recognises the sovereignty of the Swiss cantons , an alternating presidency and equal numerical representation of the cantons , have been met with utter dismay and sharp protests by the Cypriot government as well as all political circles in Cyprus .
Bearing in mind that such statements are completely in keeping with Turkish views and are contrary to UN Security Council resolutions , including the most recent , resolutions 1217 and 1218 , will the Council say in what manner it will respond to these provocative remarks , which cultivate a climate of tolerance , enabling the Turkish side to advance unacceptable positions which contravene all notion of international legality and law and undermine efforts to bring about a just and viable solution to the Cyprus problem ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Theonas 's question .
Mr Theonas , it is for the British Government to react to the alleged statements by the UK government spokesman on Cyprus , Sir David Hannay .
He is the spokesman on Cyprus for the British Government and not for the European Union .
The presidency has information to the effect that Sir David Hannay 's statements were misunderstood and that the British Government has now clarified the matter .
The presidency therefore sees no occasion to comment on these statements .


Mr President , unfortunately I am unable to thank the President-in-Office for his answer because , whether Sir David Hannay represents the British Government or not , it is important to state one 's position on the substance of the declarations .
In this regard , I am interested in the position of the Council , that is if it insists on solving the Cyprus problem on the basis of the recent Security Council Resolutions 1217 and 1218 , and if it considers that a loose federation , such as that sought after by Mr Denktash - and unfortunately Sir David Hannay appeared to agree with this idea - is the solution which the European Union could be happy with in respect of the Cyprus problem and in respect of the process of solving one of the longest-standing problems in Europe .
There has been no change to the Council 's position on the Cyprus question .
As I just said , Sir David Hannay 's statements do not fall within the remit of the Council or the European Union , and therefore I cannot comment on them .
Question No 30 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0075 / 99 ) Subject : German Presidency and accession of Cyprus
The German embassy in New Delhi , India , reportedly issued an official document on 6 January 1999 concerning the German Presidency 's objectives for the first six months of 1999 .
This document makes no reference to the accession of Cyprus to the EU ; chapter 5 ( ' Enlargement of the EU and accession process - European Conference ' , pp. 17 and 18 ) merely refers to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , while placing particular emphasis on the promotion of EU relations with Turkey .
What are the German Presidency 's views on this entire matter and when will the mistake of omitting Cyprus from the document issued by the German embassy in New Delhi be rectified ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mr Kaklamanis 's question .
Mr Kaklamanis , the document you mention does not specify any applicant country by name but refers only to the applicant countries as a group , which of course means all six of them .
Mr President-in-Office , I am not going to beat about the bush .
You are here in the European Parliament .
This morning , when we debated issues concerning the Council , the Council was absent , which shows a lack of respect for this House .
You are mistaken if you think that a 30-second answer is adequate for the question I asked you .
This shows contempt for the European Parliament and our intelligence .
The contents of the official telegram from your embassy were not disclosed this time by Sir David Hannay , but by the representative of the German Government .
I would like you to give me a direct answer .
Firstly , what is the position of the German Government and of the German Presidency ?
That is what concerns me .
Is there a question mark over the accession talks concerning Cyprus because the political problem has not been solved ?
Secondly , if the talks end and the problem has not been solved , what is the position of the presidency ?
Please give me direct answers to both these questions .
I reject this criticism .
The Council was perfectly well represented at this morning 's sitting ; it must be left to the Council to decide at what level it is represented .
I have nothing to add on the matter .
The document you quote does not refer specifically to any one applicant country but refers to all the applicant countries .
That means Cyprus in the same way as it does Poland , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovenia and Estonia .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
Mr Verheugen , Mrs Theorin has now arrived in the Chamber for Question Time , which she usually attends .
The fact that we dealt with the previous questions so quickly clearly explains why she was not present when we came to her question .
I would therefore like to ask you if you could perhaps respond to Mrs Theorin 's question .
Question No 26 by Maj Theorin ( H-0061 / 99 ) Subject : Nuclear disarmament
Nuclear weapons continue to represent a huge threat to the whole of humanity merely because they exist .
The UN General Assembly has decided , by a very large majority , to support the proposal by Sweden and Ireland for new nuclear disarmament measures .
The vote showed a marked change in attitudes towards nuclear weapons ; the only EU Member States to vote against the resolution were the UK and France .
What steps does the Council intend to take to support new nuclear disarmament measures ?
I should like to appeal to your generosity , Mr Verheugen , and ask you to answer Mrs Theorin 's question .
Of course I will answer this question .
Naturally the European Union is committed to strengthening the Non-Proliferation Treaty and making it universal .
This treaty gives rise to obligations on the part of nuclear states to take nuclear disarmament measures .
The EU reaffirmed this commitment and took note of the decision in question and of the New Agenda Resolution at the European Council in Cardiff on 15-16 June 1998 , thus expressing its position .
Thank you for answering my question .
My reason for putting it is that nuclear disarmament is at a standstill .
Nothing much had happened before the initiative by Sweden and Ireland , amongst others , which prompted new questions about a realistic way to eliminate nuclear weapons .
The initiative was based on the Canberra Commission proposals , as they are called .
It does not involve anything unrealistic or Utopian , but is a practical initiative .
I am pleased to note that most Member States of the Union either voted for the resolution or abstained ; only the two nuclear powers voted against it .
I have high hopes that the German Presidency will be prepared to take up the initiative , bringing nuclear disarmament a step nearer .
Let me specifically confirm again , Mrs Theorin , that in the presidency 's view the Non-Proliferation Treaty is one of the most important international instruments of disarmament and international security .
The German Presidency attaches the utmost importance to strengthening the non-proliferation system , to ensuring that the provisions are respected , that the commitments contained in the treaty are fulfilled and that the non-proliferation system can be maintained and further developed in future too .
As you yourself just described , there are still differences of opinion on this subject among the Member States of the European Union ; that also applies to the New Agenda Resolution tabled by Ireland , Sweden and a number of other states in the First Committee of the United Nations General Assembly .
Irrespective of these differences of opinion , the reasons for which you know as well as I , let me also emphasise that there is agreement in some important areas .
That means the Council supports the implementation of the decision , of the principles and objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament , of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference .
In this context I would point out again that under this treaty the nuclear states have undertaken to totally abolish these weapons in the framework of the general disarmament efforts , under strict and effective international control .
As the author is not present , Question No 31 lapses .
Questions Nos 32 and 33 will not be taken , as the subject to which they refer is included on the agenda of this part-session .
Question No 34 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0088 / 99 ) Subject : US breaching UN Conventions
What opinion does the Council have of , and how does it intend to react to , plans by the US Administration to deploy anti-ballistic missiles , in breach of the 1972 Anti-ballistic Missile Treaty , and to the fact that the US Administration is developing , and is likely to deploy , weather-modification weapons in breach of the 1977 ENMOD Convention ( Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques ) ?
I give the floor to Mr Verheugen to answer Mrs McKenna 's question .
Mrs McKenna , the Council has not been informed of the US Government plans referred to in your question .
Neither the European Union nor any its Member States are parties to the ABM Treaty .
But the US Government has declared that it intends to adhere to the core of the treaty and jointly discuss a modification to it with Russia .
Some Member States of the European Union are parties to the 1977 Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques .
But to date this convention has not been discussed in the framework of the EU 's Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The European Union has a responsibility here , and the Member States that are cooperating with the United States on military matters have an obligation to ensure that international treaties are respected .
There seems quite a lot of evidence to back up these allegations .
The President-in-Office has said that they are only allegations but there is a lot of information and data to back them up .
It seems to be fact .
The United States would appear to be thumbing its nose at international treaties , and it is incumbent on the European Union , as regards global disarmament and international security , to make sure that the United States is held accountable for what it is planning .
Mrs McKenna , I am happy to take note of your comments but I cannot predict whether the Council will consider this matter .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 35 to 37 lapse .
Mr Killilea has just joined us and has asked if the President-in-Office would perhaps respond to Question No 28 .
Mr Verheugen , I must once again ask you if you would be kind enough to answer Question No 28 .
Question No 28 by Mark Killilea ( H-0071 / 99 ) Subject : Seals
In April 1997 , Bord Iascaigh Mhara , the Irish Sea Fisheries Board , submitted a report to the European Commission on the physical interaction between grey seals and fishing gear .
Research at two selected sites in Ireland over a 2-3 year period produced conclusive evidence of damage to fish stocks by seals .
This study is supported by extensive previous research .
Can the Council inform me whether it has been made aware of this research by the Commission ?
Would it not agree that this report and others reveal that the extent of damage to fisheries by seals is very significant financially in local terms ?
Would it not also agree that measures to prevent such an impact would have to be considered justifiable , particularly where a proven case existed ?
Would it be in support of the Commission financially assisting national fisheries organisations to carry out such studies in order to scientifically assess such a need ?
I would once again call on Mr Verheugen 's generosity and ask him to answer Mr Killilea 's question .
Mr Killilea , I will give you an answer .
But I know in advance that you will see it as a non-answer because the Council has not received the report on the interaction between grey seals and fishing gear , which is , after all , the report you are referring to .
For this reason the Council cannot give its views on the report .
But I have been informed , Mr Killilea , that you have addressed a similar question to the Commission .
I believe the Commission is more likely to be in a position to give you a satisfactory answer .
Mr President , thank you for allowing my question and thanks to the President-in-Office for his answer , even though he has stated that it is a non-answer .
I received another non-answer from the Commission .
I do not know where we stand .
European taxpayers ' money was given to the Bord Iascaigh Mhara to do this research .
The documentation and the serious scientific research has been in print since 1997 and it sits there gathering dust .
I suspect , Mr President-in-Office , that we lack courage to tackle this major problem .
But I want to point out to you that in the three sample cod catches on the west coast of Ireland , 98 % of the cod caught in the nets was either destroyed or severely damaged by the seals .
Similarly , with other species of white fish , the overall figure was 58.8 % of the total allowable catch of Irish fishermen destroyed by seals one way or another .
It will take a lot of courage to stand up to the nonsense that goes on about those pretty animals .
They may be pretty with their heads out of the water but they are not so pretty beneath the sea where they are devouring thousands of tonnes of very precious fish and food for the people of Europe .
I say to the critics : is it more important to feed the seals or to feed human beings ?
My opinion is that it is more important to feed human beings .
I would like the President-in-Office to continue to put pressure on the Commission to have the moral courage to stand up to this awful situation which is staring us all in the face .
Mr Killilea , since I too have experience of the lengthy procedures in this House I fully understand your problem .
I do not quite know whether I should support the seals , the fish or the people .
I would advise the Irish Government to bring the matter up again if as you say - and I do not doubt your words - it is important to the people of the west coast of Ireland .
The Council cannot take the initiative to discuss a report by an Irish authority or to take a position when the report has not even been submitted to it .
My advice would be , if the Commission cannot give you an answer either , that the Irish Government itself should raise this matter in Brussels .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen .
That concludes Question Time .
The sitting was suspended at 7.02 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.

Water policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0261 / 98 ) by Mr White , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal and amended proposals for a Council Directive establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy ( COM ( 97 ) 0049 - C4-0192 / 97 , COM ( 97 ) 0614 - C4-0120 / 98 and COM ( 98 ) 0076 - C4-0121 / 98-97 / 0067 ( SYN ) ) .
I should like to say at the outset - as I will be repeating through the evening - that I shall have to be strict with regard to speaking time , since we have a very tight schedule which will take us late into the night .
Mr President , I am very glad to be able to present my report on the water framework directive for this first reading .
The path of this proposal has been almost as tortuous as a salmon swimming upstream .
I should like to acknowledge the personal contribution of my colleague , Mr Collins , in the long haul that has finally brought us to this first reading .
In 1995 Mr Collins chaired Parliament 's hearing on water policy that gave birth to the water framework directive .
Perhaps we should call it the ' water baby ' , and he will be heartened to see his ' baby ' at last christened by this Parliament before he leaves us later this year .
I should like to pay tribute to the little puddle of water rapporteurs - also present at the christening ceremony - which include my colleagues , Mr Florenz , Mrs Schleicher , Mr Eisma and Mr Collins himself , who also has a water report .

We have developed amongst us an esprit du corps , whereby we have become water-minded , and that is a very useful thing to have done .
This proposal provides an historic opportunity to secure the Union 's most basic need for adequate supplies of good quality water for today 's and tomorrow 's generations .
Its outcome will determine the future of the Union 's water resources well beyond the Millennium .
Reform of the Union 's water policy is overdue and welcome .
Piecemeal evolution has resulted in an incoherent body of legislation , with differing and sometimes conflicting methods , definitions and aims .
The perilous state of much of the Union 's water resources is plain to see from the evidence provided to us by the Environment Agency in Copenhagen .
The first report on Europe 's environment - the so-called Dobris assessment - sets out the problems in a clear manner and last year saw the publication of another assessment by the Environment Agency .
Comparison of the two reports shows that progress still has to be made .
The Dobris assessment reported that a quarter of Europe 's rivers are of poor or bad quality , with either sparse populations of fish or completely devoid of fish . Last year 's assessment noted that there has been ' no overall improvement in river quality ' .
There has not been any significant improvement in groundwater quality since the first assessment . Europe 's groundwater is endangered and polluted in several ways , we are told .
' Problems include pollution by nitrates , pesticides , heavy metals and hydrocarbons , leading to eutrophication , toxic impacts in other parts of the water environment and possible effects upon human health ' . Moreover , despite the numerous international agreements and many statements of good intent , the implementation of Union water legislation remains poor .
The Commission , having taken part - and I am grateful to them for that - in the hearing which took place in 1995 , produced its communication in February 1996 .
Following Parliament 's response to the communication , a dialogue has been continuing between the Commission and myself .
In that dialogue I voiced the concerns of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection about the early proposal .
The Commission is to be congratulated on its response in providing detailed annexes and basic definitions missing from the original .
I am also heartened by the constructive attitude of the present German presidency .
Before Parliament today there are 12 compromise amendments dealing with important issues where , in the spirit of the Amsterdam Treaty yet to be ratified , I am pleased to present the results of a recent trialogue between myself , the Commission and the Council .
These compromise amendments show a new willingness to move towards the Environment Committee 's position on wetlands , public participation , marine monitoring and underground gas storage .
This is , and has had to be , a complicated proposal .
It aims to promote a sustainable use of water resources .
Member States will be obliged to achieve good status for all surface and ground waters by a set date .
Good status means a healthy ecosystem and a low level of pollution .
These targets will be achieved by river-basin management plans and backed up by Union-wide limits on pollution .
The proposal sets out how Member States must identify river basins , appoint river basin authorities and ensure that they produce plans .
The plans will stipulate what must happen for good status to be achieved , including pollution control , promoting more efficient use of water , regulating obstruction and introducing a charging system .
My suggestions for the reform of the Commission proposal are designed to address the considerable problems which continue to undermine the implementation of Union water policy .
At the same time , my amendments seek to create a water policy framework which is both practical and ambitious .
I urge that a tougher regime of pollution control is needed , the goal for the longer term , already contained in international conventions such as OSPAR , HELCOM and Barcelona , to which the EU and Member States are signatory , is the eventual phasing out of toxic substances .
In conclusion , I should like to repeat the importance of the proposal before us .
What can be more important to the future of the Community than secure and abundant supplies of healthy water .
This is the first piece of Community water legislation to apply to all surface and ground waters .
It bases the management of these waters firmly on the principle of sustainable development .
Mr President , water quality , particularly in coastal waters , is vitally important to the fisheries and aquaculture industries .
The seas are generally the end recipients of pollutants emitted into the water , particularly their coastal fringes , which are vital for the reproduction of many species .
The proposal for a directive directly affects those who live off these activities , particularly as it will repeal two former directives , one on fish waters and the other on shellfish waters .
We have therefore tabled amendments in this respect .
Amendment No 154 extends the directive 's scope to include coastal areas and estuaries .
This amendment falls within the context of recital 11 ( a ) adopted by the Committee on the Environment and specifies that the Member States will have the option of taking into account pollution in coastal areas in order to assess its consequences on fishing activities .
Amendments Nos 153 and 156 state that fishermen cannot be classified as users of water in the strict sense since their activity is not detrimental to this resource in quantitative or qualitative terms and since they are primarily the victims of any pollution .
Finally , Amendment No 155 proposes support for the more vulnerable economic categories , in particular , the small aquaculture plants which must take measures to protect themselves against the pollution which they may cause .
This would not involve tax exemption measures but rather support for filtration and purification equipment .
Finally , on behalf of the UPE Group , I must express our support for the concept of management by river basin .
This has demonstrated its worth in certain Member States and is the key issue in the Commission 's proposal .
It must therefore be safeguarded .
Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development calls on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , as the committee responsible , to incorporate the following conclusions in its report .
Firstly , the Agriculture Committee stresses that farmers use water for the benefit of consumers in general and that they are the first to be concerned about obtaining good water in order to ensure quality agricultural production .
Secondly , the committee acknowledges that , in addition to the objectives of protecting water against degradation of aquatic ecosystems and the long-term conservation of water resources , further steps need to be taken to reduce the adverse effects of floods and droughts .
With specific regard to agriculture , the committee rejects the idea of full cost recovery in respect of services provided for water , as advocated in Article 12 of the proposal for a directive . However , it does agree with the principle of amortising the costs of water services , taking due account of the social , environmental and economic consequences of amortisation and the geographical and climatic situation of the regions concerned .
In particular , the hydrological regime of the Mediterranean and southern areas of the European Union requires specific solutions in this respect .
Without these and also without irrigation systems , which often involve extremely high water storage and distribution costs , it would be impossible to ensure the modernisation and long-term survival of these areas .
Without a specific solution , agriculture in the southern regions of Europe would not be able to survive in competition with the northern areas which have rain throughout the year .
Fourthly , the Agriculture Committee suggests , with regard to the definitions and annexes , that specific reference be made to bodies of water used for irrigators , namely aqueducts , and to the way in which their quality and quantity is to be assessed , and also to irrigation farming as a distinct form of cyclical water use .
Fifthly , it proposes involving irrigators ' associations so that they can participate in the use and management of water basins and water in general .
Finally , as a Portuguese national , I must stress the importance of establishing more stringent rules for the management of cross-border water basins in order to ensure basic quality levels and rates of flow of the water in these international rivers .
Mr President , the primary purpose of the framework directive on Community action on water policy is to ensure that every citizen has a right to good quality water , both as something that sustains life and as something that exists in the environment .
Water quality has been argued over a good deal , however , as pollution has been difficult to regulate .
For this reason , as a binding guarantee of people 's entitlement to good quality water , provision must be made for the polluter pays principle , effective monitoring to ensure that water is of good quality with the smallest number of exemptions possible , and the examination of materials that harm water quality , primarily from the health point of view .
Negligence and irresponsible action can have disastrous and irreparable consequences .
There is much that is good in this report , so I would like to thank the rapporteur .
It contains a particularly welcome amendment with Article 3 ( a ) , which provides for the monitoring of the implementation of the River Basin District Management Plan .
The authorities in the Member States must be committed to better monitoring of water quality .
However , there is one problem with the report , in my opinion , which is to do with how water charges should be regulated .
To my mind , at least as far as Finland is concerned , this is a matter of local democracy and the right of the local authorities to regulate charges , and this should therefore not be interfered with .
Special attention must be paid to groundwater .
No-one should ever think that the situation is hopeless , and that the water is so polluted that it is not worth doing anything about it .
There are plenty of examples of problems being solved , not perhaps returning water to its natural state , but at least making it safe for humans .
Mr President , Commissioner , representatives of the presidency of the Council , the fact that we are discussing a framework directive today is thanks not least to Ian White .
A few months ago the situation still looked quite different .
The Commission wanted to present us with a communication - at the time I was the rapporteur and together we ensured that we would achieve this result today , in face of the rapid-fire decisions the Council wanted to take .
That is in itself a success .
As Members of this Parliament we must not forget that .
The object of the directive is not , as many of my colleagues believe , especially Austrians , that we want to regulate the ownership of water .
Quite the contrary : we want to protect the quality of water ; that is the purpose of the directive .
Now it seems to me that the Council and the Commission want to propose that we should promise one another to protect the water , but how we protect it should be left to the Member States to decide .
I am not quite sure this is the right European approach .
I am not in favour of issuing thousands of bans , but I am in favour of issuing a few important bans and making them applicable throughout Europe .
They need to have sound scientific backing .
We decided to create the single market and one of the main objectives of the single market was to harmonise standards in the European Community , not necessarily to make them exactly the same , but to approximate them more closely .
We seem to be moving away from that at present in environmental policy .
You know what I am criticising .
Unfortunately , the directive on a framework for Community action in the field of water policy does not define Europe-wide quality standards and emission standards , at least not the way the Council and the Commission formulate it although that is certainly what Parliament wants to do .
I believe it is important to take this combined approach , which we want to and will continue to pursue in future too .
As someone who lives beside the Rhine - my house and my farm are a few hundred metres from it - I believe it is important that the local residents , whoever they are , make a start further up the river .
If they do not make a start there , if we Germans do not continue setting high standards , our colleagues in the Netherlands will soon be drowning in dirty , polluted water .
This cannot after all be a matter for individual , national policy-making ; we need European standards , not hundreds of them but perhaps 40 or 50 .
I believe the Rhine , the Rhone , the Mosel need these European standards if we are to make any progress here in the future .
The Council did not show any very serious commitment .
We turned 188 amendments into ten compromise amendments .
So we have done a little better than the Council .
The presidency of the Council has certainly achieved much in administrative terms .
But in my view Parliament 's proposal was the better one .
We believe that if we get what the Council wants , we will find it complicated to regulate matters at national level and will end up with a Babylonian environment policy .
Mr President , the decision-making surrounding this water framework directive has certainly been a clumsy affair as a result of the informal political agreement that the Council reached without waiting for Parliament 's first reading .
The enormous gulf between the substance of that agreement and what Parliament wanted , reflected in over 200 amendments , forced Parliament and the Council to the highly unusual step of informal consultation , something which is not yet provided for in the European Treaties , though it may well be in future .
Mr White has been our guide through this political jungle , and I must congratulate him .
He did a good job of defending Parliament 's views before the Council and succeeded in winning a number of points .
He refused to succumb to pressure from the Member States on the points we feel are important , such as the priority list and the combined approach .
Despite the pressure of work and the complicated nature of the discussions , he also managed to keep us all as up to date as possible .
However , it is now Parliament 's job to deliver a report at first reading clearly setting out how the quantity and quality of ground , surface and coastal waters can best be protected .
Strict definitions , clear targets and transparent procedures are needed here .
The Committee on the Environment has put forward some excellent proposals , and I cannot understand why the Council is prepared to accept so few of them .
It even has difficulty with amendments designed to ensure that environmental standards are met in line with other European directives such as the nitrates directive , and with international conventions such as the OSPAR Convention .
It is quite incomprehensible .
I have no idea why the Council is against them .
But we need not worry , as the common position will not be dealt with in this parliamentary term , and by the time the new parliamentary term begins , the Amsterdam Treaty will have entered into force , so the second reading will come under the codecision procedure .
The Council will then have no choice but to take account of our views .
I hope it realises how it cut off its own nose in concluding the informal political agreement , and draws the relevant conclusions from this .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for all his hard work on today 's report , which takes account of the need for a more transparent framework directive that has a higher level of participation .
As the rapporteur himself says , echoing the concerns expressed in the Committee on the Environment , one third of European rivers are polluted and coastal waters and groundwater are being overexploited . It is therefore extremely difficult to obtain enough drinking water for the population .
It will be even more difficult in the future , particularly in some southern countries .
That is why we are in favour of the proposal and why we were even more in favour of the previous proposal .
For example , Amendment No 38 by Mr White was , in our view , an improvement as it was more complete .
However , we must work to ensure that there is a high level of participation in the river basin management plans in order to create a common , transparent framework and to promote cross-border cooperation .
Along with our Portuguese colleagues , we visited the River Tagus and we realised that the Portuguese were anxious to ensure that Spain made good use of its resources . That will be the only way of guaranteeing cross-border cooperation between our two countries .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his tremendous work .
These proposals are very welcome indeed because they attempt to establish an integrated approach to water management and protection , which are very important .
The underlying basis of all of this , the polluter pays principle , is one that we should be pushing most of all here .
However , the terms of the analysis that has been carried out must be broadened to consider the very important social consequences of what is essentially a unique social service .
The provision of water for domestic needs , as a necessity of daily life , for economic needs and for farming and other activities must be guaranteed .
I would refer Members in particular to Amendment No 22 dealing with Article 12 ( 1 ) which provides that there will not be universal charges for water where special social and other conditions apply .
These distinctions are important and , in particular , we must ensure the continued free service for those who most need it .
Mr President , in discussing the water framework directive tonight , we are unfortunately talking not about water protection but about a piecemeal policy .
The proposal makes that clear .
There are too many exceptions , no clear limit values and standards , quality targets that are in no way binding , that follow the English principle of : let 's water it down and nobody will notice .
Then there are the excessively long transition periods of up to 34 years , which make it clear that water protection is basically being postponed to some never-never day .
That makes a mockery of consumer protection .
But for me the worst of all , the ecological Waterloo , is the question of the discharge of hazardous substances .
In spite of the OSPAR convention , this quasi-common position proposes that nothing , nothing at all should be done .
I believe we must realise that water is too precious a resource to be used as a rubbish dump .
In that regard I expect us to give a very clear signal during the vote tomorrow .
I also hope that we will reach agreement tomorrow on setting limit values for radioactivity , as we did in the case of the drinking water directive ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , in my autonomous community of Aragon , we believe that our future depends on water .
We also believe that it is not that there is too much water in our territory , but that we are lacking the investment needed to use and make the most of what there is .
We are very aware of the fact that without water , there can be no development . It is essential in order to preserve the environment and to generate wealth and employment , in both the agricultural and industrial sectors .
Our problem is not the quality of water , but the quantity of water , in other words , its scarcity . It is therefore almost an insult to us that the River Ebro , the largest river in the Iberian Peninsula , flows through Aragon for 200 kilometres , part of which is desert , yet we scarcely make any use of its considerable volume .
This is mainly because of the Spanish Government 's historical lack of investment .
In fact , it is precisely because of this lack of investment that some might say that there is an excess of water and thus justify transfers to other more developed areas . We therefore believe that it is extremely important to prevent these policies of transferring water between basins .
Far from balancing the region , in practice they actually heighten the imbalance and lead to further depopulation . This is because the work involved is costly and it almost always harms the environment .
Moreover , it does not guarantee sustainable development with an unlimited supply . Indeed , these transfers are merely the reflection of a policy where the strongest asserts its power over the weakest .
Tomorrow , we will vote on various amendments that have already been approved in committee . They aim to limit inter-basin transfers to very specific situations where prior authorisation has been granted .
It must also be demonstrated that the basins receiving the supply have taken all possible measures to reduce demand . In our opinion , this is the appropriate path to follow so as to ensure that our water policy is an effective instrument for European social and territorial cohesion .
Mr President , I would like to point out the differences that exist in some respects between the position of the Spanish Socialists and that of our political group .
We fully support the idea of a framework directive for the Community 's water policy and we very much welcome the proposal for a directive .
However , these legislative attempts to harmonise policies may become something of a farce if we disregard Europe 's special territorial characteristics .
The issue of water in countries with sufficient rain cannot be dealt with in the same way as it is in other countries , such as my own , where water is a very scarce commodity .
We cannot treat countries that are used to floods and droughts , such as the Mediterranean countries , in the same way as northern countries .
We have therefore tabled a number of separate amendments .
We believe that it would be very unfair , for instance , to impose the strict obligation to recover full water costs . This generalisation would mean that a Spanish citizen or farmer would pay between 40 and 60 times more for water than British or Belgian citizens , for example .
Other amendments refer to situations involving infringements , some of which are impossible to resolve in certain southern regions , and to the requirements for transfers and the recharge of aquifers . They are all following the same line of thought .
Parliament has legislative power that can be used on the basis of scientific and balanced criteria . However , it should not be used to try to make the various European regions seem the same , particularly given the differences that exist in terms of the quantity , quality and pattern of their rainfall .
Mr President , I fully agree with the speech just made by my colleague Mr Aparicio .
It is clear that we must not forget the idea of unity in diversity , nor the fact that proactive measures can cost us dear .
We must therefore remember that Spain 's water problem is a strategic one , as you are well aware , Commissioner . Amendments have been tabled in this respect and I hope that the Commission takes account of them and excludes cases of serious drought or flooding from the directive 's requirements .
This is a factor that must be considered .
The directive must also allow Spain to build links between basins that are adequately balanced , as provided for in the National Hydrological Plan .
It is only in this way that we can guarantee supply for the southern parts of our country .
We also need to adapt the principle of recovering full costs .
We cannot add further difficulties on top of those that some countries are already faced with . We must avoid making the cost of water in countries with less water so expensive that individuals and multiple users cannot afford it .
I cannot support many of the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment in this case as they are unreasonable .
There are some things that do work , such as the interregional agreements between neighbouring countries . I therefore do not see why we need to have agreements on international river basin districts when these agreements are already working well .
We should restrict this to consultation with the Commission , on the initiative of the Member States , if a problem arises so that it can resolve it and act as arbitrator , as it always does .
As regards the quantitative aspects , I am very concerned at some of the amendments tabled regarding transfers and the recharge of aquifers .
This is standard practice in Spain and it allows us to derive much more benefit from our scarce resources .
These are mere quantitative issues which , moreover , would prevent this directive from being approved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to begin by congratulating the Commission and Mr White on the proposal and expressing my support for it .
However , I would like to look at two issues that are the product of neo-liberal fundamentalism and the democratic deficit in the European Union .
As far as neo-liberal fundamentalism is concerned , the desire to recover the full costs of water use is a comparative insult to Spain , as was pointed out by Mr Cunha , Mr Aparicio and other speakers .

It would be particularly bad for regions such as Murcia , Andalusia , Aragon , and so on , where it would have serious consequences .
As regards the democratic deficit , I think it is important to consider involving the communities of irrigators such as the Tribunal de las Aguas and the Consejo de Hombres Buenos , which in some cases , such as in Valencia or in Murcia , have been working for over a thousand years . It is essential to ensure that there is democracy in this field too .
Mr President , the framework directive that we are discussing today and voting on tomorrow will be a breakthrough in the European management of water quality and quantity .
But it will be more than just that .
It is also the crowning glory of all the tireless hard work done by some of our colleagues .
Let me mention here Karl-Heinz Florenz , who initiated and championed our cause , my Dutch colleague Doeke Eisma , and of course the rapporteur Mr White , whom I congratulate on his report and on the compromise amendments that should enable us to achieve a large majority tomorrow .
The water framework directive is the only correct response to our hitherto fragmentary , inefficient and inadequate policy on water quality and the total absence of a policy on water quantity .
Water plays a supremely important role in the lives of Dutch people .
In one of our folk songs we sing about Limburg as ' where the broad Meuse flows majestically to the sea ' , and the Zeelanders ' motto ' luctor et emergo ' - I struggle and I emerge - refers to their struggle with the sea which , after the disastrous floods , eventually led to the Delta works , a dam that brought us worldwide fame .
We also reclaimed land in the Flevo polder .
We struggle with water on a daily basis in the Netherlands - in the polders , the delta where the Meuse , the Rhine and the Scheldt flow into the sea .
Anyone who dares to claim that we with our well-organised Dutch water management system can solve the water quantity problem ourselves has only to look at the floods that have overwhelmed us in recent years .
Mr President , I have just three points to make .
Firstly , I support a water policy which promotes the rational use of water by encouraging rational control of its demand and discouraging irrational increases in its supply .
Secondly , I would stress that river basins form the basic unit for surface water and groundwater management . These river basins do not stop at national borders : they always run from source to mouth , no matter what countries may lie in between .
Finally , I must emphasise the understanding and collaboration achieved within our group between the Spanish and Portuguese Members . This recently led to the preparation of a water manifesto considered in this report and which is particularly symbolic as , because of our group , it involved Members of both these nationalities .
Although we can be pleased with this motion for a resolution , the same is not true of the agreement on common rivers signed between the two governments . In this case , Community solidarity must be shown and cooperation between the Member States is called for .
Mr President , this directive had a difficult birth .
On behalf of our colleagues let me after the event thank all those who played a constructive part in the work , including of course our rapporteur , Mr White , but also the Commission , which has showed signs of flexibility .
I expect the German Presidency to scrutinise Parliament 's work carefully , otherwise there could be a bad surprise in store for it at the second reading in the European Parliament , in the form of rejection .
As rapporteur on the groundwater action programme , which is another extremely important area , I regard the following requirement as essential : to lay down comprehensive groundwater protection measures , ban direct discharges of harmful substances and , linked to that , not to lay down limit values for groundwater , to preempt what is called the watering down effect , and finally to remove and prevent where possible what are called indirect discharges into groundwater and of course to clean up polluted groundwater as far as possible by technical means .
Three of my amendments serve those goals .
Let me point out again that I am particularly concerned with Amendment No 77 and do not accept the compromise amendment .
I would warn against making exaggerated , unrealistic and impractical demands .
Even if environmental protection has in the past had a raw deal in many other policy areas and too little attention has been paid to it , we must not repeat the same mistake by going too far in the opposite direction .
That is why I and my group are firmly opposed to certain amendments , some of which are simply not feasible , either for financial reasons or because we do not have the available technical resources .
Legislation that called for too much would not be credible .
Let me conclude with a question to the Commission . What is happening with the draft directive on ecological water quality ?
If the Commission has officially withdrawn that proposal , I am not aware of it .
Mr President , Commissioner , in line with Parliament 's wishes this report introduces very important innovations in regard to protecting what is perhaps Europe 's most valuable asset , water . It clarifies and enshrines the combined approach , enshrines across-the-board water protection and sets ambitious quality targets for groundwater .
For many Member States , the combined approach represents a real quantum leap in terms of clean water .
It is high time to rethink our approach Europe-wide .
We do not have the right mercilessly to pollute and poison the rivers and seas ; instead we have an obligation first of all to clean up all waste water , including industrial effluents , to the best of our technical ability , and then to divert it .
We need strict emission standards , not just discharge standards .
I regard the attempts to enshrine water resource management in the directive in quantitative terms as negative , so I am very glad that the legal services of both the Council and the Commission take the view that enshrining it in this way is not compatible with the legal basis envisaged for the adoption of the directive .
I am also glad that I have already managed to get an amendment through in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection that specifies quite clearly the kind of supranational authority that needs to be created .
A Member State 's right to manage its water resources cannot possibly be restricted .
If that is decided tomorrow , I will be happy to vote for the report , on which I warmly congratulate Mr White .
Mr President , the ample supply of good quality water is a basic need of the Community .
Problems have been discovered both in the quality of the water in the rivers and with water being wasted in urban and industrial areas .
Water resources in the different European states do not constitute the common property of Europe , as with any other natural resources which are used for trade .
Each Member State , however , must , as a nation , become involved in improving the water quality of its own rivers , in developing and implementing action to save water , and in protecting its groundwater .
The idea of a common water policy should be made a reality through measures to protect areas of water that are shared by neighbouring countries and those affecting different states .
Recently the condition of the Baltic Sea has deteriorated because untreated waste water has been pumped into it .
Efforts must be made to prevent environmental disasters such as these , in accordance with northern dimension policy , and those responsible for the Community 's water policy should also be involved .
The northern dimension will provide staunch support for this , as it does for other projects aimed at protecting the environment .
The desire is expressed in the proposal to introduce certain quality standards for water consumed in the European Community .
It is good policy to incorporate such elements in a common policy , as long as we remember to leave sufficient scope for solutions to be found which correspond to specific national conditions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am the last speaker in this debate on water and since the problem is being looked at from the point of view of quantity rather than quality , I shall allow myself to take certain liberties .
I will try not to repeat what has already been said by my Spanish and Portuguese colleagues and will talk about something that is not contained in this report .
I should merely like to put forward a specific argument regarding the issue of costs .
We reject the initial proposal presented by the Commission that the full cost of water services - such as infrastructures - should be recovered from the users , who are mainly farmers . We also reject the proposal that the costs must be taken into account , since this could ruin the already fragile agriculture in the south .
We need to look at the technical improvements that are possible in industrial processes , taking account of the cost-effectiveness ratio as well as the situation in the sector .
We must abide by the political agreement reached by the Council of Ministers in June .
We must look at eliminating hazardous substances and the environmental objectives we want to achieve in the light of the actual technical and economic possibilities open to us .
We nevertheless agree with the proposal to make an exception in cases of drought . Indeed , it is very important that an exception be granted for both droughts and floods .
As far as the international river basin districts are concerned , I believe that the principle of subsidiarity should be applied . An agreement has already been reached with Portugal , which is responsible for our neighbouring basins .
As regards the quantitative aspects , the conditions for transfers and the recharge of aquifers , the proposal offers no legal basis .
The Treaty requires unanimity in this area and we are therefore not going to support this at the moment .
As far as the amendments I tabled are concerned , I would only say that three relate to definitions that have not been taken into account , such as the mass of artificial water ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment and its rapporteur , Mr White , for their thorough consideration of the new proposal for a framework directive on water resources .
As has been emphasised , Parliament has taken the reform of water policy very seriously , and I would like to take this opportunity to praise the substantial and very positive influence which Parliament has had both with regard to starting the reform and developing it further .
The Commission 's proposal on the treatment of dangerous substances and Annex V on ecological status are largely based on Parliament 's constructive involvement .
The same constructive involvement lay behind the recent informal talks between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , and as Mr Eisma pointed out , this was largely an innovation .
On the whole , the results of these talks further improved the text , while they also brought the views of the two legislative institutions closer together .
This is a positive development , and I can of course endorse the outcome which appears in the form of Compromise Amendments Nos 189 to 201 .
In fact , most of Parliament 's amendments improve the technical quality and make the text clearer , and I am very pleased to be able to say that we endorse the thinking behind most of them .
We can in principle accept 85 of the 122 amendments in full or in part .
The Commission is also able to endorse a number of the other amendments .
We support Parliament 's initiatives with regard to the treatment of dangerous substances , openness , the combined approach and the inclusion of radioactivity .
As you can see , Mr President , there are a great number of amendments , and it would be impossible for me to go through them all in a reasonable period of time .
I shall therefore confine myself to mentioning some of the main areas .
Firstly , there is the treatment of dangerous substances .
This is a major problem , on which the report rightly focuses .
It is important for us to be consistent with our obligations within international organisations in terms of discharges .
However , a lack of information about the social and economic consequences means that it is not always appropriate to introduce legally binding requirements at the present time .
We therefore intend to accept the principle behind Amendments Nos 6 , 19 , 47 and 83 and in Article 1 of the proposal of introducing a reference to elimination as a final goal .
This is in line with the approach in the declaration of the North Sea Conference and all the relevant maritime conventions .
The other amendments on this subject , i.e. Amendments Nos 22 , 43 and 46 , are therefore rejected .
As far as openness and involving the public are concerned , the discussions between the Council and Parliament have been particularly productive .
The Commission can fully endorse the rapporteur 's compromise amendment , which reflects the agreements reached concerning public inquiries or consultation , and both the Council 's and the Commission 's reporting .
Amendments Nos 25 and 29 concern the need to define the combined approach , which the Commission accepts in principle , although we are proposing a slightly different wording in order to make the scope more precise in legal terms .
The Commission is also able to accept in principle Amendments Nos 87 and 88 , which call for a timetable for the Commission to introduce controls for priority substances .
However , Amendments Nos 84 and 85 on reviewing the priority list do not allow sufficient time to deal with the substances . The Commission is therefore rejecting these amendments and is proposing to keep the existing review period of six years .
The Commission accepts in principle Amendments 34 and 122 concerning the inclusion of radioactivity in the proposal , although they may require some rewording .
With regard to charges , which have featured strongly in the debate here this evening , a more complete integration of environmental and resource costs is essential , but the problem needs to be looked at more closely .
Amendments Nos 67 , 68 and 69 therefore cannot be accepted at the moment .
However , Amendment No 66 , which calls for charges to be set at a level which encourages the attainment of environmental objectives , is very helpful and can of course be accepted .
Then there are a number of amendments which the Commission is rejecting for technical reasons .
There are also some which we are rejecting in the form in which they are presented , but which contain many elements which we think can be included in the amended proposal .
I shall refrain from mentioning all of these .
In conclusion , I can only welcome this report , and the same applies to the progress which has already been made .
Parliament has played a significant role , and the constructive approach which has been expressed in the discussions provides the basis for a good working atmosphere at future negotiations .
In connection with such an important subject , it is clear that a number of issues will require in-depth discussion before they can be resolved .
I am convinced that the firm stance adopted by Parliament as the legislative process has progressed will help us to achieve our goal , which is a water policy we can be proud of .
Let me just add , on the question raised by Mrs Schleicher , that in our view the proposal concerning ecological water quality is contained within this proposal , and is therefore now redundant .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Deliberate release of GMOs
The next item is the report ( A4-0024 / 99 ) by Mr Bowe , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 90 / 220 / EEC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms ( COM ( 98 ) 0085 - C4-0129 / 98-98 / 0072 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , scientific knowledge is very often shaky when it comes to almost all issues of general environmental interest .
Various research institutes produce ever-changing data which are used as a basis for political decision-making , and which may be interpreted whichever way is desirable .
Painting a threatening picture is often the easiest option .
Excessive restrictions on research shift the responsibility onto the shoulders of others while the Union sneaks along behind , like a stowaway .
But then regulation is an unconditional prerequisite , and this is indeed a very sensitive area of research .
It is the choice of the consumers themselves which products they wish to consume .
Their choice is informed by factors that have to be respected , factors based on knowledge just as much as feelings .
For this reason goods must be labelled clearly , comprehensibly and uniformly .
There must be an attempt to increase consumer awareness of the benefits and possible risks of genetically modified products .
To achieve this objective we have to invest time and money in publishing the work of the research institutes in a language that everyone can understand , giving the consumer the chance to take part in the lobbying process .
To gain consumer confidence we have to observe the precautionary principle .
As our experience and scientific knowledge grows , the content of the directive will naturally have to be reappraised .
There would have to be a thorough evaluation of the risks involved , and that would have to extend to an assessment of possible delayed effects .
Farmers cannot be assumed to have sufficient knowledge to bear any responsibility , but developers and manufacturers of genetically modified products , having conducted the appropriate tests , will have full responsibility for any harm resulting from the release of any product , whether into the environment or for human consumption .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment originally called for the introduction of a European moratorium to give us time to reflect .
The Council rejected the idea , but that does not mean there is anything wrong with it .
On the one hand we have so much scientific uncertainty , and on the other there is a rather dubious decision-making procedure for individual applications to place products on the market , so there would have been grounds to call a halt , and even the Commission 's influence has lacked direction .
There is uncertainty in particular regarding the question of ethics , the benefits to society and the long-term consequences for the environment and health .
We should not have GMOs containing antibiotics or resistant genes , or GMOs which can cross-pollinate with their cousins in the wild .
The Commission 's proposal tightens up the procedures in many ways .
This applies to the common principles for environmental risk assessment , obligatory monitoring of products placed on the market , and limiting the period on the market to seven years .
This is all very good .
It provides the right basis for the approval of genetically modified organisms , a basis which I think should apply to the approval of all GMO products .
But the same proposal will exclude products covered by other Community legislation in such a way that there will only be an environmental risk assessment .
This could lead to GMO products evading the thorough controls , time limits and evaluation proposed in this directive .
I am also concerned about the new , simplified procedures which make it easier to release or market certain GMOs .
This is a problem because the basis we have for making such decisions is too small .
Our experience is too limited and too uncertain in the area of GMOs .
The technology is so new that restricted authorisation would enable the authorities to have better control .
Let me say this from the point of view of the PPE : I hope that what I just heard Mrs Jensen say is not the point of view of the entire PSE Group , for that would mean the talks we have been holding over the past weeks were not very constructive .
But I believe we will manage to agree on many points during the vote tomorrow .
I particularly thank the rapporteur , David Bowe , for going to such great trouble with this report , for always being open to discussion and also being very pragmatic and determined , even if we do not agree on every point .
I hope therefore that we will manage to adopt the report tomorrow on the basis of a very broad consensus .
What is the PPE Group 's standpoint ?
We want safety for man and the environment , but we do not want more red tape .
I believe it is a big mistake to believe that more and more red tape will protect man and the environment from harmful effects .
We need clear rules that match up to the risk .
If we bear that in mind , as we in the PPE Group do , then we could say there is both good and bad in the Commission proposal .
And there is both good and bad in the report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
In the Commission proposal we particularly welcome the improved labelling provisions , compared with those in the original directive , and we welcome the fact that the Committee on the Environment has improved them again .
We particularly welcome the fact that the Commission has opted for the simplified procedure .
We also welcome the fact that provision is made for at least a rudimentary majority-state procedure .
What is very negative about the Commission proposal is that it lays down that consent shall generally be granted for a fixed period of 7 years .
Let me ask the Commissioner : what is the scientific basis for these 7 years ?
What risks arise after precisely 7 years ?
Do they occur after 7 years for all GMOs ?
Why not after 6 or 8 years , why not after 12 , 15 or 2 years ?
We are in favour of the approach that has become established in pharmaceutical law .
If there is a risk , then the consent must be withdrawn at once , without waiting until the seventh year .
If there is no risk , then there is no need for a time limit .
So we are very much against any general time limit .
We agree with the Committee on the Environment 's proposal to make this a discretionary rather than a fixed provision .
I would prefer to be even more specific here .
That is why we have tabled an amendment .
We want time-limits to be the exception , justified on scientific grounds .
But the Committee on the Environment is moving in the right direction here .
On another question the committee is moving in the wrong direction .
I listed a number of points in the preliminary discussions .
One important point we are discussing again tonight is the question of socio-economic criteria .
I believe that you are giving the Americans a through ball here .
If we make authorisation conditional on socio-economic criteria , we will be taken for a ride at the WTO .
Then we will not have a chance to gain the support of any panel in this area .
For that reason alone we should not take that decision .
The PPE Group 's decision at the final vote will depend on whether the disputed points , which we have also raised in committee , are properly clarified and agreed .
I hope we will all be able to vote for the report tomorrow and thereby send out a good signal for biotechnology in Europe .
Mr President , the report we are now debating is one of the more sensitive ones before Parliament .
It contains genuine conflicts between European industry and its desire to catch up with the USA and the more cautious environmental approach expressed through the application of the precautionary principle .
I believe that this really is an area where the precautionary principle should be applied in practice , not of course as a rejection of GMOs nor in the form of slow handling of the matter by the authorities , but as a cautious approach to the subject .
In my view , a great deal can be achieved through open discussion , not least with interested citizens - without of course revealing commercial secrets - and through careful and preferably rapid handling by the authorities .
Like other groups , the Liberal Group is divided in its attitude towards both the Commission proposal and the amendments .
I personally belong to the group which supports the Commission 's seven-year rule but not the simplified procedure , although a simplified procedure could become a possibility if we considered a renewal of the marketing authorisation for the products , in other words extending the seven years .
Nor am I a supporter of creating a multinational application procedure at this time .
One of the problems in connection with the complex procedure is that decisions are made through a committee procedure in which Parliament has no influence . We have seen in the past that this creates conflicts later on , and it would therefore be desirable if the process could begin now .
We hope it will be possible to find some form of sensible compromise tomorrow - in my view preferably with as tight a timetable as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , genetically modified organisms can be regarded as the latest food scare .
In my opinion , every effort is being made to fuel these scares , even down to the terms used .
GMOs should actually be called GIOs , genetically improved organisms , as they are being created to substantially improve quality .
The words ' deliberate release ' in the directive 's title imply a deliberately committed offence . However , this phrase actually means placing the organisms or their products on the market only after very strict controls have been carried out and after carefully considered consent has been given for the experimental cultivation of these products .
These food scares are forcing the political decision-makers to hide behind the sacrosanct precautionary principle which , if comprehensively applied , would prevent any scientific progress . Yet this progress is demanded by those who want their comfort improved and their ills cured .
As a surgeon , this principle would have prevented me from getting anywhere near a scalpel .
We really should not be using this word of the moment - ethics - for anything and everything as it has a very specific meaning and can be better replaced in most cases by a much more appropriate term .
As for including in this directive the medicinal products already covered by another directive , as indicated by Amendment No 22 , which aims to delete the excellent Article 5 , this would strike a fatal blow to research on new medicines which are desperately needed to treat new and serious illnesses .
To conclude , we must make certain requests . Firstly , a full information package must be provided before any consent is granted to the placing of GMOs or their products on the market .
Secondly , there must be a rigorous labelling policy . Thirdly , traceability and monitoring must be guaranteed together with a detailed assessment of the risks and benefits involved , rather than using the precautionary principle at each stage .
Producers must be held liable for any damage to people or property and the placing of these products on the market must naturally be halted in the event of an alarm .
We should authorise the cultivation of GMOs to be marketed within the European Union to prevent our Member States from being penalised and other countries enjoying an advantage , such as the United States , which produces and consumes genetically modified products and these are increasingly invading our supermarkets and will continue to do so . Clearly , we must continue to ensure that these products do not constitute a risk to human health or the environment by taking account of the periodic opinions of appropriate and competent scientific committees .
Mr President , since 1990 , when the current directive was adopted , the situation involving GMOs and their release has changed significantly .
Firstly , scientific uncertainty about the nature and extent of the risks is increasing .
Secondly , for certain categories of GMOs , there is proof that serious or irreversible risks do exist .
Thirdly , and with all due respect to Mr Cabrol , the precautionary principle has acquired legal and political status and has become a basic principle of European legislation .
The directive must therefore be adapted to this new situation .
The Commission 's proposal does not take this into consideration .
Instead , it aims to accelerate the consent procedures and facilitate international trade .
The adoption of a simplified procedure for placing new GMOs on the market cannot be justified on the basis of a claimed equivalence with existing GMOs .
This concept of equivalence does not have any serious scientific basis .
In fact , this simplified procedure opens the door to the mutual recognition of standards allowing products authorised in the United States to be imported into Europe in increasing numbers .
We therefore feel that certain categories of GMOs that constitute particularly serious risks to the environment or health should be destroyed , not released .
This relates , in particular , to those GMOs that contain antibiotic-resistant genes , those that release toxins that are harmful to the useful fauna , and those that are likely to cross-breed with related wild or cultivated species .
We have tabled eight basic amendments which we hope will be adopted by the House .
Our group 's vote depends on the fate of these amendments .
Mr President , it is claimed that the world 's food production will struggle without genetic modification , but I have serious reservations about this statement when I compare it with the story about the terminator gene .
By making seed infertile , western firms are making developing countries dependent on their grain supplies , thus perpetuating the unfair distribution of food even with genetically modified organisms .
This example shows that our debate on GMOs must look at more than just the long-term effects on consumer health and safety .
We would be missing the really central issues , because what we are dealing with here is an ethical problem .
I believe that God created reality , and I therefore reject the simple reduction of plants and animals to production factors to be manipulated .
As humans we are not masters but stewards , and this is the principle on which we should base our position on the introduction of GMOs .
In practical terms this means that we must strictly enforce the precautionary principle , as the rapporteur rightly points out .
From an ethical point of view , I am wholeheartedly in favour of this .
In the Committee on the Environment , I tried to put forward amendments to extend the risk assessment to include ethical aspects , but unfortunately there was not enough support for this .
Fortunately there are proposals from the rapporteur which give people with ethical objections the freedom to choose GMO-free products .
I think it is highly desirable for GMOs to be traceable through clear labelling and the preservation of GMO-free production chains .
Mr President , there is a proverb from the Ladin hills , not far from your own home area , that goes Qui va prudan ' , va sicur ' e lontan ' .
It means , he who goes cautiously , goes safely and goes far .
I believe it is a proverb that the rapporteur , whom I thank for his work , has borne in mind in his proposals .
He has made the Commission proposal more precise , careful and safer in a number of areas .
I believe it is indeed necessary to take that approach in a field in which we do not yet have the necessary experience .
I do not have the time to go into every individual point so I will only comment on a few that I regard as most important .
I think it is most important that the precautionary principle is specifically enshrined .
In my opinion , now that it is enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty , we should do so in all legislation .
I also consider it most important that Parliament 's proposal makes greater provision for information , for involvement of the public .
It is also most important to ensure that genetically modified products and organisms can be identified , to make it easier to recover them and also to assess the risk .
Risk evaluation of long-term effects has been enshrined , as has the possibility for Member States to set additional requirements for environmentally sensitive areas .
I also consider it most important - and here I would second the rapporteur 's question to the Commissioner - for consent to be limited rather than unlimited .
There are other areas of environmental legislation where we find that unlimited authorisation has been granted for plant and then at a time when we already have quite different legislation , that plant can go on operating under the old limit values for a long time and does not have to adapt to new technology .
So I believe it is necessary to set limits .
But I would also have liked to ask the Commissioner whether seven years is the right period , or whether there could not be a different , more appropriate number .
For it is important when we inform the people to be able to tell them why a particular decision was taken rather than another one .
I hope Members will endorse the Environment Committee 's proposals at the vote tomorrow , so that we can present the Council with a proposal that takes account of what this Parliament stands for , namely concern for the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , we cannot forget that this proposal amends a previous proposal and that the Member States and the Commission itself therefore already have a great deal of experience with it .
As a result , we should welcome some of the proposals that improve on previous provisions , such as the introduction of a mandatory post-marketing monitoring system for products , the introduction of clear risk assessment criteria , the classification of the experimental releases of products , an improvement in administrative procedures and increased transparency throughout the process .
These are all improvements and I therefore find it difficult to understand many of the amendments that have been tabled in the Committee on the Environment . They seem to reflect an excessive desire for control .
Biotechnology in general and genetic manipulation techniques provide great hope for humanity . They are not a threat and we must get that message across to the whole of society .
We must also get rid of the whole unscientific mentality surrounding this issue .
We must not allow fundamentalist political ideas to hide behind the cloak of ethical objections .
We cannot forget that the patent laws already take account of the ethical dimension and public policy before a patent is granted . In addition , we have always rejected socio-economic criteria when approving the release of any product onto the market .
This is political pro-activism pure and simple .
I therefore clearly support the main points of the Commission 's balanced proposal , although I will vote against many of the amendments that have been tabled .
Mr President , I welcome very much the tightening that this new directive represents .
It confronts a number of important issues as does the report by Mr Bowe .
However , it misses one major strategic point and that arises from the fact that European citizens are very much more concerned about GMOs and their potential effects than other populations , particularly in North America .
What is missing from the recommendations here , and the directive , is the provisions for Member States to apply moratoria that are not necessarily based on strict existing scientific opinion .
What I would want to see , certainly in the second reading of this directive , is provision for Member States at least to put forward moratoria for five years while that research is taking place .
Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to make a brief contribution to this debate .
Genetic research has much to offer mankind in alleviating disease , enhancing food security and quality and in the area of environmental protection .
Understandably , there have been many concerns raised in relation to this new and developing science .
They include lack of product labelling , environmental effects , antibiotic markers used in the selection process along with ethical , moral and social considerations .
These issues need debating and both consumers and public are right to be cautious .
On the question of food safety , I repeat my view that only after the most stringent tests should genetically modified food or food ingredients be allowed into the food chain and only then with detailed consumer information .
The consumer must be given a clear choice at all times .
It would be wrong , however , to deprive agriculture of the benefits of modern research .
To do so would tie the hands of the industry at a time when , for example , my country Ireland , as an agricultural exporting nation , must become increasingly competitive .
The selective use of genetic research would assist in developing my country 's green image and lead to a reduction in the use of fertilizers and pesticides .
Mr President , I was very glad that Mr Bowe accepted our proposals regarding liability .
But I hope I have no grounds for mistrust after hearing Mr Liese 's statement and hearing about his preliminary talks .
I hope we do not drop the idea of the insurance certificate , for otherwise liability would be pointless .
People would think we were mad if we said tomorrow that drivers were allowed to take their cars on the road without an insurance certificate .
It would be even more senseless in the case of a risk technology to call only for liability without making it compulsory to have insurance .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will be the proof , indeed the acid test , that the European Parliament can assume responsibility .
I was also pleased by the call just now for Member States to be able to apply moratoria .
We tabled an amendment to precisely that effect in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , but unfortunately it was in vain .
We hope you will be able to approve it tomorrow .
I hope tomorrow we will send out a signal that we take the alarming scientific findings seriously .
A simplified procedure is irresponsible , as is Category I and the majority-state procedure .
But what I regard as the ultimate irresponsibility is a 12-year consent period for doubtful cases .
That is pure cynicism , for surely it means that we are using man and nature as a form of guinea-pig !
We believe it is vital to ban antibiotic-resistant genes , for otherwise we are heading for a therapeutic disaster , and to ensure that high-risk plants , i.e. those that can cross over to others , really must not be allowed to spread ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , the applications of genetically modified organisms are very broadly based and can be found in significant areas of human life , from medicine and the protection of the environment to agriculture and foodstuffs .
However , it is natural for the citizen to ask how we can ensure that the explosive pace at which this phenomenon is evolving does not exceed our capacity to regulate the issues that arise , while at the same time ignoring the safety of our society and our eco-systems .
Taking all these factors into account , the Community issued Commission Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , which was implemented for the first time in 1991 .
However , experience necessitated that it be revised .
Today we have before us a report which seeks to revise the directive , and I should like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Bowe , for the tremendous work he has put into this report .
By tabling my amendments , I wished to clarify the relationship that exists between humans and GMOs , and this because the definition of such organisms in the Commission 's text is formulated in such a way as to include humans .
Amendments Nos 9 and 10 which I have tabled help to clarify this point and permit the use of human genes in the transfer and creation of GMOs . In this way , we can produce useful substances such as human insulin and many other human bio-molecules .
In my second amendment , I have ruled out human beings as recipients of GMOs , which would have led to the creation of genetically modified humans , and this would not have been acceptable for scientific , ethical , social and legal reasons .
We must wake up to the fact that GMOs and biotechnology are neither an economic nor a universal panacea , but nor are they a Pandora 's box .
This is indeed a force , a force which opens up wonderful opportunities , if we use it prudently and responsibly .
It offers us the opportunity to combat far more effectively catastrophes on a global scale which all types of polluting activity inflicts on the environment . It offers us the opportunity to combat the misery that disease inflicts on human beings and the wretchedness wrought on society by famine .
Mr President , I can think of a number of basic requirements in relation to GMOs .
First of all , there is a stronger requirement for food to be wholesome .
People are becoming more aware , and this is leading to discussions concerning antibiotics , salmonella and additives .
Secondly , consumers should be able to make an informed choice , and labelling would enable them to do this .
Such a requirement is absolutely crucial .
Thirdly , the ethical and environmental implications should be explained , and there should be a ban on crops which have been made resistant to pesticides .
Fourthly , there should be rules at both European and international level governing the safety precautions that are required should GMOs be released into the environment .
Clearly , there has to be a deadline for drawing up these rules , as well as rules relating to producer responsibility .
Finally , the Member States should be entitled to impose their own stricter rules and to adopt more progressive measures , for example moratoriums .
Mr President , I welcome the Bowe report and congratulate the rapporteur , who has put an enormous amount of work into this .
It is obviously very important that we put in place legislation that the people of Europe will have confidence in .
I am one of those who regard advances in genetic modification as having enormous potential benefits for mankind .
However , in recent months and years the voices of those calling for caution have got louder than those pointing out the advantages .
Of course , politicians should never simply react to the loudest lobby but public concern about GMOs has grown to such an extent that it is now very difficult to find farmers in my country who are prepared to have these trial crops grown on their land .
Unfortunately for the scientists engaged in GMO research , the public have heard relatively little about the benefits of GMO technology and a lot about the potential disadvantages .
This is a defect of the debate that scientists still have to put right in the public arena .
The directive before us is on the right lines and we believe broadly strikes the right balance between the freedom of the scientists to innovate and market the product of their innovation and the right of public authorities to insist on safety .

I agree with Mr Liese that the seven-year authorisation period is unsatisfactorily arbitrary . If there is doubt about any genetically modified material , then surely it should not be permitted for release in the first place .
There are , however , certain amendments - for example Amendment No 68 - which call for more caution and which we , British Conservatives , want to support .
In this we shall be taking up the recent call of our party leader in the House of Commons where he spoke in favour of a three-year moratorium on the commercial release of genetically modified crops until more research is done into the consequences of such releases , especially for biological diversity .
Curiously , the British Government , which Mr Bowe unfortunately does not adorn , has ignored the advice of its own nature protection body - English Nature - by refusing to agree to such a moratorium .
More curiously still , Mr Bowe and Mr Collins , we suspect , were on the brink of supporting such a moratorium before their voices were stayed by a telephone call from London .
Such is the fate of principle in the New British Labour Party .
Mr President , I wish to make a personal statement under Rule 108 .
I listened carefully to what other colleagues said with regard to the issue of a moratorium .
I should say first of all that the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and I , as the rapporteur , signed a request to the Commission to consider the possibility of some kind of moratorium until the new proposal we are debating today was brought into place and the appropriate safeguards introduced .
However , there has been a reference to a moratorium in the amendments by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Green Group .
I hope that somebody can identify for me in the eight amendments tabled by Mrs Breyer the one which calls for a moratorium .
It seems to me that none of them do and I do not understand why she says there is one because that is simply not the case .
Finally , I would just say this : I was very surprised by Mrs Breyer 's remarks describing the maximum time limit of 12 years as something awful , because Amendment No 75 by her own group itself requires a maximum time limit of 12 years !
Mr President , on the 12-year question : the committee called for a 12-year time-limit where there are safety doubts .
I am surprised to hear Mr Liese applauding , for it would be cynical of me to say : I shall put products on the market which I know in advance are doubtful .
That would be turning man and nature into guinea-pigs .
What we would have liked to see are monitoring programmes before the seven years are up , i.e. a fixed time-limit but with monitoring programmes that start before that date .
We tabled several other amendments in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , doing so in three different ways in regard to the moratorium for release .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists rejected them .
We have now tabled Amendment No 77 , which reverses the burden of proof by saying that the Commission must provide proof to the contrary .
That is not a personal statement , Mrs Breyer , and I must therefore cut you off .
Mr President , this is not the first time I have had the opportunity to discuss the issue of GMOs with Parliament .
We have done so several times , and each time we have created more clarity in the area , and now we have come to the legislation .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs of the committees which have been working on the subject , including Mr Bowe of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
As has been pointed out during the debate this evening , the directive currently before us seeks to make the decision-making process more efficient and more transparent , while at the same time ensuring a high level of protection for health and the environment .
In the long term , the directive will thus hopefully increase public confidence in the legislation in this area . I believe that is a crucial point .
In line with the precautionary principle in the field of health and the environment , the Commission 's proposal aims firstly to toughen up the risk assessment to be carried out before authorisation for the release of GMOs is given and , secondly , to improve the chances of identifying and monitoring GMOs so that the competent authorities can react immediately and appropriately in the event of acute risk .
Against this background , I am glad to note that many of the proposed amendments improve on or clarify the Commission 's proposal .
In many cases , we shall be able to use the ideas behind Parliament 's amendments .
We can accept 44 of the 100 amendments in full , in part or in principle .
Amongst others , the amendments aimed at introducing a means of identifying genetically modified organisms will simplify , though not reduce , the monitoring and inspection measures .
However , the Commission will word these amendments a little differently , and we would also like to position them slightly differently so that they fit in better with the rest of the text .
The proposal seeks to meet the growing scepticism of the public towards biotechnology , which is something all of the speakers have probably touched on .
The Commission therefore cannot accept those amendments which change the balance and weaken the safety net which is built into the proposal , including the principle that authorisation is to be for a limited period .
On the strength of this principle , all new information will be taken into account and it will be possible to amend the requirements in accordance with the latest knowledge .
We have proposed a seven-year period .
Mr Bowe said this must be my favourite number and others also asked why it should be seven years .
Obviously , there are several options which people could argue for .
We saw it as a balance between the normal lifetime of a genetically modified product , the monitoring system we have proposed , and the need for the administrative procedures for this directive to be clear , practical and founded on science , in accordance with the precautionary principle .
I would also like to add that I personally , at any rate , do not think that the seven-year period should be extended , which means that I reject a number of the amendments .
This applies to Amendments Nos 41 , 45 , 45 and 75 .
In the light of the debate which has taken place in the various Community institutions , however , the Commission can go along with an optional time-limit for the renewal of authorisations .
In line with this , the Commission is unable to accept Amendment No 24 , which is aimed at introducing tacit approval for trial releases in Category I. In the Commission 's view , the precautionary principle means that express written authorisation is required in all cases of release into the environment .
Labelling is one of the means which creates openness and reduces public misgivings .
The proposal therefore requires clear labelling of all genetically modified organisms which are placed on the market .
If there are any doubts , the labelling must state that the product ' may contain genetically modified organisms ' .
If we introduce a system which does not require labelling below a given threshold , companies which process genetically modified organisms will not receive the information they need in order to be able to fulfil the strict labelling requirements imposed by the product legislation .
Therefore the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 37 , 67 and 76 .
Another important question is the liability of the Member States in connection with decisions on product approval .
Here the Commission has proposed to change the committee procedure to give more influence to the Council .
The participation of the European Parliament in the committee procedure will now take place in accordance with the modus vivendi agreement and will , I believe , be formalised in a decision on the new committee procedure .
The Commission therefore cannot accept at this stage Amendment No 55 , which is aimed at making alterations to committee procedure 3b .
Amendments Nos 36 and 80 strengthen the connection between this directive and product legislation , and so ensure that the whole framework legislation on biotechnology involves an extensive environmental risk assessment .
These amendments can therefore be accepted in principle , after some rewording .
However , the Commission cannot accept the removal or any alteration of Article 5 , as proposed in Amendments Nos 2 , 22 and 98 .
The question of liability in Amendments Nos 7 , 56 and 95 is currently being considered in the Commission , which intends to publish a white paper on liability .
A good deal of progress has been made in this area , and the Commission will of course present its white paper as soon as possible .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 19 , 21 and 51 , which are aimed at regulating the import and export of genetically modified organisms .
These amendments would pre-empt the final wording of the Protocol on Biosafety which is currently under discussion .
I would also like to draw attention to Amendments Nos 27 , 29 and 32 on public inquiries or consultation in connection with trial releases .
The Commission is able to accept these amendments in principle , but we would like to see them reworded so that they ensure agreement with the Århus Convention on public participation in the decision-making process .
Amendment Nos 6 and 54 are acceptable in principle because they confirm that the Council and the European Parliament can request the Commission to consult with the Ethics Committee on general ethical problems in connection with the release of genetically modified organisms .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that , apart from the question of the fixed-period authorisation , the amendments which the Commission has accepted in full , in part or in principle have resulted in a clear improvement of the quality of the proposal .
An example of this is Amendment No 14 , which will simplify the monitoring and detection of GMOs .
In my view , the amendments make the Commission 's text clearer and sharper , and will therefore create a sensible and feasible framework for achieving the high level of safety we all wish to see for the release of GMOs into the environment .
Mr President , I find it unacceptable that the Commissioner has been coming here for the past six years and announcing that a White Paper on liability is imminent .
We debated Directive No 90 / 219 exactly a year ago .
There too we called for the introduction of liability .
The Commissioner said there would be a White Paper in a few weeks ' time .
But a White Paper is not a directive .
Six years have passed since the Green Paper .
Commissioner , I think what you are doing here is gradually becoming an insult to our intelligence !
You refuse liability by stalling us for six years with a horizontal directive
I would now like you to tell us exactly why you keep lying to us and in particular why you said there would be a White Paper in a few weeks ' time and why you are stalling us again now .
Even then we would still be far from having a directive .
That means it would still take years .
Where , I ask myself , is the own responsibility of industry and science ?
I find it totally irresponsible and no longer acceptable for you to stall us like this !
Mr President , I am asking for the floor because I was personally addressed and attacked in the last but one statement by Mrs Breyer and if she is given the floor again this must be clarified .
She said that because we are in favour of an optional time-limit that means we regard people as guinea-pigs .
That really is absurd .
The fact is that the Commission evidently sees a need for introducing a time-limit .
We say there need to be scientific grounds for doing so .
If there are scientific grounds , then it should be done ; so it has nothing to do with guinea-pigs .
For there are some areas where no such grounds exists , where no scientific reasons can be found for setting a time-limit , and that is the issue .
The issue has nothing at all to do with guinea-pigs or whatever but concerns a procedure that is commensurate with the risk !
End-of-life vehicles
The next item is the report ( A4-0051 / 99 ) by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on end-of-life vehicles ( COM ( 97 ) 0358 - C4-0639 / 97-97 / 0194 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , eight or nine million or cars a year are discarded in the European Community .
That calls for rules , and I think it was high time the European Commission addressed this issue .
I was a little annoyed to find that in this very important area , which is important not just to environment policy but also to economic policy , we received a proposal from the Commission that contained no annexes , or rather annexes that were empty .
For we know that the annexes are the crux of the matter .
Normally we have tended to send this kind of proposal back .
But since we have started , we may as well try to go on with our endeavour .
I believe this directive has set a good course .
There are some areas where it needs tightening up a bit .
And in some areas it is very strict .
In committee we decided by a fairly substantial majority to concentrate only on two- and three-wheeled vehicles , unlike the Commission , which wants to set out broader rules .
The object of this directive is to ensure that in future vehicles that have reached the end of their life can only be deregistered on production of a certificate of destruction , which may sound very good at first , but which is in my view rather difficult to achieve , in some Member States at least .
A little more work needs be done here and we have made a few proposals to that end .
Article 6 concerns the treatment of end-of-life vehicles .
I believe here too a few nuances are needed , but basically we will follow the Commission line .
Another point I do not entirely understand is how the costs will be distributed in future in Europe .
The Commissioner reverted to a rather fuddy-duddy approach and opted for no costs for the last owner and / or user .
No doubt that sounds quite interesting to a politician , especially when elections are on the horizon .
But no costs for the last user either , that can never be !
That is a fallacy .
I think we have overlooked the fact that no costs will automatically lead to a monopoly and , as we all know all too well , monopolies always lead to concentration processes , which are always a bad thing !
That really will drive the small and medium-sized enterprises that we keep supporting and praising in our electioneering speeches out of the market .
Jobs will be lost .
It will cut the regional incomes of our petrol stations , of our garages .
After all I would not drive to some posh body repair shop to have my car deregistered , I would go to my local dealer who lives in my village and has been looking after my car for years .
I believe that is the wrong approach .
My proposal is that the Member States should be responsible , together with the economic operators involved , i.e. the manufacturer , recoverer , shredder , last owner , etc . , for developing a system at their own cost that will where possible involve no cost for the last owner , but not par ordre de moufti .
I think an insurance system like the one for motor vehicles , where everyone pays in one euro a month , would be quite a good solution .
That would certainly have been in my amendment .
There is a second point - and here for once I agree with the Commissioner , in fact I am quite enthusiastic - and that is the very exacting recovery targets .
These very exacting recovery targets will without doubt require the industry to make quite an effort .
And that is a good thing , for we have a great number - hundreds of thousands , millions - of cars in Europe and obviously we want to go on having them .
But precisely because we want to have them , we also need sensible recovery quotas .
I believe the committee has moved in the wrong direction here , because it has accepted an amendment by a colleague of mine , whom I normally hold in very high regard , that prescribes that nothing more will be done until the year 2020 .
If I am interpreting that amendment correctly , then in future the motor industry will only have to ensure that there are no passengers in the car ; apart from that , it can send the car to the shredder and do whatever it wants .
That is not environmentally friendly , and you know that this is something I keep a very close eye on .
I believe the Commission 's approach is a little too harsh , but if it could be toned down a little the basic principle would be right .
It is precisely because we have nine million tonnes of scrap cars that we need recycling rules .
We turned the whole of Europe upside down for one ridiculous little package and introduced packaging regulations for it .
We are now deciding on the labelling to go with this packaging regulation - the rapporteur is sitting behind me .
So if we fix a recycling quota for such a small matter , then we surely also need to have recycling quotas for nine million tonnes of scrap cars , and certainly before the year 2020 .
I do not think this is acceptable !
A lot of lobbying is going on here , but we will put a stop to it .
We may quarrel about the ban on hazardous substances .
The Commission has proposed values and parameters which , in my view , are very tough .
In this field too we are now seeing an enormous expansion .
I would stick to the Commission 's principle and propose a combined committee made up of Directorates-General III and XII , which would make a critical , scientifically sound proposal after three years on whether these tough rules need to be maintained and implemented .
I know it is sacrilege to invite DG III and DG XII to the same table , but I do not think it is such a bad idea .
Some people want to ban PVC .
I cannot judge the merits of that .
I am not an expert in chemistry .
But if PVC is dangerous , then all this junk should be banned in a horizontal directive and not stigmatised in an individual secondary directive .
The Commission needs to hurry up here , and that is where you , Mrs Bjerregaard , come in .
I know you have some very important colleagues who are slowing this whole business down .
It is up to you to see to this horizontal directive .
This kind of thing cannot be regulated in the directive we have here .
That is stigmatisation , and I do not think it is right .
I am a passionate supporter of voluntary agreements .
If there are Member States which dispose of their old cars in line with the objectives of the European directives then , for God 's sake , provided they can be monitored , we should also allow them to retain their voluntary agreements .
Instructions from above are always a second best .
Mr President , in this debate it falls to me to represent the views of the committee which has offered an opinion to the Environment Committee which , I have to say , was very favourably received , and I thank the rapporteur and the members of the committee for accepting many of our amendments .
I can , therefore , commend the report itself to the House , on behalf of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee .
In relation to that report we do not just have to take on board the importance of the ideas expressed by Mr Florenz about recycling - endorse them though I do .
He is absolutely correct : there are large tonnages of waste coming from cars every year .
Much of it is not metal and much of it has to be dealt with under very difficult circumstances .
We need a serious and proper approach to it .
Certainly one of the outcomes of this would be a more orderly market-place , one in which recycling takes place , not in the traditional scrapyard , which we are all familiar with , but in a proper recycling facility which will create employment opportunities and the kind of jobs which are so sorely lacking in many parts of the Union and which will isolate the metals and other substances from cars and put them to good economic use .
There are two issues we cannot ignore and I would press on the House .
The first is the issue of leaded steel .
We have some amendments before us tonight which recognise the difficulties involved in removing certain metals from cars completely ; I hope we will endorse those amendments tonight to ensure that the recycling of cars is done in an environmentally friendly way that does not require additional expenditure of energy which , if we took out all the metals referred to by the Commission , would be needed .
In addition , I should like to point out that it is very important from the point of view of the final consumer that take-back is free of charge - perhaps the consumer could even receive the deposit back , but take-back must be free of charge .
That is very important if we are to ensure that the system functions effectively .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are aiming at two major objectives with this directive .
First , we want to dispose of these eight million vehicles properly and , secondly , we want to dump as few as possible as landfill .
The question is : how do we achieve that ?
I believe that first we must guarantee take-back free of charge to the last owner , and for several reasons , one of which is of course social .
For it is surely not acceptable to penalise the last owner in this way .
Many others have had the benefit of this car ; many others have driven it .
The manufacturers sold it , of course , so they also benefited from it .
So if we take this approach we must distribute the cost fairly among everyone and not just foist it on the last owner .
That is why I say : no charge for the last owner .
How the Member States apply that is of course their business .
There is the Dutch system , there is the German system , the French system - I do not want to lay down any rules .
It is the principle that concerns me .
And there is a second reason . What , I ask you , is happening today in countries where disposal is either self-financing or is cost free ?
In those countries used cars are stored illegally or exported to the east .
Surely that cannot be our waste-disposal policy !
In Germany some 50 % of used cars are transported in an exodus to the east .
So it is quite clear to me that we must insist on freedom of charge .
Nor will that spell the death of small and medium-sized enterprises .
After all , what does the motor industry do in the case of services , of supply contracts ?
It invites tenders and there is competition .
The same will apply to the recovery of old cars .
However , and this is my second point , I believe we must draw a distinction between old and new cars .
After all , we cannot expect a car that was built 20 years ago to satisfy today 's requirements .
That would be like saying that a 20-year-old car had to meet the Euro 4 standard for 2005 under the current legislation on exhaust gas .
So we must ensure that as few old cars as possible are dumped , but we certainly cannot lay down what quota is to be recovered in what way .
Just imagine in real life : an old car is taken to the shredder , goes through the shredder ; at most you can determine the weight before and after , but not how the individual materials are used - that is quite absurd .
It would mean that the very people who keep fighting bureaucracy would have to set up an enormous monitoring system for old cars which would be impossible to verify .
I think we should only decide on matters that we can also guarantee and verify .
So for old cars we can restrict the materials that may be dumped , but not set a sub-quota on how they may be used .
For new cars , however , which are being manufactured now , we need an ambitious system to ensure that they are as recycling-friendly as possible .
So in that case I am in favour of a type approval that lays down such quotas .
There we can carry out checks , as we do with the crash test , as we do for exhaust gas emissions .
For new cars we must apply stringent reuse and recycling requirements .
After all , the question of application is the key question .
Mr Florenz said , in his nice way , that we would be taking a softer line and the directive would only apply from the year 2020 .
Let me tell him , that is total rubbish !
We say the directive should apply immediately , and to all cars .
Regardless of how they are serviced , regardless of any spare parts they contain - all cars must be taken back and recovered free of cost at once , not just in 2005 , as the Commissioner proposes .
So we are taking a more stringent line .
Secondly , we say that the type approval rules as from 2005 must provide in precise terms that new cars must be recycling-friendly .
That too makes this legislation more stringent .
That means , to put it mildly , that it is not right of Mr Florenz to say that we would be watering down these Commission proposals in any respect at all .
On the contrary , we are following a different system .
But I am firmly convinced that we are tightening up the Commission proposal for the sake of environmental protection and consumer protection and moving it in the right direction .
It is quite obvious to me that we need clarification on the question of heavy metals , which is why we must now make it clear once and for all in what areas we want or do not want heavy metals .
Mr President , the proposed directive under discussion is particularly important and concerns all of us as users of motor vehicles .
I am not going to go over the ground covered by my colleagues Mr Florenz and Mr Lange , but will instead mention a few points which I feel are essential .
Firstly , some people are calling for a ban on PVC , but we must be consistent .
Calling for a ban on PVC is in complete contradiction with our recent call to vehicle manufacturers to build vehicles that consume less and therefore have lower levels of emissions .
It is common knowledge that if vehicles cannot use PVC , they will be heavier and will therefore consume more .
So we must be consistent .
On the other hand , I totally agree with Amendment No 34 tabled by Mr Lange .
In my opinion , it is essential to make a clear distinction between old and new vehicles that will receive type approval before and after 2005 respectively .
At least this gives vehicle manufacturers an idea of the constraints to be imposed on them after 2005 .
Finally , it is essential to carry out a risk assessment of the materials and substances included in Annex II .
In my opinion , it would be better to assess these risks and , if a risks exists , to then look at the exemptions that could be granted .
That would allow us , in this case , to achieve an appropriate balance between the environment and the motor industry .
These are the points which I feel are particularly important if we are to find a solution to a problem that is sweeping through our entire industrial society .
I sincerely hope that appropriate solutions can be found to solve this problem of end-of-life vehicles , particularly since we are now all aware of it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to say that I was impressed by this proposal for a directive .
Mr Florenz has also done his work well , although I would actually rate his work in other areas more highly than in this one .
He has not been quite as tough as he has tended to be in other circumstances .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has , however , sharpened up the directive and I sincerely hope that the Commission will now approve it .
I should like to mention one or two points .
It is abundantly clear that there should be some form of manufacturer responsibility for cars as well .
It would therefore be reasonable for manufacturers to bear the major share of the responsibility , but in point of fact the consumer alone foots the bill ; it is always the consumer who has to pay .
However , the final consumer should be able to get rid of his or her car free of charge .
I believe that this is necessary if the scheme is to work .
There should also be quotas and rules regarding the quantities to be recycled using different methods .
As regards new cars , far more stringent criteria need to be introduced as quickly as possible .
We know the industry often claims that to do so would be impossibly difficult or expensive , but it then goes on to do just that .
In a number of different areas , the industry has shown that it is capable of making the necessary adaptations .
Bearing in mind that cars eventually have to be scrapped , environmentally unfriendly materials such as lead , mercury , chromium and cadmium should be eliminated , that much is patently clear .
My group and I also think that the same should apply to PVC , since if we allow it in cars , it is never going to be clear to people that we want to eliminate this material , only we have to wait for a horizontal directive in order to do so .
You cannot explain such things to ordinary people . In all probability it is only our politicians who understand them .
Consequently , I think it should be included in this proposal .
Mr President , I have two initial remarks to make .
The first concerns so-called ' historic ' vehicles .
In a limited number of cases , these vehicles are kept by their owners either for restoration or as a source of spares .
They are part of our industrial heritage and their preservation must be encouraged .
We therefore fully support Amendment No 1 tabled by the rapporteur .
My second remark concerns two-wheel vehicles , which cannot be regarded as a threat to the environment for the simple reason that the concepts of ' end of life ' and ' discarding ' do not apply to them .
Although a few may attain the hallowed status of historic vehicles , the ruthless world of two wheels is typified by cannibalism as parts are easy to strip off and many owners carry out maintenance and minor repairs themselves .
Two-wheel vehicles are therefore generally stripped and their components naturally reused .
I must also highlight Amendment No 53 which concerns the recycling or recovery percentages .
It maintains our ambitious objectives but , based on the experience of the ' packaging ' directive , it pragmatically provides for the option to periodically review these objectives and alter them if necessary .
We will also support Amendment No 54 which rightly stipulates that the free recovery of vehicles will not be backdated .
On the other hand , we will vote against Amendment No 21 , which would ban the use of PVC , for three reasons .
Firstly , the usefulness of this material is indisputable .
Secondly , it is an anticorrosive product which extends the life of vehicles , reduces their weight and thereby has a positive impact on consumption and pollution , as indicated by Mrs Grossetête .
And thirdly , the majority of PVC is reused or recycled and it would therefore be particularly illogical to move away from the Commission 's horizontal approach in this respect .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive is a stroke of luck for the environment , since assigning responsibility to the manufacturer was long overdue and it was also high time waste prevention applied to the motor vehicle sector too .
I am glad the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection also stood up for freedom of charge to the last user .
I very much regret that Mr Florenz has expressed his personal view here rather than that of the Environment Committee .
I hope that tomorrow Members will also stand by their amendment on banning PVC from the year 2005 .
I find it shocking to hear that there are obviously plans to bow to the PVC industry here tomorrow !
And let me tell Mrs Grossetête and others that we are not talking about banning plastic .
We are talking about banning PVC , about products involving chlorine .
There is actually a bioplastic and other plastic materials .
The argument she put forward was quite absurd and I must say that unfortunately that shows that she was not well-informed and that obviously this is merely a question of arguments ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President , problems with end-of-life vehicles which are to be scrapped are largely due to the way they are produced .
That is why we should both ensure that vehicle parts are reused and that specially harmful substances are not used in the new generation of vehicles .
That brings us to PVC .
Like other Members , I wonder what the Commission intends to do about this .
As we know , PVC is not the solution of the future , even though in the material it sends us , the PVC industry tries to distort the Swedish PVC action plan , for example , so as to persuade us that the Swedes think PVC is a health product which everyone should have more of .
In fact , they do not think that at all .
PVC has a wide range of applications , but its disposal creates environmental problems .
PVC produces even more waste after incineration than the amount that was sent to the incineration plant .
Incinerated PVC produces dioxins , which are among the most dangerous toxins that exist .
In addition , the plasticisers used in PVC , the so-called phthalates , are suspected of being hormone interferers , and in legislation which is geared to the future we must observe the precautionary principle .
Every time that PVC is involved in a proposal for a directive , we are told that this problem in particular cannot be looked at on its own or vertically , but that we should look at it globally and horizontally , and that the Commission will do the thinking for us .
As far as I am aware , it has been meaning to do so since the 1980s .
Today the Commission must tell us when it will take an initiative in the area of PVC , because that will have a bearing on the way we vote tomorrow .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Florenz because reuse really should be given priority ; but I also want to say absolutely no to the PVC ban because we do not yet know of any viable alternatives .
To include the collection of used parts from repaired cars would involve the entire garage waste disposal system and in the final analysis that has nothing to do with the directive .
Take-back free of charge would also destroy market forces and , above all , would exclude existing firms from the recovery chain and produce expensive bureaucratic obstacles to trade .
On Amendment No 42 I would say it is a positive sign for environmental agreements because with many agreements on end-of-life vehicles in Europe compliance tends to be concentrated on just a few articles .
On Amendment No 44 : in my view the technical annex is too detailed and also contains provisions that make no sense .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Florenz for the work which the Committee on the Environment has done on this important and complex proposal .
The Committee on the Environment has proposed 45 amendments , and with a further 16 there is a total of 61 .
Some of the amendments clarify or improve the proposal , and I can already say that the Commission is able to accept 20 of them in full or in part .
There are also some amendments which dilute the Commission 's proposal and reduce the level of environmental protection .
Here I am thinking in particular of topics such as producer responsibility , recovery targets , and the scope and implementation of the proposal .
These elements are central to the Commission 's proposal , and we cannot accept any watering-down of them .
I would like to comment on the many amendments in groups .
Let me begin with the scope of the proposal .
Here I shall comment on two aspects in particular .
The first aspect , which relates to Amendments Nos 9 , 14 and the second part of 17 , concerns veteran vehicles .
We do not think that veteran vehicles which are in museums or owned by private individuals constitute waste .
They are therefore not covered by the proposal , but we can of course make that clearer in the proposal itself .
Then there is the proposal concerning the extent to which this should apply to two and three-wheeled vehicles .
We have also considered this , and we think that these vehicles should only be exempt from Articles 4 and 7 of the proposal .
Amendment No 18 means that two and three-wheeled vehicles would be exempt from all the articles apart from Article 6 of the proposal , and we cannot agree to that .
Then there are the heavy metals and PVC .
In its proposal , the Commission has chosen to require that some of the heavy metals should be removed from the vehicles before they are reused , and I see that the Committee on the Environment is in favour of a clear phasing-out of such heavy metals and a list of derogations which can be amended through the committee procedure .
Unfortunately , I have reservations about this , so at the moment I cannot support Amendments Nos 20 , 21 , 45 , 56 and 59 , and Mrs Jensen was quite right that my answer concerning PVC would be that we are currently working on a horizontal initiative , so I cannot accept Amendments Nos 8 , 19 and 21 .
Then there is the question of the collection and take-back of end-of-life vehicles .
Here the Commission accepts Amendments Nos 24 , 28 and 29 which clarify the text , but we cannot accept Amendments Nos 26 and 27 .
Amendments Nos 22 and 23 require careful consideration , so we are not accepting them today .
I would like to emphasise that both free take-back and the principle of producer responsibility , which have also featured strongly in the debate today , are key elements in connection with making production and consumption more sustainable in the longer term .
This is also the reason why we cannot accept Amendment No 25 or Amendments Nos 46 and 54 , but we can endorse Amendment No 43 .
As far as recycling , reuse and recovery of end-of-life vehicles is concerned , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 34 , because it would remove the short-term recovery target .
Then there is Amendment No 61 , which makes the targets less clear , and Amendment No 53 , which represents a serious obstacle to achieving the long-term targets and is also unacceptable .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 49 and 50 , which would make it difficult to monitor whether the quantified targets have been reached , but we can accept Amendments Nos 57 and 58 .
There are also the amendments relating to implementation and , lastly , there is the question of environmental agreements , which we cannot accept at the present time .
In this context , I must point out in passing that this concerned an entirely different debate , when we were discussing a different proposal from the Committee on the Environment regarding voluntary agreements .
I hope it will be possible to find a compromise in the course of further negotiations which strikes a balance between considerations relating to the environment , consumers and industry .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Unilateral US measures against banana regime
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0017 / 99 by Mr Querbes and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on unilateral retaliatory measures taken by the United States against Community exports in the wake of the ' bananas ' dispute ; -B4-0018 / 99 by Mr Aldo and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on unilateral US retaliatory measures in the dispute over the European banana import regime ; -B4-0019 / 99 by Mr Castagnède and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on the new WTO panel on bananas and unilateral US threats of retaliatory customs action ; -B4-0139 / 99 by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission , on the functioning of the WTO Dispute-Settlement Procedures and the US / EU banana dispute ; -B4-0140 / 99 by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on unilateral measures taken by the United States against the import of EU goods ; -B4-0141 / 99 by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , to the Commission , on unilateral retaliatory measures which the United States of America is threatening to take in the dispute over the European banana import regime ; -B4-0142 / 99 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on the WTO and the trade dispute between the EU and the USA concerning the common organisation of the market in bananas ; -B4-0143 / 99 by Mr Kittelmann and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on unilateral trade measures taken by the United States of America against selected European products and the WTO Dispute Settlement Procedure .
Mr President , I would like to point out that the measures agreed on by the United States , the problems involved in applying the regulation on the COM for bananas and the conflicts that have arisen in this area mean that we must consider two basic issues .
The first is that the Union must defend its internal law , which is an expression of its autonomy . It is being attacked by rules such as Section 301 , that are applied with extraterritorial effect and that are used to defend interests rather than rights .
The second is the need to guarantee that the arbitration procedures are effective . These have been used against the Union in the past and now , due to circumstances , they are being called into question because of the unilateral protectionist measures that have been taken .
Both questions lead us to the conclusion that we are pursuing an open market policy that is not reciprocated and that benefits the United States .
The US not only wants European markets to be open to products from the United States ; they must also be open in the way that the United States dictates .
We must ensure that we maintain the Union 's legislative autonomy ; in this case , the COM for bananas is symbolic .
What we are trying to do is to assert the Union 's autonomy .
Thank you , Mrs Sierra González , and thank you for keeping to your speaking time .
I would remind the House that I have to be extremely strict this evening in order for us to stay on schedule .
Mr President , since my election to this House , I have repeatedly denounced the constant attacks by the United States against the COM for bananas .
Despite the far-reaching concessions granted by the European Union during the reform of the COM , this new regime continues to be attacked by the United States which basically wants it to be dismantled . I must point out that , at the time , we fought against those concessions as they undermine the basic principle of Community preference .
The threats now being made by the United States , in total defiance of the rules governing the multilateral trading system , are coming directly after the establishment of the transatlantic partnership .
The UPE Group is therefore calling for an appropriate response from the European Union .
In essence , the European Union can under no circumstances be subject to United States sanctions if no decision has been made by the relevant bodies of the WTO , in accordance with the applicable procedures guaranteeing the observance of due process .
If the Americans were to go down the road of unilateral action , they should realise that they would bear a heavy responsibility for weakening the international trading system .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to go into detail today .
Some Members have already addressed certain questions and I assume that others here present will be referring to many of the details .
If the consequences of these fresh disputes with the United States were not so serious , this quarrel might seem amusing . But the consequences are very serious and I hope that we will reach a satisfactory solution in the very near future , otherwise we would seriously jeopardise transatlantic relations .
Let me remind you : the European Union and the United States did most to initiate the dispute-settlement procedure within the WTO .
This procedure may not be perfect in every way and may need to be developed further but it is the only international instrument we have to resolve trade disputes .
The United States doubts whether the new banana market organisation is WTO compatible .
That is indeed its right .
But it does not have the right to take unilateral measures against its trade partners and to issue sanctions , such as in this case the absurd 100 % duties on products from EU Member States .
It does not have the right to take it upon itself to deliver a verdict .
The conduct of the United States does considerable damage to the WTO dispute settlement procedure .
It makes the preliminary negotiations for the new WTO round considerably more difficult and it damages confidence in the process of transatlantic partnership .
It gives the impression that the American margin for play in trade policy is increasingly determined by a purely national political agenda , which causes justified fears that it is trying to impose a particular American trade philosophy worldwide .
That is playing with fire and puts the WTO itself in the firing line .
Protectionism must not always be seen as the solution to national problems .
In the scheme of things we are all dependent on one another and the WTO is an instrument for harmonising egoistic national approaches .
It is not beloved of everyone , it is not perfect , but it is extremely necessary .
To approach national issues , such as bananas , hormones and many others I could mention , in emotional political terms , takes the reason out of politics as a whole and sets in motion a trend that may not be stoppable .
My group fully supports the Commission 's position .
You have before you an appropriate joint resolution from the Committee on External Economic Relations that strongly rejects the unilateral measures taken by the United States , fully supports the Commission and , moreover , in my view can form a good basis for further European policy measures .
With regard to the banana dispute , the crisis affecting the relations between the European Union , its Member States , its ACP partners and the United States illustrates the ambiguities of the EU 's trade policy .
Faced with the determined stance of the Americans , who are skilfully playing a double game with their European partners by seeking both partnership and sanctions , the European institutions appear divided , powerless , paralysed and reluctant to truly defend European interests .
There are several reasons for this .
Firstly , the American desire for domination is not perceived as such by many Member States .
Secondly , the 15 Member States increasingly appear to have divergent interests . And thirdly , the absence of democracy within the European institutions is ensuring that any complicity is obscured .
The fact remains that we are faced with a situation in which the United States has unilaterally decided to publish a list of European products which it intends to sanction by raising customs duties to 100 % if the EU does not amend its new banana import regime . In addition , they have taken this decision even before the WTO has decided whether or not this regime is compatible with its rules .
Mr President , as US Ambassador Vernon Weaver recently made quite plain in the Committee on External Economic Relations , the current banana war is a test case .
The real test will come when the EU bans meat containing hormones in a few weeks ' time .
Next on the cards - and here too Mr Weaver did not mince his words - will come genetic manipulation .
Under the pretext of offering the consumer a wider choice , US firms are to be allowed to put genetically modified tomatoes and laboratory-made soya on our supermarket shelves .
And if possible they will not label it as such , since the poor consumer might find it too hard to take in so much information !
The issue goes far beyond bananas .
That is precisely why we cannot give way to the unjustified US demand , even though and in fact just because they are threatening lunatic sanctions .
After one WTO panel we revised the organisation of the banana market .
Whether that revised regime is compatible with the rules is something that same panel will decide again .
Any form of US sanction against European firms prior to the panel 's findings would deprive the WTO of all meaning .
If any penalty duty is imposed before the panel 's findings , we might as well shut down the WTO .
Unfortunately the Commission has to take some of the blame for this situation .
The founders of the WTO manoeuvred themselves into this position because world trade is not being regulated according to the principle of sustainable development , consumer protection and social protection .
Instead the ruling principles are economic growth and profit seeking .
With a view to the forthcoming millennium round , it is high time to formulate concrete reform proposals .
Precautionary measures , the environment and local development must become the guiding principles of economic action .
At the high-level WTO meetings in March , the Commission ought to begin by submitting the appropriate documents if it really wants , as promised , to make transparency the primary obligation of EU officials .
Today 's protests in front of Parliament by the French farmers have given some idea of what they think of the adjustment to the world market and the mania for liberalisation and deregulation , as also what they will be capable of once they really get going .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party supports the joint resolution .
We consider it most important for the WTO rules to be observed .
It is absolutely unacceptable for the USA to threaten unilateral measures again European firms that really have nothing at all to do with the banana market organisation , with the dispute about it .
It is also entirely unacceptable for US policy to give in to the pressure from Chiquita and others .
We must support the Commission in its demand for respect for the WTO rules .
But the EU must also respect the WTO rules , which means that if we lose again at the next panel , we will have to revise the market organisation again .
I would ask the Commission to consider how we will react if that happens .
For myself , I would say that I do not regard this as a good organisation of the market .
It discriminates against producers in Latin America and it does not protect small producers against the multinationals , as is said so often , for there are small , independent producers in Latin America too .
In Ecuador , 60 % of producers have fewer than 20 hectares , and they are owned nationally , not owned Chiquita .
In Costa Rica there are fair-trade bananas , and the organisation of the market discriminates against all of them .
For Commissioner Pinheiro actually to say two weeks ago in regard to my report on bananas that the Commission should give the multinationals in the ACP states money to build up banana plantations is pure hypocrisy , if at the same time we say we want to defend the small producers against the big shots .
Perhaps quite different issues are at stake here .
But that should not prevent us from insisting again and again that the WTO rules must be respected and that we cannot accept the US attacks .
Nor can we accept the US views on hormone-containing meat and on the question of genetically modified organisms .
Here we must stand up for our legislation .
But should we find that our legislation is not compatible with the WTO rules , then indeed we have to revise it .
I would also draw Sir Leon Brittan 's attention to the debate we have just held on the Bowe report .
There the committee proposed an amendment to the effect that we should take account of socio-economic criteria when authorising genetically modified organisms .
I believe that if that amendment is adopted and has an influence on the legislation , it will be a through ball for the Americans .
We have to prove on the basis of scientific evidence that our policy is the right one , and this applies both to the hormone issue and to GMOs .
We regard the precautionary principle as the foundation of our policy , not some arbitrary socio-economic criteria .
Here too we must take care we do not come up against new problems in the autumn .
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming the support that Parliament has given generally to the Commission on this issue and also thanking it for the resolution that has been drafted , which we find very supportive .
The questions raised two key issues : what is the Commission doing to avoid the threatened US sanctions and , if sanctions are nevertheless applied , what does it intend to do then ?
All our actions , both present and future , are and will be taken in full compliance with WTO rules .
Two wrongs do not make a right .
That does not , however , mean , that we are powerless .
American sanctions are illegal because they are based on a unilateral determination that the European Community has failed to bring the banana regime into compliance with WTO rules .
We have therefore sought to persuade the Americans to submit the question of the conformity of the new banana regime to a WTO panel procedure , in accordance with Article 21 ( 5 ) .
In fact , WTO procedures make this an obligatory step before any sanctions can be authorised .
As early as last September , and in the weeks and months following , we offered to reduce the WTO procedure to an absolute minimum of time .
We even initiated the procedure ourselves , inviting the United States to participate .
But the fundamental problem is that , at the end of the Uruguay Round , the US Administration promised Congress that it would take sanctions immediately at the end of the period for implementation of the WTO panel ruling in application of the domestic Section 301 procedure .
The Administration now has to prove that it can deliver .
That is the simple American political background .
The United States has , therefore , ignored the fact that where there is disagreement between the parties , the conformity of implementing measures must first be tested through the obligatory WTO procedures .
In the bananas case the American Administration promised Congress to implement sanctions at the latest by 3 March 1999 whatever happens in the WTO !
That is what ties the hands of the US Administration .
That is why the United States has refused to participate in any WTO procedure on the conformity of the new EC banana regime simply because that would have taken the Americans beyond their self-imposed internal deadline , which does not comply with WTO rules .
By initiating the Article 21 ( 5 ) procedure ourselves , we succeeded in bringing Ecuador to launch its own procedure to challenge the conformity of our regime .
This procedure is now under way and panel reports are due by 12 April .
After this , the normal procedures provide that the other side has the right to appeal .
Meanwhile , the US has continued to press for authorisation to take retaliatory measures by 3 March .
There has been a major debate on this , in which almost all the WTO members who spoke supported our position that there cannot be authorisation of retaliation in the absence of a WTO ruling on the conformity of the regime .
We will now continue to argue before the arbitrator that he can only determine the level of any retaliatory action if and when the non-conformity of the new banana regime has been determined .
Otherwise , the arbitrator would be sentencing the European Community while its guilt has not been proven .
We have also asked the WTO General Council to give an authoritative interpretation on this question .
Finally , we are challenging the conformity of the American Section 301 legislation .
We have requested a panel which will , in due course , be set up .
The US , from its side , has requested consultations with us and we will enter those consultations in good faith .
This brings me to the second question : what would we do if the Americans go ahead with sanctions on 3 March ?
Firstly , we would challenge the legality of those sanctions through the WTO dispute settlement procedures .
Finally , as long as those sanctions lasted , we would have the option of retaliating , quite legally , by withdrawing concessions or imposing measures in areas not covered by WTO disciplines .
There are such measures that could be imposed and we would be entitled and would give the most serious consideration to applying them in the face of such flagrant breach of the law .
Mr President , we support the Commission view that the unilateral action by the United States is illegal as it is outrageous and totally irresponsible .
Its very threat is already causing severe damage to cashmere garment producers who are wholly innocent parties in this dispute and who stand to lose around GPB 20 million of export orders and possibly 1000 jobs .
By these vindictive actions , the United States has prejudiced , not only their own reputation , but also the future of the transatlantic partnership .
Precisely what the USA asked for - an arbitration panel under Article 21 ( 5 ) - I believe in the letter to Sir Leon of 13 July is now under way .
We must condemn the crude attempt at intimidation by the United States , singling out for exemption from sanctions products from Denmark and the Netherlands because these countries voted against the banana regime in Council .
On this point , I wish to ask the Commission what mechanism is at the disposal of the US authorities that would allow them to distinguish between products originating in say Denmark or Holland as opposed to those from France or the United Kingdom .
The points we make in the resolution of the Committee on External Economic Relations are very clear .
We demand that the European Union fulfill its obligations to our ACP trade partners and we expect the Commission to achieve that objective within the WTO framework .
Finally , we cannot and will not tolerate further damage to our industries by a regime whose ambition is matched only by its arrogance .
Mr President , perhaps we have not done very well with the banana regime we have adopted in Europe .
But to react to that by immediately declaring war , by imposing a 100 % duty on candles , weapons , pullovers and suchlike , is not , in my view , the right answer .
It is the old method of trying to get your way by might and main that was used in the wars of the past .
The winner is the one who can shoot most people dead .
We have learned a lot more since then in Europe .
Basically it is a question of finding a better solution .
That means if we have two different points of view , we should acknowledge that both sides could be right .
Then we should try to meet each other halfway and say , let us not just accept solution 1 or 2 , let us also try solution 3 , 4 , 5 , 10 or 15 and go on until we find a solution that everyone can accept ; and these solutions must be worked out at a high official level .
Mr President , because two or three major American companies control the banana production of the Latin American countries , the United States , which does not itself produce any bananas at all , is relentlessly maintaining its offensive against the Community import regime .
Although the European Union has taken account of the WTO verdict by amending its regulations , the United States is again threatening trade sanctions against imported European products .
The United States also wants the EU to lift its embargo on imports of hormonised meat and is preparing an offensive against genetically modified organisms .
On 28 January , the US ambassador to the European Union stressed that the banana dispute was a minor issue compared to the potential scope of the hormonised meat and GMO issues .
This reaffirmation of the commercial and political domination of the United States and the latter 's desire to start the next round of negotiations from a position of strength are basically calling into question the WTO mechanisms .
The motion for a resolution tabled jointly by my group and the Green Group condemns the threats of American sanctions .
It urges the Commission to stand firm in the face of this new offensive so that we can continue to protect the interests of Community and ACP producers .
While awaiting the next arbitration proceedings of the WTO panel , an interim agreement has been obtained .
However , the United States has not abandoned its threats . If the sanctions announced are applied unilaterally , is the Commission ready to reply by applying equivalent retaliatory measures if necessary ?
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Brittan for being here at such a late stage in the evening as it shows his interest in this issue .
Tonight , we are showing our support for the Commission , as the Commissioner himself pointed out . There is therefore no point in repeating arguments that have already been put forward .
I should like to make a few comments , although I do not know if I shall receive any response to them .
Firstly , I would like to look at the problems that this crisis entails .
The initial problem is that although , during the final round in Marrakesh on the World Trade Organisation constitution , we insisted that the dispute settlement procedure be included , what we wanted was to combat American unilateralism .
Now , however , Section 301 of US external trade law is coming back to haunt us .
Secondly , it seems as though the Americans may be exempt from the dispute settlement procedure as it has not been possible to contest either the Helms-Burton Act or the D 'Amato Act effectively within the World Trade Organisation .
Thirdly , what we are concerned about - particularly the members of Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs - is whether or not the Commission really has sufficient resources to face up to the huge team of legal experts the United States has assembled in Geneva .
It seems as though the United States is capable of winning almost all the cases we are bringing : we have just mentioned the issue of hormones , we have a possible appeal on genetically modified organisms and we also have the banana war .
In other words , if we do not soon reach an agreement on this issue and if the United States insists on multilateral measures , the Community may have to reconsider to what extent it is prepared to submit to a multilateral mechanism , which the United States itself does not seem to want to respect .
Mr President , during the last part-session in Brussels , we discussed the banana issue with regard to the financial assistance to be granted to ACP countries suffering from reduced production .
As we pointed out at the time , the scale of the retaliatory measures announced seems to be disproportionate , regardless of the rights and wrongs on each side .
On our side , this dispute threatens assistance for two peripheral regions - Mr Mendonça will doubtless mention Madeira - and for poor ACP countries which have no satisfactory alternative to banana production . As for the Americans , this dispute does not threaten the interests of their own farmers , just those of extremely powerful multinationals which operate in Latin American countries .
While we obviously must be sensitive towards the populations of these countries , it must be stressed that the market available both outside and within Europe is still very extensive , regardless of the established quotas .
We therefore support one of the oral questions put to the Commission about whether or not an understanding can be achieved within the WTO panel .
As we inevitably have major reservations about the fairness of the American position , we would also ask - and this is also a policy suggestion - whether the Commission is ready to rigorously and rapidly apply the trade policy instruments at its disposal .
We must lend our full political support to the Commission 's continued firm position on this dispute , as clearly indicated in Paragraph 3 of the motion for a resolution which follows on from the oral questions tabled .
By taking this step , we are not simply trying to legitimately defend the interests of the people and areas affected , which in this specific case are the banana-producing areas on one hand and the areas which would be hit by American retaliatory measures on the other . Much more importantly , we are ultimately helping to ensure the multilateral resolution of disputes , in accordance with WTO rules , and consequently the rejection of unilateral retaliatory measures which use a political logic which we would rather not qualify .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the United States of America is not satisfied that a WTO arbitration board , convened on behalf of its interests and its multinationals in the dollar banana zone , recently ordered the revision of the common organisation of the banana market .
Instead , the USA is continuing its offensive with the aim of destroying any Community banana support regime and wiping out the remaining production in less-developed and ultraperipheral regions , as is happening in Madeira .
However , the most scandalous aspect of this offensive is its unilateral nature , with total disregard for WTO structures .
The USA is now threatening to impose new customs duties on European products exported to the United States . In practice , this would mean a ban on various products entering the American market , including textile products .
This offensive also includes new attacks to force the European Union to accept imports of American hormonised meat and genetically modified products , with total disregard for the health of European consumers .
Commissioner , this offensive must be stopped in its tracks .
If the USA carries out its threat , it is essential that the EU should be able to retaliate immediately by clearly restricting the access of American products to the European market .
It is also essential , and fundamental , that the Commission should use all available mechanisms under international trade law to reestablish the legality which the USA is trying to undermine .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I come from an ultraperipheral banana-producing region of the European Union , I wish to protest in the strongest terms and indicate my deep anger at the retaliatory stance taken by the United States of America in the latest dispute over the Community banana import regime .
I must take this opportunity to point out that the European banana-producing regions include some of the ultraperipheral island regions which are still suffering from a lack of economic development . In these regions , banana production is the main and sometimes only source of income for thousands of families .
We cannot begin to imagine the economic , social and environmental damage which would have occurred in the autonomous region of Madeira if the European institutions had yielded to the pressures which American-controlled multinationals determined to defend their own interests are continuing to exert on the banana market .
Under these circumstances it is clear that , in order to protect itself , the European Union must not submit in any way to the pressure exerted by the USA with regard to matters which may still be under discussion .
The European institutions should , within the various international bodies , maintain their steadfast opposition to unilateral retaliatory trade measures .
In this respect , the sanctions announced by the USA are scandalous and are already starting to have negative effects on other sectors which have nothing to do with the infamous banana dispute .
We totally support the Commission 's position as long as this remains resolutely in accordance with the spirit of the principles and rules of the World Trade Organisation . However , the Commission must be prepared , as it seems to be , to respond rigorously and rapidly if unilateral measures are applied by the United States .
Mr President , may I first of all say that those who have spoken in the latter part of the debate have pointed out that the action taken by the United States is not only action taken against parts of the Caribbean countries , but also against parts of the European Union which are very dependent on bananas .
In the case of some of the Caribbean countries , if they gave up producing bananas they would be likely to be driven to being drug havens which would do more damage to the United States than it would do to the European Union .
Mr Smith asked how can the United States discriminate against products completely unrelated to bananas such as cashmere , and in the case of Italy pecorino , and other products of other countries ?
Our view is that they have no right to do so whatsoever and that this is simply a bullying tactic designed to persuade the European Union to succumb to American threats .
As to Article 301 , which was also a point that has been raised , our view has always been that it is unlawful .
Up to now we have been content to let it stay on the American statute book and only to take action if it is actually implemented .
If it is implemented , the action will certainly be taken .
We were asked by Mr Medina Ortega whether we are able to face up to the American lawyers in these various threats ?
The answer is certainly Yes .
We have done so as he has pointed out in the case of the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Acts and we will do so in the face of all other legislation .
What will we do if action is taken ?
First of all we will respond in the WTO by taking a case against the Americans , as we have begun to do .
Secondly , if we win that case , we will be entitled to retaliate lawfully against the United States but , in addition to that , we will have to give serious consideration to taking action which would be in accordance with the WTO but would involve the withdrawal of concessions which are not bound in the WTO and which the United States do not have as of right .
I hope it does not come to that but the European Union is ready to defend its interests against anybody , including the United States .
Mr President , perhaps I did not make myself clear to the Vice-President .
The United States have exempted two European countries from sanctions .
What mechanism do the United States authorities have at their disposal to distinguish between goods coming from these two countries as opposed to goods coming from any of the other 13 ?
I do not know how the United States proposes in practice to do that .
It will be difficult for them .
It is not a question for me , because we think the action is unlawful in any event and we will take action against it .
I agree with you that looked at from their own point of view , they might well have some problems .
I have received nine motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 11.55 p.m.
EC-Israel scientific and technical cooperation agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0035 / 99 ) by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Decision concluding the Agreement for scientific and technical cooperation between the European Community and the State of Israel ( COM ( 98 ) 0457 - C4-0555 / 98-98 / 0241 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , back in 1996 , Israel became the first non-European country to be fully involved in the framework programme for research and technological development , and it remains the only non-European participant .
The basis of this agreement is that research cooperation is fundamentally international in character and that it makes no sense to limit it to the territory of the EU if it would benefit both parties and if there are no other political objections .
Israel pays and is treated like a Member State .
The other states ' contributions are not reduced , which means that the funding of the programme as a whole is topped up as a result of Israeli participation .
Under the fourth framework programme , which has been implemented since 1994 , the number of calls for tenders for the various programmes was higher in 1995 and 1996 than at the end of the programme period .
Although Israel , anticipating the conclusion of the agreement , began to contribute financially and submitted tenders , subject to conclusion , in 1996 , the bulk of the funds for many programmes had already been allocated by that time .
That is why Israel is very interested in full integration into the fifth framework programme from the outset .
We all know that the start of a multiannual programme is an important phase , and so for sheer reasons of time my first plea to the House is that we approve this agreement today .
But it is , of course , essential to take account of the general political context too , even in the case of a technical agreement .
Let me say the following on that : first of all , there are many strong links between Israel and the European Union .
The value of trade between us is twice as high as that of Israel 's trade with the United States .
It is important that the Union 's relations with the Middle East and its influence in that region remain steady and strong .
This agreement is one of many instruments that govern these relations and with which Parliament will deal in greater detail in March .
I believe that EU-Israeli relations in general are so stable that they can withstand the difference , important though it admittedly is , in our respective assessments of the progress achieved in the peace process .
And now my second point : even during the fourth framework programme , we were pressing for Palestinian research groups and companies to work with us and to be involved in projects .
This agreement is therefore an indirect means of promoting mutual understanding .
We shall insist that this cooperation be intensified , and when we come to review the programme here in Parliament we shall check that this is actually happening .
My third point is this : if the agreement is implemented , information networks will be set up under Article 6 .
The Israeli side has expressed the wish to participate more fully in future evaluation measures .
I would ask the European Parliament to support that wish .
The fourth point I wish to make is that , in order to reinforce this cooperation and to incorporate it into the same framework as the other agreements and cooperative projects , we should ensure that regular contacts are established between the European Parliament and the Knesset , so that the research cooperation can be monitored and promoted at parliamentary level .
Some of the groups in this House believe that , by approving the agreement and not suspending it , we would be intervening in the internal political debate in Israel , since as we all know , a general election is about to be called there .
Let me say to you that our failure to approve the agreement today would constitute far more serious interference in Israel 's domestic politics , and we have no right to exert heavy pressure on foreign governments to alter their domestic policies .
Lastly , as your rapporteur I should like to make the following comment : relations between the Commission and Parliament are somewhat strained at the present time .
For that reason it is my sincere wish , Commissioner , and not just a pious hope , that in future negotiations the Commission will provide Parliament with comprehensive information from the very start and keep it abreast of the latest developments in the negotiating process .
Applause
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my group endorses the report and very largely agrees with what the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , has said .
The Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation between the European Community and the State of Israel allows us to build on past successes , which began in 1996 , at least as far as the present high level of cooperation is concerned .
At that time Israel , with the status of an associated state , was allowed to take part in all non-nuclear programmes under the fourth framework programme for research and technological development .
In a period of only three years , 369 joint projects , costing a total of ECU 53 million , have been successfully implemented .
However , the added value deriving from cooperative arrangements is far greater than that .
In fact , some 1 000 joint applications have been received .
The continuation of this cooperation in the fifth framework programme is in the interests of both sides .
Our own interest lies not only in the high quality of Israeli research , but also the emerging adoption of European processes and standards and the future development of more marketing opportunities in the region .
Israel , for its part , has an interest in being involved in the discussion on strategic developments in the research field which Israel alone cannot achieve .
Moreover , high-tech products are the only means whereby Israel 's balance of trade deficit , like ours , can be reduced .
This cooperation in our mutual interest is therefore a long-term proposition .
That is why it is natural that not only Israel but also our Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the great majority of my group favour the smoothest possible transition from the fourth to the fifth framework programme .
Postponement of our decision for whatever reason would mean , as has already been explained , that the conference of foreign ministers on 22 February could not ratify the agreement , as a result of which Israel would be unable to take part in the first round of tendering , which will take place in March , and would be placed at a financial disadvantage , as happened in the fourth framework R & D programme .
In accordance with its gross domestic product , Israel will contribute to the success of the fifth framework programme for research and technological development by making an annual commitment of around EUR 30 million .
Various members of our committee have had the opportunity to see at first hand the high quality of joint EU-Israeli research .
At our insistence , Palestinian companies and research establishments were also involved in joint projects .
It is true that even greater efforts could be made in this direction , as my honourable colleague said , and indeed we are demanding progress here .
In my own personal opinion , further research cooperation can help in the long run to stabilise the peace process , which , it has to be said , is seriously deadlocked .
The aims of science are full understanding and effective communication .
Its universal nature also offers a matrix for resolving conflicts that arise from sectional interests .
Conversely , however , scientific cooperation can only flourish in the long term in a peaceful environment .
Even if the procedure applied here is that of a simple hearing , I would ask the House to approve the report .
Mr President , our group can also endorse the report and would like to see it implemented as soon as possible .
We are delighted at Israel 's participation in the Community 's research programmes up to now , and we look forward to the results of the cooperation between the European Union and the State of Israel in connection with the fifth framework programme .
Israel was , of course , largely created by immigrants , refugees and individuals with a very strong character , who have been able to endure dictatorships and oppression and who in many cases have an extremely high standard of education to contribute .
This has been reflected in the research programmes .
What is being made available here for the cooperation between the European Union and the State of Israel is therefore a considerable mass of talent with high levels of education , competence and diligence .
We look forward to the cooperation and hope that the report can be implemented as soon as possible .
Mr President , our group is very pleased with this very reliable and broad-minded report by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl .
However , we cannot approve it at this stage , because we - the European Union and the European Parliament - would be being used by a head of state who has shown total disregard for the peace agreements and for the process of promoting peaceful coexistence in the region .
We do not want to be manipulated by a head of state whose actions are almost Nazi-like : he demonstrates nothing but racist disdain for the Palestinian people in general .
As a result , and for that reason alone , we believe that it would be better to suspend the application of this agreement . We must hope that , after the elections , we will see the arrival of a new government whose behaviour and positive attitude towards coexistence , the United Nations resolutions , the Oslo Agreements and the Wye Plantation Agreements show that guarantees do exist .
We understand the situation in the region and believe that both parties should receive equal treatment .
In order to do so , it would be more appropriate if , instead of establishing cooperation between Palestinian firms and universities in Israel , the European Parliament itself implemented an agreement with the Palestinian people , its research organisations , its university and its firms . This would be more fitting in that since the end of the Second World War - when the UN was set up - the question of consolidating the Palestinian state through a UN resolution has remained unresolved .
By doing so , the European Union would be giving equivalent , equidistant and equal treatment to both parties involved in the conflict , thereby showing that it does not allow itself to be swayed by either side .
Therefore , when it comes to the vote on this report , our group will ask that it be referred back to committee so that it might indeed be approved under better circumstances .
Mr President , this report on the research agreement between the EU and Israel is no simple matter .
I can go along with part of what Mr Marset Campos said here , namely that this report , which we had thought would support the peace process , could just as easily be seen as a threat to that process if these issues are used to the wrong ends and in the political arena .
As far as the content of this agreement is concerned , those parts of the programme that relate to nuclear safety and fusion are , of course , excluded .
These areas are not included in this research agreement , a fact which I am pleased about .
At the same time , however , I am concerned , because we need to be aware of the fact that Israel has nuclear weapons , even though the country denies this .
I am a little anxious that , in spite of everything , funds will sneak in from other programmes precisely for use in research on nuclear fusion and nuclear activity .
This is something that I simply cannot support .
In this context , mention also needs to be made of Mordechai Vanunu , the Israeli researcher who disclosed details about nuclear weapons and nuclear energy research in Israel .
It will soon be ten years since he was imprisoned .
It would now be appropriate for Israel to release him as quickly as possible .
There was an application for his release , but that has now been rejected .
I would like to ask Mrs Cresson what steps the Commission is taking to seek Mr Vanunu 's release .
Openness is perhaps not Commissioner Cresson 's strong point , but I would nevertheless like to appeal for efforts to be made to prevail on Israel to release Mr Vanunu .
There are several other parts of this research project which I do not , perhaps , view as positively as the rapporteur does .
One such area is space research .
We Greens do not think that the EU should take part in space research .
We are therefore also against cooperation between the EU and Israel in this field .
We are just as reluctant for such research to be conducted in the EU as we are for it to be conducted within the framework of agreements with other countries .
Mr President , the issue with which we are concerned today has an obvious political element .
Renewing a link between Israel and the European Union in the middle of an electoral period could be looked on , at least locally , as support for the political powers .
It could also facilitate the re-election of the rabble-rousers and those behind the disastrous situation in which the peace process now finds itself .
That would indeed be absolutely deplorable .
It is also why some countries have still not ratified the association agreement with the State of Israel .
However , in this case , the situation is entirely different .
It is worth giving more consideration to continuing scientific and technical cooperation , especially as several Palestinian companies and universities are involved in this agreement . I am thinking , in particular , of Al Qods , the University of Jerusalem , and the University of Bethlehem .
They will benefit from participating in it and this is also something that we must monitor .
Moreover , penalising universities or the high technology sector - which , on the whole , are avid supporters of peace - would probably amount to targeting the wrong enemy .
Finally , an agreement such as this is not only an agreement , or a matter of charity ; it is also - and this must be pointed out - a means of returning to prosperity through exchanges .
This all means that there are varying opinions within the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Many of us will perhaps abstain or will , in any case , either want to vote in favour or be tempted to do so .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Quisthoudt on her excellent report and the speech she has just given .
I entirely agree with her , and my group will also be supporting her position .
In an increasingly global economy and with growing competition , cooperation between European partners in the fields of research and technology is no longer enough .
Scientific and technological cooperation between the European Union and third countries and the involvement of third countries in the framework programme help to promote knowledge and technology transfers and innovation in the European Union , which is good for employment here and helps to strengthen the links between people in the partner countries and the Union .
Such cooperation can also help to find solutions to the trade disputes that the Union sometimes has with its partners .
The Liberal Group is therefore very much in favour of continuing scientific and technological cooperation with Israel .
However , we do not want it to use participation in the framework programme as a political instrument in the Middle East .
There is no reason to block aid to its neighbours .
The Union has good relations with those countries too , and our aid to the Palestinians in particular is not producing the hoped-for economic development in the region because Israel sometimes frustrates our aid programmes .
My group therefore hopes and expects that if Parliament delivers a positive opinion on scientific and technological cooperation , Israel will clean up its act .
I am hoping to see some positive developments in the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome the conclusion of scientific and technical cooperation agreements between the European Community and the State of Israel .
We would nevertheless like to take advantage of this debate in order to express our concern .
We are concerned because , although a large proportion of Israeli research is dedicated to the civilian sector , another part of it - for which we do not have exact figures - involves the military sector .
With this in mind , it is impossible to forget the plane crash involving a plane full of chemical and bacteriological weapons , which claimed so many victims in the Netherlands .
That brings us to a question I raised in this very House on an article in The Sunday Times , which I actually thought was a hoax .
The article claimed that Israeli researchers had tried to isolate genes specific to Arabs in order to be able to use bacteriological weapons against them .
I did not receive an answer to this question , but in the Israeli press , the daily newspapers Haretz and Maariv also published the story , and it has not yet been denied .
We could therefore be dealing with the most extreme and most abominable type of racism ever experienced .
As a result , we would like to be convinced that these cooperation agreements are not going to contribute to such extremely dangerous research .
We are in favour of the security of the State of Israel , and we are aware of the threats that have hung over this young nation .
However , Israel must understand the desire of the Palestinians to regain their land and their sovereignty .
Therefore , we would like Europe to do everything possible to ensure that a definitive peace agreement , based on the recognition of the rights of the Palestinian people , is finally reached .
That is the necessary condition for peace in the region .
Mr President , Commissioner , it has certainly emerged from the statements on behalf of the various groups that this is not a purely technical agreement but that there are many political aspects involved , a point which the rapporteur made perfectly clear too .
It is true that there have been voices in all the groups , including the group to which I belong , which have spoken against the conclusion of such an agreement at the present time .
However , it is my experience of foreign policy more than anything else which makes me think that the reasons against concluding the agreement are far more tenuous than those in favour of concluding it .
Whenever anyone says that we need a few good cards in our hand to engage in diplomacy and that such agreements should be used for that purpose , I can certainly endorse that argument .
But if we in the European Union want to make our voice heard more clearly in Israel , which we do , and if we want to have more influence on the decisions taken by the State of Israel , we have no option but to approve this agreement .
We would forfeit any credibility as a negotiating partner and any possibility of bringing our influence to bear in Israel if we did not approve this agreement now .
By so doing , we shall not be endorsing the current government .
The choice of government is a matter for the people of Israel .
They will decide who should be prime minister and they will no doubt decide on the composition of the Knesset .
The agreement will scarcely influence their decision .
The present government could perhaps use our rejection of the agreement to illustrate how ill-disposed and hostile Europe is to Israel at heart , which is not the case at all .
The only reason for our heavy criticism of the present government is that it has done nothing to promote peace and has failed to do many things that it could have done .
We do not know who the next prime minister will be ; nobody knows that today .
Above all , we do not know what the composition of the Knesset will be .
That is why a postponement will achieve very little . The same situation , or even a far more difficult one , may result from the elections .
Things cannot become all that much easier , given the abundance of parties and candidates .
That is why it surely makes good sense to decide now .
To my Palestinian friends - and I do not hesitate to say that I have very many of them and am in close contact with them - I should like to say here and now that , precisely because we are developing ideas in Israel , with Israel and for Israel , because we are establishing cooperative mechanisms that can help to break the deadlock on the peace issue , we in Parliament should , and indeed must , decide to ratify this agreement in order to maintain the common ground that can underlie and justify our continuing dialogue with Israel .
For that reason , the Palestinian people have a special interest in our approval of this agreement , which I , particularly as someone involved in foreign policy , can certainly commend to the House .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , because her report is quite outstanding and her presentation is a model of balance and synthesis .
Of course , we must ratify this agreement .
The proposals to postpone it are extremely worrying because postponing the agreement would naturally mean changing the nature of the agreement .
Excluding Israel from the first round of invitations to tender would amount to a virtually irreversible penalty and would make Israel into a lesser partner in terms of cooperation .
This cooperation must be exemplary in all respects , and it is of fundamental importance , both in terms of scientific exchanges and in terms of developing our cooperation with all the countries in the region .
It obviously augurs well that Israel is prepared to accept the participation of Palestinian Arabs in this project .
I will conclude by saying that it is extremely worrying to see that some people are trying to postpone this cooperation .
The combination of the extreme right and the extreme left is significant in this respect and it is clear that these attempts are due to the resurgence of old feelings of hatred that we would have hoped not to see here again .
Mr President , I will not respond to the attacks that were just made .
I am a friend of Israel too .
I even have family in Israel .
However , I think that the scientific cooperation agreement with Israel appears , at first glance , to be an essentially technical document that could stand in the way of the development of cooperation between universities and research institutes elsewhere in the Mediterranean .
There is a risk that the adoption of this agreement could be seen as an electoral tactic and a positive sign for the Israeli Government , which would be encouraged to continue blocking the peace process .
The Palestinians are already under considerable pressure to abandon their decision to proclaim a Palestinian State on 4 May 1999 . Indeed , some of that pressure comes from this House , as we can hear .
We must use all the means at our disposal to put pressure on Israel , on Netanyahu 's government , to respect its commitments .
We have the ideal opportunity to do so by postponing the vote on this scientific cooperation agreement until after the Israeli elections .
This would not , in fact , be the first time , as in January 1990 , Parliament blocked the scientific cooperation agreement so that Palestinian universities would be reopened ; at that time , they had been closed for over two years .
It was mainly due to this vote that the Israeli Government decided to reopen them .
Why should we not repeat this approach in order to achieve some real progress in the peace process ?
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on her work .
There are two aspects to this report .
Firstly , the technical aspect , and here the agreement is sweet : mutual benefit to the European Union and to Israel .
The latter has a technological advantage in a number of areas : biotechnology , opto-electronics , medical information technology and software development .
The European Union can benefit from the knowledge that is available there .
The Israelis also have skills in space technology and in the nuclear sector , areas where I would have strong reservations about cooperation .
This applies particularly to the nuclear sector : ten years ago I spent some time outside Mordechai Vanunu 's prison in Gaza trying to visit him .
He is , of course , still in jail .
I would welcome the Commission putting some pressure on Israel to deal with that .
I would reassure Mr Antony who has now left us that if anyone in Israel or , for that matter , in the Arab world was stupid enough to try and develop ethnic weapons , they would be self-destructing in the sense that the gene pools of the Arabs and the Israelis are sufficiently close that it would be very difficult to identify or produce weapons that would not harm people on both sides of the divide .
I hope that this can be a force for progress .
I will certainly be voting in favour of the report , as long as there is a commitment that we will not cooperate in the nuclear area .
I certainly would not want to have any cooperation in the space sector and I agree completely that we should be encouraging Israel and putting pressure on the Israelis to cooperate with the Palestinians in their research programmes .
Finally , I hope that we will make sure that none of this money goes into parts of Occupied Palestine .
That would be a provocation and the European Union would have some responsibility for that .
Mr President , I would also like to express my thanks for this report , especially for the conclusions that are drawn in it , and above all for its desire to support the peace process by means of cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian research bodies .
The problem with this agreement is that no mention is made of cooperation between Palestinian research bodies .
The rapporteur says in her introduction that after the agreement has entered into force , and after it has been in operation , we shall make an assessment of the extent to which different Palestinian centres have been given the opportunity to participate .
This would appear to me to be a rather absurd way of drafting an agreement if one wishes to achieve a given objective : surely one would normally include that objective in the agreement ?
This aside , I would very much like to endorse Mr Holm 's request that we should do something for Mr Vanunu .
I also believe that we must address the question of obliging Israel to sign a non-proliferation agreement as far as nuclear weapons are concerned .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , as the chairman of the Delegation for relations with Israel , I would like to welcome the fact that our colleague Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl has proposed that the new scientific and technical cooperation agreement between the European Union and the State of Israel be approved .
As many people have pointed out this morning , this is the result of particularly effective joint work : since 1996 , 369 joint projects have received subsidies amounting to a total of more than ECU 59 million .
It is also the proof of real cooperation between the European Union and Israel , and as we are well aware , it has considerable technological and intellectual benefits for both parties .
This is a clear example of how a balanced partnership should work .
It is actually helping the peace process in the Middle East , and we make no secret of this . In fact , the agreement will lead to further joint work with Palestinian researchers , laboratories and universities .
And the Israeli authorities have made commitments to this end .


I would like to congratulate the rapporteur very sincerely , to thank all our colleagues in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and , of course , to express my agreement with the very strong proposals made by Mr Stockmann .
A few weeks away from the Israeli elections , I would personally like to see in our decision - which I hope will be a positive one - a strong signal to those in the region with intelligence and spirit in favour of a peace based on development , progress , mutual respect and partnership .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to express my gratitude to the rapporteur and to the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy . They dealt with this issue in a very short space of time and almost unanimously support the conclusion of the scientific and technical cooperation agreement between the European Community and the State of Israel .
The Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament is now able to make a decision on this matter .
In 1996 , the Union and Israel signed a scientific and technical cooperation agreement for the duration of the fourth framework programme .
Israel thus became the first , and currently the only non-European , country to be fully associated with the Union 's research activities .
What has this cooperation become today ?
As has just been mentioned , it has led to around 350 joint projects and these have produced results that are already visible .
New products and practices have been developed , for example , a high-performance camera for medical imagery and a rapid photo-printing machine , to mention but two .
All these projects are based on partnerships that combine their complementary skills , and the institutions of the two parties involved draw considerable benefits from them in terms of knowledge , but also in economic and commercial terms .
The association between Israel and the Union is firmly based on the principal of mutual benefit , which is applied to each project .
Israel 's population is among the most educated in the world .
It could be looked on as an example from which we could learn a great deal .
This is due to its extremely advanced technological know-how , the dynamic nature of its small and medium-sized enterprises and its innovation policy , which makes it the second leading country in the world in terms of the number of start-ups that are generated as a result of cooperation between universities , laboratories , businesses and financial organisations .
Moreover , I have visited the country on several occasions to see what progress was being made .
Israel has become a partner that is very much in demand and highly valued by European consortiums .
All the evidence shows that the participation of Israeli institutions brings a considerable added value to our programmes .
I would like to add that , insofar as the agreement guarantees reciprocity , European researchers also have access to Israeli programmes .
The agreement has fulfilled all its promises .
The two parties have therefore expressed their desire to continue and to strengthen their cooperation for the duration of the fifth framework programme .
The Israeli authorities would like this agreement to be implemented as quickly as possible .
In fact , Israel would suffer if there were a delay with respect to the agreement entering into force , as happened with the previous agreement .
With this in mind , the Commission and the Israeli authorities completed the negotiations in the record time of three weeks .
Nevertheless , certain Member States are reluctant to bring this to a rapid conclusion and link the approval of the agreement to the progress of the peace process in the Middle East .
On the contrary , I think that the development of scientific and technical cooperation could make a significant contribution to the peace process .
As the rapporteur points out , it is important , from this point of view , for Israeli and Palestinian research institutes to be able to strengthen their cooperation .
Some speakers have spoken on this subject , and I would like to reassure them .
This work has already begun and such cooperation will be particularly encouraged within the framework of the international section of the fifth framework programme , which gives priority to actions in the Mediterranean region .
Above and beyond its intrinsic interest , cooperation between the Union and Israel in research is part of a broad political perspective .
This is an additional reason for concluding the agreement to associate Israel with the fifth framework programme as soon as possible .
Finally , the Commission will continue to keep the relevant committees regularly informed of the progress of the negotiations .
In order to respond to certain speakers , I would like to say that the Commission believes that rather than encouraging regrettable abuses , the renewal of the scientific and technical cooperation agreement aims to maintain dialogue within a specific sector and with a population that should be supported .
We must not turn this agreement into a political challenge as the effects of this would be counter-productive .
I would like to add that the agreement does not cover nuclear research , even of a civilian nature , nor , of course , does it cover the military sector .
The Commission wishes to encourage cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian research institutes , as I have already said . In order to achieve this , it will use all the possible actions provided for in the fifth framework programme for the Mediterranean countries .
One very specific area that comes to mind is that of water management .
This is naturally an extremely important field as it is vital for bringing together populations that may be in a conflict situation .
Israel 's recent policies in certain respects have shown regrettable shifts .
However , as regards the measures contained in this agreement , given that the peace process is facing certain obstacles , we cannot add to those problems by suspending cooperation with a scientific community that is among the most brilliant in the world .
As has already been mentioned , its members are in favour of peace , and some of them are even very actively involved in the peace process .
We should not punish those people .
On the contrary , we must try to help them , support them and continue to hold dialogue with them , in the interests of the people . If we do not , the people will be directly penalised by our reservations .
We must show that we are open and generous , although that must not prevent us from being aware of any possible shifts in Israeli policy .
However , I do not think that we should join these two elements together in order to use this scientific and technical cooperation agreement as a bargaining chip .
It is a good agreement , it has a certain symbolism and it has considerable political implications .
It tries to take the best of both scientific communities in order to make things easier for the people there who are going through difficult times . We must learn to appreciate better their skills , courage , nature and great intelligence , and become aware of how much we have in common with them .

Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
Ship-generated waste and cargo residues
The next item is the report ( A4-0023 / 99 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues ( COM ( 98 ) 0452 - C4-0484 / 98-98 / 0249 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the Commission on its proposal , which I feel is a successful attempt to combat the pollution that is still being caused by vessels dumping their waste at sea .
The approach adopted here is , in my view and that of the Committee on the Environment , a balanced one , in that vessels are required to deliver their waste and ports are required to build facilities to deal with it .
So far so good .
But you will not be surprised to hear that there were also certain points where the committee wanted to improve or tighten up the proposals .
First of all - and this is the most important point on which there was the most discussion , as there probably will be in future - there is the issue of payment .
The Commission proposes that a substantial proportion of the costs of receiving and processing the waste should be paid by all those using the port .
In my view this is rather too vague , so we have tabled an amendment to replace the word ' substantial ' by 90 % of the costs .
Why ?
Because I think it is extremely important to prevent ships from having a financial incentive to dump their cargo or cargo residues at sea outside the port .
If only a small part of the costs are shared in the port dues , then there will always be an incentive for vessels to consider dumping their waste at sea .
This is why we are in favour of replacing the word ' substantial ' by at least 90 % , not because we want to have a precise figure , but because we simply want to make it clear that the processing costs are to be shared among all vessels , irrespective of whether or not they use the reception facilities .
The second point on which we think the proposal could be tightened up is the monitoring of compliance .
This operates on two levels .
First , monitoring at ports of call .
If a vessel , for some good reason , does not have the time or the opportunity to deliver its waste at a particular port , it must not be free to do likewise at the next port .
It must be possible - and it is already possible - for ports to inform each other about the situation of vessels sailing to and fro between them or calling in at subsequent ports .
The systems are already in place , but they need to be further developed , which is why we are calling on the Commission to support efforts to do this .
Another aspect of monitoring concerns inspections within ports , and here too we were a little unhappy with the rather vague wording used by the Commission , which says that ' a sufficient number of such inspections ' must be carried out .
Instead of this we would prefer to use a figure which the Commission itself suggested in earlier regulations , so that 25 % of all vessels must be inspected .
This figure is already included in a number of regulations .
The Commission has said that it may be dropped , but at the moment we do not feel that there is any reason not to go ahead with this , so as far as we are concerned the directive should contain the reference to 25 % .
The third change to the Commission proposal concerns fishing vessels .
The Commission itself has admitted that it was a mistake that its proposal excludes all fishing vessels .
We do not want to create unnecessary red tape , so we are not in favour of bringing all fishing vessels within the scope of the directive , but it seems too stupid for words that huge vessels like factory ships which generate enormous quantities of waste should be excluded from the rules .
This is why we have proposed to exclude vessels under 15 metres and include vessels over 15 metres .
The fourth improvement concerns rewarding environment-friendly behaviour , which we feel is an important part of any environment and transport policy .
We should be in favour of rewarding vessels that do their best to encourage environmentally friendly work practices on board or in dealing with waste .
To do this we need to make it clearer exactly what an environment-friendly ship is , which is why we urge the Commission to support the attempts being made to produce a more detailed definition .
My conclusion - and this is perhaps more of a comment on EU proposals in general - is that all too often , the Commission and sometimes Parliament too put forward proposals that are difficult to implement because they do not correspond to the situation in practice .
I am convinced that the Commission proposal , with Parliament 's amendments , does correspond to the situation in practice .
There are ports which already have reception facilities or are planning to build them .
Vessels are prepared to deliver their waste .
There are plans to produce better definitions of what environment-friendly vessels are .
It is precisely because these plans are already being made and the proposal dovetails with them that I think the Commission proposal is a necessary , useful and viable attempt to prevent the dumping of waste at sea .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the British Presidency put marine pollution on the agenda , following quite a few requests from the Committee on Transport and Tourism , among others , there were many of us who said : At last !
And I mean this quite sincerely .
We have witnessed many accidents involving oil in European waters .
We have witnessed many ships that have spilt oil in our waters .
This directive imposes obligations on the ships .
We are moving from a convention - an IMO convention - which was a recommendation , to legislation , whereby we oblige the vessel and its master to give an account of any oily waste that may be on board .
In addition , we shall be obliging the ports - but not necessarily all ports - to receive waste oil .
In my opinion , it is essential that this directive should be made as functional as possible .
It must not be difficult or bureaucratic .
I hope that in the final version , the Commission and the Council find a model that makes this directive workable and attractive for the ships and the ports .
There are two problems .
The rapporteur has touched on one of them .
There are two problems that I would like to address .
Of course it must be paid for .
Of course it is not free of charge .
I hope that these costs will not become yet another restriction on shipping .
After all , the short-sea report clearly demonstrated that port charges are one of the contributory reasons for choosing other forms of transport .
So the small coaster - or the large coaster for that matter - will certainly incur a charge here , and I consider this to be a problem .
If one were to regard this as infrastructure , it would be possible to make it free of charge .
It is also possible to look at it from the point of view of the waste oil that is brought ashore .
Surely this can actually be recycled and used .
If one were to exempt it from oil taxes , VAT and so on , then it could actually finance this system .
I think that we should come up with some good ideas with regard to this question of financing and present them to the Member States .
Ships in transit in international waters that do not call at European ports are a different matter .
After all , we do not get hold of them .
I feel that we should think back to what happened with the Pallas Athene .
Here we have a vessel which bursts into flames in international waters , drifts through Danish territorial waters and ends up on German territory , and there we all are , sitting down together and playing a kind of official ' pick up sticks ' .
The first ones to make a move lose the game , since it is they who pick up the bill .
If we had had a monitoring system in the North Sea , we could have intervened collectively - Denmark , the United Kingdom and Germany - but we did not .
We allowed the bill to be passed on to the place where the ship ended up .
I therefore believe that it is also our job to get the Member States to take ships in transit into account in their deliberations on future policy .
I am well aware that this is not covered by this directive .
Mr President , let me express my thanks for the preceding remarks and extend a special welcome to my honourable colleague the Transport Commissioner .
I am delighted that we have been given another rare opportunity to discuss this matter in the morning , rather than at 11 o 'clock on Tuesday night .
But let us turn to the business in hand .
I believe that the Commission has adopted an excellent approach in the directive .
As a native of Hamburg , I am pleased to see that it incorporates all the results of a European international conference on the issue of port waste-discharge facilities , which was held in Hamburg .
Practice has shown us , of course , that the Marpol Convention with its discharge requirement for ships is inadequate .
We must ensure that the waste on board ships is actually discharged .
If we say here that the ports must provide discharge facilities and that everyone will have to pay anyway under a no-special-fee system , I believe that more captains will decide to use the port discharge facility , since they have paid directly for it in their harbour dues .
This is a very important issue , because we have no other way of cleaning up our beaches , especially those on the North Sea and Baltic coasts .
We still have a lot to do here , but the same can be said for the Mediterranean and other parts of the European Union .
The approach , then , is exactly the right one .
I thank Mr Lagendijk , who is a new member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , for his excellent cooperation .
I believe the committee adopted the recommendation unanimously , and it is a good thing and to be applauded that all the groups in this House are pulling in the same direction on this occasion , promoting environmental protection without neglecting economic interests .
Allow me to deal briefly with two more points .
We have tabled a number of amendments , and I hope the Commission will be able to approve them all , Mr Kinnock .
At any rate , I should like to highlight two things .
First of all , the Commission must be urged to ensure that the system of charges now being introduced does not distort competition between ports .
It is to be expected that one port or another will try to offer a particularly attractive scale of charges or to obtain particularly large profit margins in order to secure a competitive edge in the usual conflict , so to speak , that occurs between ports over cargoes .
The Commission must be watchful , and we may have to beef up the legislation .
I also believe , as the rapporteur said , that we must require Member States and ports to ensure that 25 % of all ships are actually inspected every year .
After all , we are familiar with the problem of inadequate control from our experience with rest periods for long-distance lorry drivers . We had to tighten up there , because the Member States were not sticking to the rules .
That , Commissioner , should not be a problem either , since we have the same figure of 25 % in the port state control directive .
One and the same official may be able to carry out both types of check .
We need effective control of waste discharge , for the sake of the sea and for the sake of animal and human life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive that has been submitted to us responds to a perfectly commendable objective , as it aims to ensure better protection of the marine environment .
International rules do exist , but everyone recognizes that they are not always respected , far from it , in fact .
These international rules include the MARPOL Protocol , and the proposal for a directive transposes its provisions into Community law .
These include reducing dumping at sea , improving port reception facilities , stepping up monitoring in order to force vessels to hand over their waste , and establishing a system to fund these facilities .
On the whole , we can agree to this , but the methods of implementing these objectives are of some concern and add to those we already expressed when considering the Green Paper on ports and maritime infrastructures .
I would like to mention here the principle of subsidiarity .
I would point out that the Maastricht Treaty does not give any particular powers to the European Union to organise the port system and the rules for managing sea ports .
It would be unfortunate if the Union tried to interfere in that management through environmental issues .
We should therefore ensure that the principle of subsidiarity , to which my group is particularly committed , is not called into question through such methods .
With these reservations , we approve and support the proposal for a directive , as amended by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
To conclude , I would like to commend the excellent work carried out by the rapporteur and congratulate him on the quality of his report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , people in civilised societies do not relieve themselves in the street .
The requirement that ships discharge their waste in port follows the same elementary logic .
I believe that Mr Lagendijk 's report makes that perfectly clear .
There must be no incentive , such as the avoidance of special fees , to circumvent that requirement .
There must be a 50 % inspection rate .
Anything else will give rise to absurd or dangerous situations , and the system must be weighted in favour of environmentally friendly vessels .
Basically , this report pussyfoots its way indirectly towards addressing three key points .
The first is the question of a European maritime regulatory area .
The United States has had one for a long time .
The European Union continues to act as if it were a patchwork of small states , between which only the IMO standards apply .
That is an indefensible state of affairs .
The second point is the need for control by the port state .
This is an imperative of the first order , given the development of flags of convenience and dual registration .
The third point is the primacy of ecology , since the destruction of our vital resources is certainly no basis on which to develop an economic activity .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lagendijk , on his excellent work , which , it must be pointed out , rightly deserved the unanimous approval of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I fully agree with what was said by Mr Jarzembowski and would merely like to clarify a few points .
As was mentioned , the aim of this proposal on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues from ships is to reduce pollution and thus protect the environment , in particular by monitoring the legal discharge of waste and other pollutants at sea .
In this case , the Commission proposal was a necessary and desirable addition to existing legislation on the protection of the marine environment and the creation of fair conditions of competition between the ports of the Community .
We therefore welcome this opportunity , especially the legal requirement for ships to dispose of waste and cargo residues in ports .
The fee system proposed , which comes very close to a ' no-special-fee ' system but avoids any downward pressure , is to be welcomed in general terms .
The proposal includes provisions that mean that ship-generated waste is treated slightly differently from cargo residues .
Ships are required to deliver both types of waste in ports , but under MARPOL 73 / 78 rules in the case of cargo residues . This means that the treatment and disposal of cargo residues are not covered by port charges but special fees could be charged for the process .
I would like to end by saying that it is only natural that warships should be exempt from the provisions of the directive and , generally speaking , we support the proposal .
Mr President , we are all familiar with pictures of birds and fish fighting that final , impossible battle against oil spills and other waste from our ships along our coastlines , because the international conventions which prohibit dumping at sea are not being enforced .
This situation will hopefully be remedied by this directive , together with the amendments proposed by the committee , whereby the ships must - under all circumstances and regardless of the quantity of waste - pay a port fee to dispose of their waste .
Like the rapporteur , we in the June Movement normally uphold the principle that the polluter pays .
But we also agree with the rapporteur that in this case there is a need to depart from this principle , since a fee which corresponds to the quantity of waste would make it tempting to dump the waste at sea .
Control is the cornerstone of this directive .
But in order for this to become effective , the June Movement is urging that the amendments tabled by the rapporteur should receive particular support with regard to the following points : that a definition should be found for the term ' environmentally friendly ship ' ; that the controls should be made more specific ; that the expression ' a substantial contribution ' should likewise be made more specific , so that this becomes sufficiently large to ensure that it does not pay to dump at sea ; and finally that cargo residues should be covered by the port dues .
Mr President , it is in many contexts a major problem that waste from ships is not being managed in the proper way .
The traffic through the Baltic Sea is a particular problem in this respect , not least due to the extremely sensitive nature of this particular sea .
Every year huge quantities of oil are discharged directly into the Baltic .
In Swedish waters alone , there are hundreds of discharges of this type every year .
And it is virtually never possible to determine which vessel the oil has come from .
In the light of this situation , Sweden has a law which gives every passing vessel the opportunity to enter practically any port and dispose of its surplus oil there .
Of course , such a system has both advantages and disadvantages .
Naturally , a huge plus point is that this means that nobody will need to dump oily waste directly into the sea for purely economic reasons .
At the same time , however , a system like this costs a great deal of money - above all when there are only a few countries that apply the system .
Given this situation , it is a natural and obvious development to implement the same type of measures in a European context and also , in my view , to make the same demands of all the EU 's applicant countries .
This would mean that , within the near future , practically all the countries situated around the Baltic would be subject to the same conditions with regard to the reception of such substances as oily waste .
On this basis , let me put a question to the Commissioner responsible : what steps is he prepared to take in order to include the EU 's various applicant countries in today 's decision ?
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming Mr Lagendijk 's report , not only because it supports the Commission 's efforts to ensure a major reduction in marine pollution , but also because it is his first as a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism - I congratulate him on that .
It is an accomplished piece of work , if I may say so , and in return for the support and the quality of the work , I am very happy to say that the Commission can endorse many of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur .
Specifically , the Commission can accept at least the underlying principles of Amendments Nos 1 , 3 4 , 5 , 12 , 16 , 17 and 18 ( England 0 , France 2 - I thought I might get that in ) .
There is , however , another set of amendments which the Commission must reject , mainly on the grounds that it feels that the concerns expressed have already been dealt with in other parts of the existing text .
I am sure that , on further examination , the honourable Members will understand and , I hope , accept that point .
I refer specifically to Amendments Nos 6 , 10 , 14 and 15 .
That leaves just 6 out of 18 amendments where there is a more substantial degree of disagreement with Parliament and I must say that , even in those cases , the divergence is not fundamental .
Amendments Nos 2 and 7 propose to extend the obligation to notify the onboard waste situation in writing to fishing vessels over 15 metres .
Mr Lagendijk referred specifically to this in the course of his speech earlier on .
The Commission 's concern is that this could easily lead to an excessively bureaucratic system without bringing any substantial benefit to the environment .
We should bear in mind , of course , that fishing vessels are not excluded from the requirement to deliver their waste in ports and to contribute to the cost of facilities .
They are only exempted - I emphasise this - from the obligation to make a written notification before each port call .
The reason for that is simply that most fishing vessels , obviously , have one or more standard ports where they normally land their catches .
The prior notification proposal exists in order to allow the port to make the necessary arrangements for receiving waste from ships .
In the case of fishing vessels , the port will generally be very familiar with the needs of the vessels , even without a written notification .
We also believe that the length limit of 15 metres , like any other limit , is bound to be somewhat arbitrary and therefore difficult to justify .
For those reasons - we hope that the House will accept practical reasons - we cannot accept Amendment No 13 either .
Having said that , however , I share Parliament 's concern that if very big fish factory vessels were to be excluded from the statutory obligation , that would be very retrograde .
I should like to reassure the House that those vessels are definitely subject to the notification and control obligations , since fish factory ships , which are not engaged in catching fish , are not considered to be fishing vessels under the terms of this proposed directive .
The most controversial amendment , as indeed Mr Lagendijk said , is probably No 8 on the charging system for the delivery of ship-generated waste .
Here the objectives of Parliament and the Commission are absolutely the same : all of us want to achieve a charging system in which ships are not given incentives to discharge waste at sea .
However , we differ about methods of securing that objective .
The Commission 's proposal seeks to strike a balance between the need to make the best possible progress in encouraging waste delivery to ports and the plain political reality of taking into account the very different views of Member States on this issue .
The end result of both Parliament 's and the Commission 's approach is that fees cannot only be based on actual delivery .
Neither of us thinks that ships which do not deliver waste should be free from the fees associated with waste management .
Our divergence , therefore , arises only from the fact that the Commission 's proposal preserves a greater flexibility for the Member States in deciding the extent to which the so-called no-special-fee system will be applied .
In addition , we should bear in mind that ports , marinas and fishing ports in Member States are obviously very different , not just between but also within Member States .
As I said , however , the fundamental objective of sharing the cost between users and non-users is crucial if we want to encourage the delivery in ports of waste and reduce and , indeed , prevent the pollution of the sea .
Amendment No 9 is unacceptable because the Commission can adequately deal with competition matters under the powers it already has under the Treaty .
The proposed amendment would have the effect of reducing those necessary powers merely to the possibility of making a proposal , and that , clearly , would not be in order .
Again , I hope , on reflection , that amendment may be withdrawn .
Finally , we cannot accept Amendment No 11 , which relates to the number of spot-check inspections to be carried out for control purposes .
The Commission considers that a certain flexibility is needed , partly because of the potential future inclusion of the waste control regime in the existing port state control directive , which obviously would have exactly the effect anticipated correctly by Mr Jarzembowski .
Our feelings arise partly from the fact that the main elements for enhancing compliance with this directive are not only set down in the control part of the directive .
The Commission , therefore , considers that a slightly less systematic spot-check system is adequate for the purposes of the directive and achieving the purposes of combating the pollution of the sea , at least as far as checks outside the port state control regime are concerned .
Clearly , as Mr Jarzembowski said and as other Members have noted , in the course of the normal port state control check , it would be extraordinary if the inspector taking his 25 % quota , as it were , were not to pay attention to the waste-disposal situation on board the craft .
One could readily anticipate that will be undertaken - it is a relatively simple check .
One or two questions were raised by the honourable Members , to which I should like specifically to respond very briefly .
Mr Sindal raised the question of wrecks in international waters .
We recall in this House that he has fastidiously pursued the questions raised by the disastrous wreck of the Pallas in international waters .
Currently , as the House and Mr Sindal know , just vessels are the responsibility of the flag state but we are all aware of the deficiencies of that system , and coastal states may get involved in order to protect their own environment .
Clearly there is something to be desired in respect of using those powers as well .
The House may be glad to know that the Commission is supporting discussions in the International Maritime Organisation about placing the mandatory responsibility for safeguarding against pollution and other effects of wrecks on the vessel owner .
In my view , that could be a very real breakthrough in our efforts to achieve quality shipping in all waters , particularly in European waters .
I hope that progress can be achieved without great delay in the IMO .
Naturally we would prefer the standards to be global , if that is at all possible , and then followed up with a legal regime in our own maritime area .
I hope we can embark upon that without great delay when the discussions are completed in the IMO .
Further , Mr Sindal also asked about VAT on waste disposal fees .
That is a crucial question which is probably why discussions on the matter are still continuing .
However , in the course of the further development of this legislation , I will be in a position to give a more specific response .
Mr Jarzembowski 's point , which is well taken , that it is essential that the fees levied do not result in the distortion of competition between ports , because their rivalry is , to say the least , very interesting .
After I retire I propose to write a novel about this to do them real justice - maybe a fairy tale , who knows !
There will be differences in the level of the charges which arise mainly because of the relative efficiency or inefficiency of the system .
If a port , because of its efficiency in handling waste disposal , is able to charge smaller fees , well the very best of luck to that port .
What we are then seeing is effective competition and not a distortion of competition , as I am sure Mr Jarzembowski will agree .
I conclude by expressing my gratitude to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and specifically to the rapporteur , Mr Lagendijk , for the expeditious work and the excellent report on this detailed and important proposal .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Combined traffic : dimensions and weights
The next item is the report ( A4-0031 / 99 ) by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on
I.the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 92 / 106 / EEC on the establishment of common rules for certain types of combined transport of goods between Member States ( COM ( 98 ) 0414 - C4-0485 / 98-98 / 0226 ( SYN ) ) II.the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 96 / 53 / EEC laying down for certain road vehicles circulating within the Community the maximum authorised dimensions in national and international traffic and the maximum authorised weights in international traffic ( COM ( 98 ) 0414 - C4-0486 / 98-98 / 0227 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , combined transport is one way of reducing the negative effects of road freight transport , the aim being to replace a considerable proportion of the road transport by water or rail transport .
However , the situation is disappointing : combined transport accounts for only 5 % of the total freight transported by road , in spite of all the encouragement which Parliament has given .
We must conclude from this that the efforts made up to now have failed to produce adequate results .
For this reason , the Commission 's initiative to improve the position of combined transport is certainly to be welcomed .
It recognises that the existing policy has not achieved the desired results , and proposes four measures to improve the current situation .
First , it broadens the definition of combined transport , which now applies not just between Member States but also within one Member State .
Second , it proposes to reduce the fixed costs of road use .
The road transport legs make less use of the infrastructure than other road transport , so it seems reasonable to reduce the taxes paid .
Third , the Commission proposes an exemption from the bans on weekend driving for the initial and final road legs , thereby reducing the total duration of combined transport operations .
Finally , it proposes to increase the permitted vehicle weight for lorries involved in combined transport to 44 tonnes , thereby enabling certain transport units to be operated to full capacity .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism has a number of comments on the Commission proposal .
First of all , we agree with the broader definition of combined transport , but it must be absolutely clear and leave no room for differences in interpretation .
This is why we propose that the distance travelled by road in combined transport operations should be limited to 40 % of the total journey .
I should like to make the following points about the rest of the Commission proposal . The problems of combined transport can largely be put down to variations in the services provided by the railways and the high transshipment costs which combined transport inevitably involves .
The question is whether a permanent solution can be found which does not involve a structural approach to these two factors , and any new policy has to get to grips with them .
This is why the Committee on Transport and Tourism supports the plans to offset the high transshipment costs at least partially by reducing or reimbursing the tax paid by lorries .
The Committee on Transport does not agree with the proposal to exempt the road transport legs of combined transport from the ban on weekend driving , as this will distort competition between combined transport and road transport .
Parliament is trying to create a level playing field for the various forms of transport , so such distortions are not what we want to see .
The proposal would also bring disadvantages for the public , since freight transport on main roads would increase at weekends .
It would come up against the same objections that have been raised in connection with harmonising the restrictions on weekend driving .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism also does not support the proposal to allow exemptions from the maximum permitted sizes and weights .
This would first of all undermine the generally accepted 40 tonne limit established in order to prevent damage to the infrastructure .
Allowing 44 tonne lorries means putting the infrastructure under greater strain , and the high costs of this make it unacceptable , particularly in view of the accession of the Central and Eastern European countries .
It would be the first step towards a general 44 tonne limit , which is by no means desirable for the reasons I have described .
We also have to ask whether higher vehicle weights really serve the best interests of mankind or the environment .
In conclusion , as the present rapporteur , I should like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek for the work he did as rapporteur in the earlier phases of this report .
I think that a collective day of rest is essential if society is to operate successfully , which is why I am pleased that the retention of the ban on weekend driving prevents another group of workers from having to lose their hard-earned rest day on Sunday .
I therefore commend these proposed amendments by the Committee on Transport and Tourism to the House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a word of thanks first of all to Mr van Dam , who stepped into the breach for Florus Wijsenbeek , who for very honourable reasons handed back the report .
If I sense the mood correctly , the House will reject the report when it is put to the vote or at a subsequent stage , and with good reason too .
But why ?
After all , we agree on the aim of promoting combined transport , because we want to see the transport of goods shifted from the roads to the railways and waterways .
So we agree on the aim .
The question is whether the solution proposed here by the Commission is a suitable means to that end .
I believe it is an unsuitable means ; I believe it is counter-productive .
When the Commission proposes in Article 9a that goods vehicles be exempted from all restrictions on traffic movements that may be applicable at weekends , at night , on public holidays or in the event of heavy atmospheric pollution , provided they constitute combined transport within the meaning of Article 1 , this would open a Pandora 's box , which we cannot endorse .
In other words , as well as the 44-tonne trailer combination that we have consistently rejected in Parliament , another adverse development is being permitted here , allowing almost anything to run on our roads as long as it operates in the name of combined transport .
That cannot be our line .
We are willing to negotiate about precise times and routes in this Parliament too , but this blanket clause , this carte blanche , cannot be in our interests .
It is the wrong way to proceed .
That is why the Commission must think again on this in order to come up with a better proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the shortness of time , I can only state that we essentially agree with the Socialists and in particular with the rapporteur .
We do not want to promote combined transport in this way .
We are in favour of promoting it by offering tax relief .
But lifting the bans on night driving and weekend driving and increasing the maximum permissible weight are unsuitable measures which , in the interests of the people of Europe , we must reject .
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
I have seldom encountered a worse example of hypocrisy than what we are hearing this morning .
How do people intend to achieve the modal shift if combined transport is not given any advantages ?
How is rail transport supposed to compete with road transport if large containers cannot be brought to the trains and we are therefore forced to accept the 44 tonne limit ?

Trains run every single day , including weekends and holidays , but the freight has to be brought to them , which will be impossible if we keep the ban on weekend driving in place .
I would add that , structurally speaking , a total weight of 44 tonnes or 40 tonnes makes no difference to the infrastructure whatsoever .
Mr van Dam , who was the one who included this in the report , is telling us a load of nonsense here .
Mr President , I too want to defend the Greens ' opposition to the Commission 's proposal .
Taking up points made by those who have already spoken , with the exception of Mr Wijsenbeek , we believe it is crucial to keep road transport down to 40 % and we cannot accept conditions which entirely favour road transport in every particular , such as being allowed to drive at weekends .
We think the road transport legs should be limited to a maximum of 200 kilometres but an increase in the maximum weight to 44 tonnes is unacceptable .
In view of all this , although this approach is obviously designed to promote combined transport , we think it is just a means of making road transport easier .
We shall suspend the debate at this point since it is now voting time .
It will be resumed this evening .
Mr President , I would like here to raise an issue that has led to the European Parliament being deluded .
In his reply to Mr Donnelly 's question , Wim Duisenberg , the President of the European Central Bank , said that the members of the board of the European Central Bank receive a salary that is ten per cent greater than that of the Members of the Commission .
In Finland yesterday it was revealed that the Bank of Finland , which belongs to the European Central Bank organisation , pays Sirkka Hämäläinen , who is on the board of the European Central Bank , a pension of around EUR 10 000 a month in addition .
I believe there is reason to suspect that other members of the board of the European Central Bank receive such additional payments .
I hope that the appropriate parliamentary committee will look into this matter , and will not condone such immoral goings-on .
I am sorry , Mr Seppänen , but that is not a point of order and I therefore cannot let you go on .
We take note of what you say , and no doubt the Commission will also have heard your comments .
We shall now move on to the votes .
VOTES
Mr President , with regard to the legislative resolution , I would request that we do not vote on it so as to comply with the procedure that has been adopted for all the reports on Agenda 2000 .
As I have the floor for a moment , I would like to take this opportunity to thank all my colleagues for the vote and to inform them that I have analysed the Commission 's position on each of the amendments that were tabled and adopted .
I noted with great satisfaction that the Commission has accepted half of the amendments adopted in the Committee on Agriculture .
Nevertheless , there are naturally differences on some points that were considered to be fundamental by the majority of the members of the Committee on Agriculture .
I will defend these points in the meetings we will hold with the Council and the Commission up until the vote on the legislative resolution .
Applause

I therefore put to the vote the proposal by Mr Martin that the vote should be postponed pursuant to Rule 60 ( 2 ) .
Parliament decided to postpone the vote and the matter was deemed to have been referred back to committee
Mr President , I just wanted to inform you that in the official gallery there is a delegation from the parliament of Taiwan , led by Mr Lee and Mrs Song .

Loud applause
I therefore welcome the delegation from Taiwan .
Mr President , the report on which we are about to vote , the White report , is , in my view , the most important report for the physical territory of many countries of southern Europe and even for European agriculture .
Since it is likely that there will be few Members here for the vote this evening , I would ask you , along with the rapporteur and our colleagues here , to agree to postpone the vote on this report to the next part-session in Brussels to be held in 12 days ' time .
Mr President , I am acutely aware of the problems presented to the Iberian peninsula by the issue of water .
In view of what has just been said I do not object to what is proposed .
Mr White and Mr Aparicio , the decision will have to be taken in due course , at the beginning of the vote .
You can ask then for the vote to be postponed , if you so wish , but as things stand at present the vote is on the agenda for today at 5.30 p.m.
The Swedish Social Democrats are of the opinion that wine - bearing in mind the health aspects - is not a product which should be supported by the Union 's common agricultural policy .
Our view is therefore in principle that this support should be stopped .
We are voting against the common organisation of the market for wine because it falls outside the whole existing CAP framework .
The financial envelope allocated to this COM is insignificant compared to the amount earmarked for meat , cereals , milk and tobacco .
Contrary to what happens with those COMs , wine producers will not be entitled to any direct aid .
The permitted planting areas cannot sustain a self-sufficiency policy for the European Union , with 14 % of trade already in the hands of third countries .
Despite the Union 's campaign to ensure transparency for the consumer , the COM does not make it compulsory to list the ingredients used to produce the wine on the label , leading to unfair competition between wines containing sugar and those produced from grapes alone .
The COM seeks to distinguish liqueur wines from naturally sweet wines , thus adding to the fiscal burden on them and creating unfair competition between port and Madeira wines .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted against the Martin report because it rejects large parts of the Commission 's proposals for a reform of the organisation of the market in wine .
We support the Commission 's proposals , since the reform is in line with the thinking behind Agenda 2000 .
The Commission has proposed that the wine sector should become more market-oriented , so as to achieve a better balance in future between supply and demand .
The proposed arrangements therefore mean an adaptation of the market , which in turn means reorganisation and bans on replanting of wine areas in certain regions , together with the abolition of artificial outlets for products that cannot be sold on the market .
This avoids surplus production , which is marketed at prices far below the costs of production and distillation .
The Martin report paves the way for a dilution of the Commission 's proposals by retaining part of the distillation arrangements , which the Commission proposes should be abolished , and imposing longer timescales for the individual objectives , and this we cannot endorse .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations voted in favour of almost all of the amendments that were adopted in the Committee on Agriculture as they reflected our position .
During the debate on the Martin report in the House , Commissioner Fischler made a speech in which he expressed views that were contrary to the interests of French and European wine growing .
With regard to the ban on importing musts from third countries for wine making , Commissioner Fischler said that he disagreed with the European Parliament 's position , basing his argument on the WTO agreements and stating that suitable ' labelling ' regulations would be introduced .
The amendment as adopted in the report reflects the very same current legislation that was consolidated in the GATT .
Our group does not , therefore , understand Commissioner Fischler 's views and is opposed to the introduction of specific labels for wines made from musts imported from third countries .
The wine will be promoted according to where it is made , so the final product will have the designation of origin of the place where the wine was made , in line with the GATT agreements .
As far as planting rights are concerned , the Commissioner says that he still favours limiting the growth of European vineyards to 1 % in the 2000-2010 period .
The European Parliament wanted 3 % growth in order to enable vineyards with structural problems to adapt to their market without relocating from regions of production where the product is less highly valued .
In terms of the restructuring of vineyards , the Commissioner said that he was in favour of this measure because it fulfilled the objective of quality .
Nevertheless , he remains opposed to our proposals on the regeneration of vineyards and the improvement of wine-making facilities .
Once again , the Commission 's approach is too restrictive and does not embrace the real economic situation of the wine-making industry .
What is the use of altering the quantity of vine stocks in a production region without altering its winemaking facilities ?
How do we plan to alter the vine stocks in an area of designated origin ?
The Commission 's proposal is therefore going to limit the qualitative improvements of the qwpsr and table wines with geographic designation .
I must point out that these are products that are exported by the European Union and that therefore contribute both to the development of rural regions and to the balance of trade in the wine-producing Member States .
As regards the promotion measures , the Commissioner stated that they would be subject to a horizontal regulation , that is , one that is valid for all so-called quality agricultural and food products .
I must point out that only eight of the European Union 's fifteen Member States produce wine .
It is highly probable that of the financial resources to be used for this horizontal regulation , the majority will be used for agricultural and food products that are produced in all the Member States of the European Union , such as milk products and meat products .
However , I was pleased to note that the Commissioner took account of all the amendments tabled by Parliament on trade organisations .
In France , we are aware of the fundamental role of professional organisations . They need to have a legal status that is specified in Community law in order to ensure that they are not called into question by the non-producing Member States on the premise of the single market and competition .
As a Member from the Languedoc-Roussillon region , I welcome the fact that we were able to reintroduce the definition of natural sweet wines into the Commission 's proposal .
However , I regret the fact that certain French pressure groups wanted to remove this definition , purely for tax reasons .
In conclusion , I was pleased to see that some of our proposals were taken over by the Commissioner .
However , once again , all the measures that we envisaged in relation to revitalising supply and demand , with regard to both the single market and third countries , have been rejected by the European Commission .
I must point out that the European Union is the world leader in terms of wine making , and alone accounts for 80 % of world trade in this sector .
Rather than trying to preserve this dominant position on the world market , the Commission is taking an approach that puts constraints on the European wine-making industry .
I want to use this explanation of vote to express my support for the report by Mr Martin on the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine . This reform is essential and aims to adapt the sector to the current situation and to the high degree of competition in the global market .
We need to establish a better and more complete system of Community aid and support for those wine-growing zones that are both in crisis and expanding , due , for the most part , to increasing competition from third countries .
In this respect , the Commission must provide greater protection for quality wine through the designations of origin system both within the EU itself and in international agreements with third countries .
A comprehensive policy to combat the crisis in the wine sector must aim to ensure that vineyards do not relocate to areas receiving EU subsidies .
In this respect , the Commission must allow the sector to be cofinanced at national level . Moreover , we must not consider wines made with grapes from third countries to be Community wines , as the Commission proposes , since they would therefore be eligible for subsidies .
It is also essential to increase to 3 % the area for new planting up to 2010 .
The organisation of the market in wine is , from start to finish , an absurdity that would make the Soviet Gosplan planning authorities green with envy .
Moreover , support for wine amounts to an irresponsible waste of taxpayers ' money , which not infrequently is actually embezzled .
In spite of this , it is proposed to increase the support from around EUR 1.1 billion per annum to around EUR 1.3 bn - i.e. from some SEK 10 bn to SEK 12 bn a year !


We believe that this form of organised swindle involving EU funds should be phased out as quickly as possible .
Wine is not a foodstuff , but a luxury item which should be subjected to the laws of the marketplace without any further intervention from central authorities - apart from any steps that might be justified for reasons of alcohol policy , but these would need to be effected at Member State level , not EU level .
If , for social reasons , the wine-growing countries wish to support their growers , then of course they have every right to do so , but to make taxpayers contribute in this way , over and above what they pay to purchase the wine , is nothing short of grotesque .
It is hard to imagine a more flagrant example of misdirected pseudo-solidarity than support for wine .
We are in favour of genuine international solidarity , including increased foreign aid .
This is one of the reasons why we have voted against the report as a whole .
Wine producers are farmers , and must therefore be entitled to EU support in the same way as other farmers .
However , EU support must be changed and become more of an environmental support and focused more on smaller agricultural holdings .
In the long term , the support needs to be reduced .
It is wrong to include such a large number of detailed provisions in the report .
I have abstained from the final vote .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament has not gone along with the Commission 's proposals but has devised a counter-project , as it were , thereby eliminating some obvious weak points in the Commission text , and has tabled a compromise proposal .
The important thing is to preserve wine production in Europe , attaching special priority to quality products .
In particular , it will be essential to safeguard the diversity of traditional production methods , many of which go back thousands of years .
That is why it is incomprehensible that some of my fellow Members keep trying to fan the flames of north-south discord over winemaking processes .
The north does not find fault with southern production methods , so the MEPs from southern climes should not oppose typically northern methods either .
The message here is ' Live and let live ' .
Wine is a natural product which , taken regularly and in moderation , is beneficial to health .
This has been proved by a number of scientific analyses .
I should like to refer in this context to a recent study conducted by the University of Mainz , which clearly demonstrates that daily consumption of one to three glasses of wine protects the heart and reduces the risk of coronary thrombosis .
In my opinion , it would be appropriate to advertise these findings as part of a series of large-scale European wine campaigns .
Initiatives to this end should be supported by the European Commission .
They would also serve to refute explicitly the recurrent false reports according to which the Commission intends to prohibit the advertising of alcoholic products .
Again and again and again - one regulatory frenzy after another from the European Commission !
In 1962 , for example , a set of market regulations for wine was adopted and remained in force until 1970 .
Then came new market regulations for wine , but these were originally devised for France , Germany , Italy and Luxembourg only .
The accession of Greece , Portugal and Spain made the problems greater , and as time went by we had a growing surplus of table wines which had to be brought under control .
The Martin report is therefore of great importance to Luxembourg wine growers too .
Who does not remember the epic discussions on the two wine reports by our honourable colleagues Mateo Sierra and Julio Fantuzzi ?
Two worlds were pitted against each other - the wine-growing areas of the south and those of the north .
Although the Fantuzzi report was adopted by a slender majority , it did not attract majority support in the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
The Moselle and our winegrowers once more emerged relatively unscathed , because the Commission 's pessimistic forecasts of wine production and consumption proved to be inaccurate .
Almost five years after the Fantuzzi report , Parliament has to deal again with a proposal from the Commission on the common organisation of the market in wine .
And at this point I should like to congratulate Mr Martin as a specialist in this field for the good report he has tabled , and especially for its fairness .
In the expectation that the report will achieve a majority in both Parliament and the Council this time , let me say that the compromise amendments he has tabled will enable the wine growers of the northern vineyard regions to go on producing their quality wines just as they always have done .
In any case , I believe that the production of quality wines in the European Union falls under national jurisdiction by virtue of the subsidiarity principle , and that Luxembourg still produces some of the best of those wines .
Our aim must be to achieve a decrease in the production of table wine and to prevent the importation of must from non-EU countries .
Above all , there must be a reduction in large-scale distillation , in other words the organised destruction of wine , before it reaches the market .
I shall therefore be voting for Mr Martin 's report , and I do so in the hope that producers in all wine-growing areas will be spared any further rules and regulations in future .
I would first of all like to commend the exceptional quality of the work that has been done in the context of this detailed study of the importance of activities linked to wine in our societies .
This is due to the professional experience of the rapporteur , combined with the best possible knowledge of the subject that came from the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , and the study carried out on the ground by the writers of the report , on the basis of contributions from producers and in close cooperation with our Directorate-General for Research .
This debate brings to light several fundamental points , dealing with both the nature of the common agricultural policy and the actual running of the European institutions .
At the centre of our concerns is the desire to clearly affirm that wine is an agricultural product and not an industrial one .
It is essential to take this position , as it conveys the need to maintain a genuine , close and rigorous link - not only in terms of marketing - between the land and the product .
It also implies the desire to encourage the promotion of products on the basis of the place of production .
Respecting this link between the land and the product is essential to ensure consumer safety .
It is a necessary condition for the future of food safety , and also for the possibility of maintaining balanced land-use planning .
It enables us to prevent destructive concentrations and to continue to develop the production of food from the land , which is part of our culture .
In order to maintain this link , we must prevent the development of a dangerous shift , that is , the possibility of making wine from musts imported from third countries .
Our colleague Mr Chesa , who comes from one of the most important wine-making regions in Europe , rightly highlighted the risks of a reduction in quality and of breaking the link between product and land that this move would entail .
Parliament has proposed banning wine making with musts from third countries .
However , Commissioner Fischler argued that this position was not well-founded , considering that the provisions of the Marrakesh agreement establishing the WTO no longer allowed the countries of the European Union to declare such a ban .
We in turn contest Mr Fischler 's interpretation , as the proposals in the Martin report merely take up the exact provisions of the COM in wine which are consolidated in the GATT .
I have , moreover , addressed a written question to the Commission on this fundamental point , and this must be clarified quickly .
Rather than taking the relevant step of encouraging the development of a sector in which European countries are world leaders , the Commission has adopted a Malthusian , restrictive and cautious attitude towards several issues .
Fortunately , the Martin report deliberately breaks away from this philosophy by rightly proposing a controlled restructuring and regeneration of vineyards and measures to improve the quality of grapes and wine-making facilities .
It also gives priority to structural measures to help and support young people when they are setting up their operations and as they expand .
Finally , the Martin report quite rightly requests that the Council 's authority and rights be entirely preserved in this important sector , while the Commission proposed , as usual , an excessive increase in its own powers , claiming that it alone held all the powers of modification and regulation .
We can only hope that the Council , which is the only European institution that has real democratic legitimacy , will be able to resist the pressure from the Commission .
Mr President , Mr Barros Moura 's report raises the issue of which European institutions and policies are needed to complete the transition to the single currency and enable it to function .
It has not come too soon .
This issue was deliberately avoided at Maastricht so as to facilitate the Treaty 's ratification , and again at Amsterdam , so as not to open debates that might have led to doubts among the citizens on the eve of the single currency 's entry into force .
Nevertheless , we are faced with the issue now and we must face up to it .
The Barros Moura report opens up several debates , but by no means all the debates .
For example , it does not thoroughly examine the issue of the democratic control of the single currency , as this issue seems practically impossible to solve .
It also fails to consider the issue of who will make the ultimate decision on external exchange rates , because it is such a contentious issue at present .
And even though it mentions the need for a federal-style budgetary system , it fails to specify what this means in terms of new taxes and the rates they would be set at .
In fact , what does this report actually deal with ?
Essentially , it deals with the coordination of economic policies which it would like to see extended to other related areas , such as structural policies .
This is something it would like to see become more centralised , to the Commission 's advantage , and more binding , along with the obligatory decisions taken by a qualified majority .
The socialist leanings of the rapporteur , who views all solutions in terms of a superstate , are clearly evident in all of this .
Our Liberal colleagues appear somewhat taken aback by this prospect , and yet the result was obvious .
It is true that the choice has still not been formally announced between socialist or Liberal-style euro management institutions , but , in short , that choice has been largely predetermined .
The single currency is in itself a unifying and rigid principle , something our Liberal friends seem to have realised a little too late .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for the accomplished work that has been put into this important report .
We believe that there is good reason to highlight the need for an effective consensus with regard to the policy on EMU and other policy areas , such as employment and social policy , the overall macroeconomic policy and environmental policy .
We also believe that there is good reason to highlight the need for political control over the ECB within the framework of the independence demanded by its operations .
The enlargement of the EU compels us to pay greater attention to these questions , a point which is also emphasised in the committee 's proposals .
However , we feel that in several instances the committee 's proposals run the risk of tackling the issues from the wrong starting-point .
The development of increased coordination between policies relating to EMU - above all employment and social policies , overall macroeconomic policy and environmental policy - should be based on more active initiatives and more closely coordinated objectives in these areas , rather than on static demands for changes in the Council 's decision-making procedures and the introduction of binding rules .
In our opinion , it is essential above all that the Community should increase its efforts to achieve more active employment and social policies and better coordination of overall macroeconomic policy .
We believe that increased efforts cannot in all respects be driven primarily by institutional changes in the way that is proposed by the committee .
In our view , this is a valid position even in the context of enlargement .
Furthermore , we are of the opinion that changes in the rules for making decisions on economic policy should be based on clear definitions of which areas of the Member States ' current economic policy would be affected .
We believe that some of the proposals for institutional changes that are being submitted by the committee do not take into account this need for clear definitions .
One example of these essentially unclear definitions is the committee 's paragraph 18 on ' federal-style ' budgetary systems .
As regards the committee 's proposal of a legal basis in the Treaty for the Euro Council , we believe that this fails to take into account the fact that EMU should be seen as a matter for all EU countries , even those which are not currently taking part in the euro .
EMU and the common currency have an impact on large areas of Community policy and should therefore not be a matter that is handled exclusively by the Euro Council , as envisaged in the proposal put forward by the committee .
This consideration has guided us in the position we have adopted on individual points in the report and the individual amendments that have been tabled .
The fact that the report as a whole contains certain weaknesses does not mean that we believe it should be rejected in its entirety .
The relationship between EMU policy and other policy areas and the consequences of enlargement for EMU are so important that this matter warrants further attention .
The Barros Moura report sets the course , in a clear and technically convincing way , for the development of the EU in terms of the establishment of the internal market , EMU and the euro .
Consequently , the next logical and inevitable step - if a breakdown of the monetary union project is to be avoided - is to establish a real federal structure .
Amongst other things , this means giving more power to the Commission and the European Parliament and less power , first and foremost , to the national parliaments .
At the same time , majority votes will be the norm .
There will be a common economic policy and a common tax policy .
In addition , a ' federal-style ' budgetary system will be created - a budget that will be used to resolve crisis situations in the individual Member States .
To put it more directly : the report is canvassing for the establishment of a federal state with a federal budget at its disposal , similar to the federal system that exists in federal states such as Germany and the USA .
As a counterbalance to EMU , the report wishes to create a social and political union .
The establishment of a social union will mean that a framework will be created at EU level for the way in which social security benefits and schemes are to be administered .
The Union will establish parameters for determining who is entitled to benefit from the social security system , how much they are able to receive and how the benefits and schemes are to be financed .
We do not share the Barros Moura report 's vision of a federal EU , and we are therefore voting against the report .
The transition to the euro is the result of the political will demonstrated by the Union and its Member States .
It was not an end in itself , but simply one stage further along the road to European integration .
The launch of the euro provides the Union with a single monetary policy which makes it necessary to restore some kind of balance , particularly in the economic sphere .
The ECB , among other institutions , now performs all of its tasks with full independence , which is certainly a positive thing .
However , the absence of a genuine political authority in economic matters at the European Central Bank clearly places the issue of the lack of democratic accountability in European integration at the centre of the debate .
It also gives rise to the fear of an uncompromising monetarist policy which would govern the Union 's strategic choices and be a burden for potentially healthy economic growth which is able to create jobs .
Coordinating economic policies becomes a pressing need if we wish to promote an efficient and competitive European economy , which - as our resolution states - is also able to generate jobs , solidarity , economic and social cohesion and equal opportunities between citizens of all the Member States .
In order to attain this , we now need to openly declare our commitment to an economic and social union as well as to define a new ' social contract ' that establishes the common principles in social matters .
However , this will not be possible if the development of an integrated economic policy is not accompanied by closer alignment of Member States ' tax systems .
In short , I very broadly share the conclusions reached in the resolution we are considering .
I will support it all the more as it highlights the need to strengthen Parliament 's role in all matters concerning Economic and Monetary Union .
Sadly , I have to note that the scenario we feared will become a reality if this text is adopted . We predicted that the existence of EMU would result in calls for harmonisation in areas such as taxation , as well as employment and social policy .
The Member States are , in other words , being asked to harmonise their economic policies - which is one of the reasons why I voted against this report .
EMU means ' more Union ' .
Decisions on economic policy , as well as interest and exchange rates , become an EU-only affair .
In the long term , fiscal and financial policy will be decided at Union level too .
A whole raft of reports from the European Parliament confirms this trend .
EMU is an economic and political project - the cornerstone of a future EU state .
This report admittedly takes a relatively softly-softly approach , but the underlying message is there .
Economic policies are described in terms of ' issues of common interest ' .
The report speaks of approximation of fiscal and social policy , more qualified majority voting and a stronger Commission .
The rapporteur calls for ' conclusion of the draft interinstitutional agreement on the coordination of national economic policies and on monitoring the stability and growth pact ' .
Such measures would only increase the power of the EU and widen the democratic deficit .
I therefore voted against this report .
The rapporteur clearly views EMU as a platform for championing the transformation of the EU into a federal state .
In the recitals to his report , he uses formulations such as ' The European Parliament ... considers that the absence of a common economic and fiscal policy appears to be completely incompatible with the unified management of monetary policy ' ; or ' ... points out that establishing monetary union would require a ' federal-style ' budgetary system ' .
EMU as an enterprise is fundamentally undemocratic .
Yet the rapporteur erroneously hopes to remedy its shortcomings by granting increased powers to the European Parliament and allowing qualified majority voting in the Council on the general guidelines for the Member States ' economic policy .
The EU should operate on the basis of intergovernmental cooperation .
Accordingly , unanimity must be the rule when Community-wide measures are decided upon . It should be governments that appoint the president of the ECB , and the Member States must be responsible for shaping national economic and fiscal policy .
In the interests of the continued positive development of the EU , it is necessary for economic and monetary union to be a success .
Especially in the light of the prospective enlargement , it has become even more important to ensure that the structure of EMU is as healthy and as effective as possible .
This can be achieved in part by providing for strict control of the economies of the participating countries .
In my opinion , it is important to ensure that a healthy balance exists between decisions taken at national and supranational level .
Coordination of macroeconomic regulation is essential , but it is important that the EU does not deprive the Member States of the responsibility which they are obliged to live up to as members of the economic and monetary union .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party welcomes much of the Barros Moura report , and the attention it pays to the political consequences of Economic and Monetary Union .
However , we have major reservations about some aspects of the report .
In paragraph one , second indent , we cannot support the implication that social security must be harmonised to make EMU a success .
If the President of the Central Bank is to enjoy the confidence of all Member States , he or she should be appointed by consensus .
We therefore voted against paragraph 8 .
We are concerned about the proposals to extend QMV to the management of economic policy and voted against paragraphs 10 , 16 and 20 .
The proposal for a ' federal-style ' budgetary system in paragraph 18 is also one we oppose .
Paragraph 14 calls for the Euro Council to be enshrined in the Treaty .
This risks institutionally a two-tier Europe in which non-EMU Member States of the EU will be in some sort of second division .
We oppose this .
On the final report , the position of the EPLP was to abstain .
Mr President , we believe that of all the European institutions , the Council of Ministers and , to a greater extent , the European Council , possess the greatest relative legitimacy because people see their elected representatives meet in these institutions at the highest level .
No other European institution has achieved such status , neither the European Parliament , which is still considered to be a lower House , nor , of course , the Commission , which is considered to be a mere collection of civil servants .
In the very interests of Europe , attention must be focused on the most legitimate institution .
Therefore , the Council must be granted the right to propose legislation and exercise control over the Commission , even censure it .
Also , decisions must be taken unanimously for all major issues .
In this respect , the Bourlanges report asserts that ' unanimity is an arrangement fundamentally inappropriate to effective decision-making ' . In the explanatory statement , the rapporteur presents some gloomy calculations showing that with 15 players , the probability of achieving a unanimous position is one in 32 769 .
This is quite clearly wrong , because in today 's Europe , a great many decisions are taken every day by general consensus .
In fact , the system of unanimous voting forces each partner to respect the point of view of others and endeavour to understand that point of view in order to negotiate better .
The decisions taken as a result are more valid because they are based on mutual consensus .
It seems as though this system is perhaps somewhat slower than others that are more authoritarian in nature , but it nonetheless produces good results .
An enlarged Europe with 25 or 30 members should be able to operate in this way .
We also reminded you , through an amendment , that the Luxembourg compromise should be incorporated into all parts of the Treaty .
Unfortunately , that amendment was rejected .
In any case , we have to accept that a Europe with 25 members cannot be monolithic and must obey the model of variable geometry .
All of these measures , including the variable geometry which will make decisions on European cooperation more flexible , will strengthen the link between Europe and its nations .
If the Union is to meet its goal of enlargement , reform will need to extend beyond agricultural policy and the Structural Funds to embrace the whole process of decision-making .
The report is therefore a welcome initiative .
We do not however agree with the rapporteur 's proposals on the common and foreign security policy , the CFSP .
Our view is that the Council plays - and should continue to play - a central role with regard to the EU and the CFSP .
We would refer to the political spirit underpinning Article J.7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , where it is stated that the Council shall be responsible for decisions in all areas affecting the Union 's security .
The rapporteur 's paragraphs 10 , 13 and 14 are not acceptable in the light of this .
We believe that the concept of positive abstention could be of assistance in fulfilling the Petersberg tasks ( humanitarian intervention , and peacekeeping and peacemaking measures ) . In our view , however , political will alone can equip the EU to be more active in crisis management .
The outcome will hinge on how the new decision-making procedures work out in practice . We cannot therefore support paragraphs 30 and 31 .
We support the forward thinking in the Bourlanges report about the way the Council should operate in an enlarged European Union .
In particular , we support his call for better coordination and greater efficiency through increased use of qualified majority voting and , above all , the vital importance of returning to the Community method by re-establishing institutional balance , with a strong Commission endowed with a real power of initiative and political drive .
We have voted against certain points :
The rapporteur 's limited definition of constitutional issues for which unanimity would be maintained ; -Paragraph 33 , which would give qualified decision-making power in budgetary matters to the States contributing most . This is at odds with the Community method and the principle of constitutional equality between the Member States ; -On the weighting of Council votes , anything that goes beyond maintaining the current balances and might therefore encourage the concept of a ' directing board ' of the larger Member States ; -As in the previous points , anything that might predetermine the position of the European Parliament on basic political and constitutional issues before the process of revising the Treaties begins ; -Anything that would make good anti-European propaganda in the coming election campaign.Our final overall vote was determined by the outcome of the votes in the House on these issues - on which , thanks to our initiative and our efforts , the PSE Group has adopted exactly the same approach .
Given that some of these essential concerns of ours - especially the weighting of votes in the Council - have not been sufficiently safeguarded , we have voted against .
Before I make any comments , I should like to congratulate Jean-Louis Bourlanges on the quality of his report and the relevance of his remarks .
Without prejudice to the future of the Community institutions , this text provides a particularly interesting basis for an excellent debate and , moreover , is proof of the maturity of this House , if indeed that still needed to be demonstrated .
As regards the comments made about the Council , I share the rapporteur 's concerns and cannot imagine enlargement ever taking place without there first being a thorough reform of the present decision-making process .
My greatest fear is to see a paralysed European Union and one that is incapable of giving impetus to a clear policy .
Faced with the challenges of the next millennium , we need a Council that is capable of setting out Europe 's central themes .
I also think that the ability to do this is fundamentally incompatible with the present system of the rotating presidency , which is why the question raised by Jean-Louis Bourlanges regarding the Council 's powers is important , even if it is difficult to answer .
As regards the way in which the Council of Ministers currently operates , and following the rapporteur 's example , I am actively campaigning for a rehabilitation of its role : in my view , it must be the Union 's driving force .
Contrary to the report , I would prefer to see the various ministers for European affairs engage in closer coordination with a view to achieving greater consistency in national and European policies .
In accordance with the agenda , the relevant minister should be in charge of the matter .
Lastly , as regards the system of procedures and , more specifically , the general principle of qualified majority voting , I believe that this system should be extended .
I am not opposed to the principle of the double majority , which to me seems more fair and legitimate than the present weighting system .
Indeed , I also think that we need to begin debating the powers of the future European Commission within the context of the Union 's enlargement .
Finally , I should like , once again , to stress that enlargement cannot take place without there first being a change in the present institutional framework .
This prerequisite is not , in my view , designed to hinder the process but , on the contrary , aims to establish the foundations of a political Europe that is able to take responsibility for the choices it makes .
Jean-Louis Bourlanges has quite rigorously conveyed the expectations of our Committee on Institutional Affairs , which has for a long time been calling for a radical reform of the Council 's role , structure and modus operandi .
Without such reform , successive enlargements will paralyse this central decision-making organ .
During the discussion on this report , my concern - in thinking about European citizens - was to extract clear principles from the recitals which will push the European project towards the objectives of our efforts and proposals .
In my opinion , this project is inextricably linked to an increased democratisation based on the principle of majority voting , the political accountability of the authorities , scrutiny on the part of parliamentary institutions and the transparency of decision-making procedures .
The Union must progress towards a model which clearly reveals its dual nature as a union between Member States on the one hand , and as a union between peoples on the other .
In this model , the Commission will become a genuine European executive , with Parliament representing the people and the Council representing the Member States .
This model of Europe will be able to act as an integrated whole , which is both coherent and united , thereby increasing its international influence .
As this is an own-initiative report from the European Parliament , my second concern relates to both the principle behind the report and the time chosen to adopt it .
Generally speaking , I appreciate the efforts made by Jean-Louis Bourlanges and , in particular , his attention to detail in the proposals .
However , I think that until the Amsterdam Treaty is ratified and implemented by the Member States , it would often be appropriate to leave to the future negotiators the job of putting forward specific rules and limiting our role to simply announcing the general guidelines we are to follow .
In this way , we can be justified in our desire to see the double majority adopted in the long term , as this is a guideline that the vast majority of the House can ratify .
But we will not go into detail regarding percentages here , as these should be studied at a later stage .
I was pleased to note that the rapporteur had recommended that the weighting system be maintained until this double majority is adopted .
However , it would perhaps be somewhat restrictive and ill-advised to suggest that current percentages must be maintained .
The most important thing is for the principle of equilibrium to be maintained , chiefly between the larger and smaller countries .
We should by all means clearly specify a guideline - maintaining equilibrium - but try to prevent divisions emerging by beginning a debate on quantification .
As regards qualified majority voting , in the majority of cases , Jean-Louis Bourlanges ' intention to withdraw the resources that belong to the cases that are excluded from this type of majority gives rise to concern .
Parliament already gave its opinion on this matter when it examined the Méndez de Vigo-Tsatsos report - a report which expressed a balanced opinion and which was approved by the broad majority of Members - by making an exception of constitutional and ' semi-constitutional ' matters in terms of qualified majority voting .
In my opinion , it would not be wise to go back on this agreement at the present time , even if the term ' semi-constitutional ' poses a problem .
With regard to the issue of foreign policy , we are waiting for the Amsterdam Treaty to be both ratified and implemented before deciding whether or not to reject the idea of ' positive abstention ' .
I think that opinions on this are divided , even within the groups .
Allow me to briefly sum up the approach that I advocate .
At the present moment in time , we simply express the principles that guide us , which essentially means our desire to keep the balance , but we avoid discussing details that might divide us .
This approach is similar to the ' culture of minorities ' , which leads to respect for others and rejects the abuse of dominant positions .
For a long time , it has been clear to those of us that are in favour of consolidated European integration that successive enlargements have brought European institutions to the edge of paralysis .
Any further enlargements are likely to hamper a system which , in its time , has proved its worth , but which was never designed to function with 15 members and less still with 20 or 25 members .
Before any further accession takes place , European institutions must be reformed , including the Council , which has become tangled up in the growing multiplicity of its organs and takes more and more liberties with procedures that had , however , been determined in the Treaties .
This is clearly an unacceptable situation .
I fully share the rapporteur 's conclusions , particularly where he affirms the need for a thorough reorganisation of the Council 's structure and role , as well as the need to rationalise and consolidate procedures with a view to making it more efficient and transparent .
I lay great emphasis on the role the rapporteur would like to see conferred on both the President of the Commission and the High Representative for the CFSP , instead of and in place of a Council presidency that is forced to concentrate on its conciliation duties .
This effectively implies a new division of tasks that is likely to give fresh impetus to the Union .
In this connection , I fully approve of the idea that qualified majority voting should become the general procedure for decision-making in the Council .
Unanimous voting would then become the exception , its use only justified on the grounds of the seriousness and importance of a few rare decisions .
What is more , I think that any future change to the weighting of votes needs to retain the present principle of the relative over-representation of Member States with small and medium-sized populations .
To conclude , I should like to highlight the quality and importance of the work carried out by the rapporteur in the hope of helping European institutions to cope with the challenges they have yet to meet and overcome .
There are several comments I should like to make in relation to this excellent report .
1.I do not believe that Parliament should get involved in the Council 's internal procedures as the Council has nothing to do with Parliament 's.2.Contrary to the rapporteur 's wishes as set out in paragraph 1 , I believe that we would be ill-advised to make a distinction between the national and legislative role of ministers , as this might lead to calls for the creation of a new institution , such as a senate , which we do not need.3.I do not approve of the high-profile role the rapporteur confers on the European Council , as it is a role that appears to result from a very centralised and radical approach to politics.4.I do not share the rapporteur 's scepticism concerning the rotating presidency .
I cannot accept his proposal to hand over the tasks of Union leadership to the President of the Commission .
On the contrary , I think that the presidency , with its enhanced responsibilities , has a significant effect on the attitude of each Member State towards the process of integration.5.This report once again raises the problem of small and large European countries in the context of the weighting of votes in the Council.I was extremely pleased to note the reasonable and well-thought out approach taken by the rapporteur on this issue and his rejection of the popularity-seeking attitude shown by the larger Member States .
It is an attitude that comes from an unfounded fear of being dwarfed by a coalition of less populated states .
What we need to do is to find a way of preventing a deadlock in the key areas of common legislation and extending the use of qualified majority voting .
However , we must not lose sight of the fundamental principle of the partnership between small , medium and large states , formed on the basis of mutual confidence and equality ; it is a principle that is all too often forgotten today .

Lastly , I would wonder about the status of this text .
If it intends to establish Parliament 's position for subsequent negotiations , it is somewhat premature , but if it aims to launch the debate , it is welcome .
For once , I shall abstain from voting .
I do not oppose the report , because it is both detailed and interesting .
However , if I voted in favour of it , I would feel that I was making a definitive decision about a matter that has yet to be debated and that will surely evolve .
I am disturbed that three quarters of this House should be backing a report which unequivocally advocates such a radical institutional overhaul of the EU , without there having been any proper airing of the issues in the Member States or among ordinary citizens .
The call for effective abolition of the right of veto and the desire to turn the Commission into a quasi-government constitute a huge leap in the direction of political federation , and away from the principle of intergovernmental cooperation as enshrined in the Treaties .
I wish to distance myself resolutely from this new trend .
This report advocates a set of measures which , taken together , would lead to ' more Union ' .
Specialist committees , it is argued , should be abolished , centralising power at Coreper level .
The Commission - and , in particular , its president - would gain power too . It would be entrusted with ' tasks of leadership of the Union ' and would act as the driving force behind foreign and security policy , in conjunction with the CFSP High Representative .
This scenario is quite unacceptable to a non-aligned country .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs is calling for qualified majority voting in the Council to become the general rule , even when contributions to the EU budget are at stake .
I therefore voted against the report .
I believe that the EU should be based on intergovernmental cooperation .
I cannot therefore endorse statements lamenting that there ' must ' still be unanimity when decisions are taken in certain fields .
Nor can I go along with the idea that the Commission should be the only body enjoying the right of initiative .
Not allowing elected representatives to amend or propose legislation constitutes a serious breach of democratic principles .
Finally , I believe that the CFSP High Representative should be Council-based and not transferred to the Commission , as the rapporteur proposes .
We fully endorse the assessment of the Treaty of Amsterdam offered by the rapporteur in paragraph 1 , where he says that the new provisions in many ways constitute a new stage in the development of the European Union .
In this connection , we welcome his reference to the principle of non-discrimination .
It is absolutely vital , in our view , that the Treaty be ratified as soon as possible . We cannot therefore support paragraph 11 .
On paragraph 13 , we feel that it would be inappropriate , in the current circumstances , for the European Parliament to propose that ' police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters ... be defined more broadly ' .
As a result , we are unable to accept paragraph 13 .
The Gutiérrez Díaz report unintentionally shows , right from its title , the impasse the European Union is about to reach , stating that it is aimed at ' strengthening Union institutions with a view to establishing an area of democracy ' .
What more blatant admission could there be that , for federalists , European democracy is now an objective , rather than a path to achieving a goal ?
This is indeed the situation we are faced with because of the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty which is building a European superstate at the cost of a real decline in democracy . On the one hand , it is destroying the national democratic area , excluding national parliaments , and making national law - including constitutional law - subordinate to Community law .
On the other hand , it is proving incapable , for the time being , of establishing the slightest democracy at European level , quite simply because the European people do not exist .
What is more , the transposition of parliamentary procedures into this House only manages to produce joint positions that are all too often artificial and that are only ever accorded secondary importance by the people of Europe .
It would appear that , in spite of all of these diversions , genuine democracy remains the ultimate goal .
I , however , have my doubts about this .
Once antidemocratic institutions that are allowed to be strengthened without impunity are established , a return to control by the citizens can no longer take place spontaneously and painlessly .
In spite of its good intentions , the Gutiérrez Díaz report exacerbates the situation by proposing that all the rights conferred on citizens by membership of the European Union be brought within the ambit of a specific Treaty title on ' citizens ' rights ' .
It is to be noted that this aim appears very similar to that of the German Presidency , which has proposed to create a ' charter of fundamental rights ' for the post-Amsterdam period .
However , this is a guideline that would bypass national democracies even further and restrict their legitimate role as a pillar of the Union .
It is indeed this role that we wish to preserve instead , so that democracy and respect for the people are always present in the life of the Community .
European integration will only progress in the long term if the citizens of the Member States see any interest in it either for themselves or their children .
Therefore , it is , in fact , vital that the Union 's citizens do not perceive the various stages in European integration simply as an accumulation of ethereal texts , but as something tangible and meaningful for all .
The rapporteur is right to lay particular emphasis on the practical provisions that have resulted from the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty .
So surely the free movement of people is thus a tangible way for everyone to assess the reality of the Union in a positive manner .
On the contrary , the insecurity associated with organised crime which , to a certain extent , is also a result of the removal of internal borders , generates a very negative image of European integration in the eyes of our citizens .
In my opinion , it would be irresponsible of us to lead citizens to believe that it is possible to simply remove internal borders in Europe without there being any negative effects , something that the rapporteur does not do .
The free movement of persons naturally goes hand in hand with the creation of an area of security and justice which also enjoys enhanced police and judicial cooperation and respect for transparency and legal certainty .
It therefore falls to the various institutions to act promptly , each in the area of its responsibilities , in order to meet people 's expectations .
I am absolutely convinced that it would be beneficial for everyone if the Council and the Commission were more open in their cooperation with the European Parliament , in these areas , as in many others .
And on this particular point , I fully agree with the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
This resolution , which was unfortunately adopted , includes a series of demands , amongst which are : increased power for the Court of Justice ; the coordination of national employment policies at EU level ; the creation of legal bases for the formulation of social legislation ; legal recognition for transnational or ' European ' political parties , with an entitlement to financial resources from the Union budget .
These are all important issues , but they must be the subject of wide-ranging debate in the Member States before politicians from this Parliament adopt a position .
And this debate - which will need to be held at all levels , in all contexts and in all countries - will have to centre on the major questions . Where is the EU going ?
What are the goals being pursued by the various organisations ?
What do our citizens want ? If we wish to retain people 's faith in us , I believe that the time has come to discuss these matters openly .
I cannot support this report in its entirety .
I believe instead that :
Since the EU ought to be based on intergovernmental cooperation , the employment policies of the Member States should not be coordinated at Community level , although far-reaching cooperation is of course possible .
This applies to legislation on pensions , civil legislation , etc.-Unanimity should be required in the Council on matters of asylum , visas , immigration and free movement.-Schengen should be done away with as soon as possible.-Police cooperation should also cease ; we already have Interpol and it works very well indeed .
Mr President , the Green Group voted against this report because we feel it does not go far enough .
We have succeeded in some areas such as antibiotic resistance - that has been banned - and also on GMOs that cross-breed .
That too has been banned .
Other categories may be added later .
There is a huge amount of confusion over the time limit of 12 years .
Initially we wanted what the Commission proposed , namely seven years .
We then had to propose 12 years because the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which is supposed to protect public health and the environment , actually weakened the proposal and took out the time limit .
So it was essential that we put some amendment in .
We put in 12 years because we felt we would get some sort of consensus for it , which we did .
But it is still unacceptable that the Environment Committee should actually water down a proposal by the Commission .
We are supposed to be there to protect public health .
That is a total contradiction .
The whole issue of fast-track marketing is extremely concerning for the Greens .
Basically it will mean that Member States who have some sort of conscience about environmental protection and public health will be side-lined because the Commission will decide and negotiate with the United States .
Member States who feel it is important to protect the environment and public health will be side-lined .
Already there are Member States within the European Union who have a conscience about this issue , who have serious reservations .
The European Union is now going to set aside their concerns and negotiate as a whole .
So multinational companies who control the EU and the United States are going to control this whole issue .
Those are two of the reasons why we voted against this report .
Having said that , there are some very positive elements in it .
But even on time limits it is quite confusing .
In certain areas we voted for the 12 year time limit but later on there were other votes taken which seemed to confuse the whole issue .
So it is not very clear .
One of the most disappointing things is the fact that the Environment Committee and the Socialist Group , along with the PPE in this House , have collaborated with industries ' interests instead of with the interests of public health and consumer protection and the environment .
History will prove that they were irresponsible in not upholding the rights of the environment and of public health .
Mr President , GMOs provide an extra tool of dependency for nations and people , as is already the case for non-reproducible hybrid seeds and , generally speaking , all patented life forms , because these days , man 's madness is leading him to patent the living world .
Let us not be mistaken , all of this comes under a strategy for world domination , since people are being deprived of the ability to feed themselves .
We must not forget , in passing , that these methods lead to large-scale job losses , and destroy the environment , quality , tastes and biodiversity .
As the next millennium approaches , here is a sample menu the European Commission might serve up : human gene ham , hormone-enriched beefburgers , somatotrophic pasteurised cheese , and genetically modified apples from Chile .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish you all bon appétit !
Mr President , I voted against this , because despite two major successes , namely the ban on marketing those genes that can be made untraceable and the fact that we managed to insist on a certificate of liability insurance , the text on which the House decided at the end of the day is worse than bad .
It represents the demolition of environmental and safety standards .
We have even backtracked from the Commission 's stance .
The fact that we want to limit the marketing of products to a fixed period where there is inadequate monitoring experience relating to the marketing of comparable organisms effectively means that human beings and their environment are being used as guinea pigs , because if there is not enough experience available , these products should not be put on the market at all .
And we have no right to say that they can be marketed for a fixed period .
This is tantamount to saying that we shall see what has happened after twelve years , and only then will we draw the necessary conclusions .
That , I believe , is utterly irresponsible , just like the simplified procedure , the procedure for simultaneous release in several Member States and the Category I classification , because all these organisms fall under Category I. This means in effect that an environmental risk assessment is virtually ruled out .
I find this more than deplorable , along with the fact that no scope has been created for more stringent labelling .
This makes it obvious that we have bowed the knee to industrial interests here .
We shall see what the Council makes of it , and whether we can still pull the fat out of the fire together and initiate something that will really take us forward .
I also hope that industry will finally get down to discussing the risks and that the insurance business stands by what it has said , namely that the risk is too great for it to cover .
I call on all Irish MEPs to protect the Irish environment and peoples ' health by voting to strengthen the Directive on the Release of Genetically Engineered Organisms in the Environment .
This is a huge opportunity to safeguard the future of Ireland 's clean green image of food production .
I am calling on the Irish representatives to come off the fence and , along with other Members of the Parliament , to resist the intimidating lobbying tactics of the gene-industry .
These companies are panicking because their plan to foist their tampered food products on the public in secret has been exposed .
Governments and even the companies themselves are now admitting the dangers of gene crops and food , so the genetic industry is now reverting to type by pressurising governments on the quiet , while trying to fool consumers in public .
The Bowe report will subsequently translate into the legislation to govern the crops grown and the food eaten throughout Europe .
The Green Group is pushing for full and open labelling of GE foods , proper risk assessment and a moratorium on GE crop and food which would be of immense benefit to Irish agriculture .
I call on all Irish MEPs to support socio-economic provisions along with public liability .
One of the most important questions is that of liability and who pays if there is a crisis like BSE .
The insurance companies say that they cannot give cover unless the risks can be quantified .
I am demanding that the Irish Government take steps to ensure the biotech companies quantify the risks to consumers .
As well as resisting the attempts by the multinationals to water down these proposals , we have to eliminate fast-tracking mechanisms which would allow the gene industry to be unaccountable and uncontrollable .
Genetically modified organisms - particularly when used in food crops - have been the topic of intense debate within the Union .
Ethical considerations underlie many of the questions surrounding genetic engineering technology .
Research has run on ahead , with public debate and political regulation lagging well behind .
Ordinary citizens lack the knowledge to oversee developments , and this limits all our scope for reflection and critical appraisal .
This directive is designed to introduce strict rules to govern the deliberate release of GMOs .
The safety of human beings and the environment is put first , which is a good thing .
And many of the amendments tighten up the Commission 's text .
Nonetheless , we feel that a more restrictive stance on the development of GMOs for use in food production should have been adopted from the outset . Equally , there should have been broader discussion of the advantages of this kind of research before we accepted trial applications , followed by the presence of GMOs in our food .
We also believe that consumers have an absolute right to information , which means that they ought to be able to choose whether to buy products containing genetically modified ingredients or substances .
The title of the Commission 's new proposal for a directive regarding the placing of GMOs on the market might mislead people as to its severity : ' directive relating to the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms ' .
And yet , in spite of this somewhat dramatic title , the actual context of the text turns out to be quite vague , to the extent that 177 Members - including those from the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations - out of 439 saw fit to oppose it .
The content of this text is admittedly not completely negative .
For example , the European Parliament has just voted in favour of some interesting amendments that recognise civil liability and force people to take out sufficient liability insurance to cover the losses that might be incurred by persons releasing GMOs .
In spite of this positive point , there are four major faults with the report which have led us to reject it .
First , it confirms that a centralised procedure in Brussels for the release of GMOs is planned for the majority of cases without any safeguard for Member States who would like to adopt more stringent measures .
Therefore , under the auspices of the single market , it appears that underhand plans are afoot which might soon force Member States who do not want anything to do with GMOs to soften their approach towards them against their wishes .
Second , it creates a simplified consent procedure for GMOs which contains a number of references .
Speeding up the procedure of common law like this would mean that cases would not be properly researched , and that is unacceptable .
Third , the European Parliament has extended the time-limit for placing GMOs on the market to 12 years , whereas the Commission itself only proposed a seven-year time-limit .
This undoubtedly signifies a victory for pressure groups who have been lobbying the larger parties in this House , both the Socialists and the Christian Democrats .
Fourth , some high risk GMOs have not been banned with sufficient force .
Like the Green Group , we would like to see three categories of GMOs prevented from being placed on the market : GMOs with antibiotic resistant genes ; GMOs with toxins that are dangerous for useful fauna ; and GMOs likely to crossbreed with similar wild or cultivated species .
Instead of voting for an outright ban , Parliament has voted in favour of some very weak amendments , while claiming that certain measures need to be taken to prevent the transfer of genes from these GMOs .
Overall , this proposal for a directive provides a general view of the direction in which European integration is currently heading : it is taking power away from the Member States and centralising it in Brussels under the pretext of being able to defend the people better .
However , once the people have been stripped of their powers , the central decision-makers , who are in the driving seat , are themselves not monitored by anyone and do what they like .
In the end , we find ourselves in a no-win situation , at the mercy of forces that are based in Brussels far more than anywhere else .
Questions concerning genetically modified products loom larger every day .
Neither politicians nor scientists can foresee the consequences for man and nature .
It is therefore unforgivable , as things stand , to be giving the green light to genetically modified products ; future generations may well have to pay dearly for our mistakes .
The Environment Committee has produced a good piece of work , endeavouring to make the best of the situation .
Many of the amendments were tabled in a similar spirit .
Sadly , Parliament did not vote in favour of some of the most important ones , however , including the right of Member States to say ' no ' ( a ' black list ' ) and more stringent labelling requirements .
Along with the rest of the Green Group , I therefore voted against the report .
Future employment in Europe largely depends on the successful development of biotechnology .
This is why it is important that European firms and research institutes should be able to operate in the same way as their partners in America and Japan .
Only then will they be able to survive against cut-throat competition worldwide .
The industry needs a clear and viable legislative framework , and it goes without saying that great care is needed in this new field .
Many of today 's amendments to the Commission proposal for the release of genetically engineered organisms in the environment would result in excessively restrictive legislation for the biotechnology sector , putting the food industry and the EU 's competitive position at a disadvantage compared with the US .
The legislation would also have an impact in the Netherlands , where biotechnology has become one of the country 's leading sectors , and this is why the VVD delegation has departed from the ELDR Group 's position by voting against a number of amendments , including those tabled by Mrs Dybkjaer and Mr Eisma .
The VVD continues to demand an unambiguous , viable and straightforward European legislative framework with simplified procedures for the biotechnology sector .
The position of our group regarding the Commission 's communication on biotechnology favours some degree of development in this sunrise industry , while taking great care to anticipate potential drifts .
With this in mind , strict labelling procedures must be introduced to enable genetically engineered products to be monitored effectively .
During the various debates we have had on genetically modified organisms , industrialists have persistently stated that the release of such organisms is under control .
This is why our group supported the urgent request calling on the Commission to introduce specific rules relating to the liability of the various operators .
The BSE crisis has highlighted the dangers of focusing all research on extremely high levels of agricultural production and the need to provide for a genuinely independent monitoring system .
To this end , we supported the plan to create a central scientific committee , but we must ensure that the proper procedures are developed so that the mistakes that were made during the mad cow crisis are not repeated .
To conclude , our group places much emphasis on the need to retain the precautionary principle so as to guarantee both consumer and environmental protection .
The citizens of Europe will only fully accept biotechnology if they receive genuine assurances about its safety .
It takes 15 years for experiments to be carried out on medicines before they can be placed on the market .
However , here we are faced with the prospect of GMOs being released into the environment after only three years of piecemeal experiments and with no extra time allotted for assessing their direct or indirect effects on the environment and health .
In this regard , we must bear in mind the answer given by the Commissioner for Industrial Affairs when asked if he thought that industrialists and politicians were not playing the sorcerer 's apprentice once again .
Mr Bangemann replied , ' We must not create metaphysical problems with GMOs ; placing them on the market will prove their worth ' .
In other words , in the Commission 's view , the best guinea pigs are still the consumers , to the extent that they are not even granted the right to correct information on the goods they are buying as labelling procedures are so lax .
They are not even granted the freedom of choice .
The report mentions on page 33 that genetically modified crops present ' few risks ' , but what does this decidedly unscientific term actually mean ?
We should remember that the nuclear power station at Chernobyl was , until April 1986 , said to have presented ' few risks ' .
According to Professor Cabrol , we should not ban GMO production in Europe and thus let the Americans have a monopoly on GMO products .
This is an interesting comment , but his conclusions are surprising since if the Americans are allowed to export products that have not been fully tested to Europe , the best response is not for us to produce similar products ourselves .
The only acceptable answer for the sake of public health is to ban the import of such products altogether .
This is the logical application of a simple , but fundamental , principle , namely , the precautionary principle .
How can we explain the European Commission 's submission in the face of American agri-industrial lobbies ?
GMOs , sterile hybrid seeds , the patenting of life forms , and so on , are all perhaps part of a more global strategy concerning people 's and nations ' dependency on food .
As one American secretary of state said , food is the best weapon of the future .
Mr President , while I support technological progress , I am voting in favour of this report today because I believe that my constituents should be protected from the excesses of US biotechnology firms , like Monsanto , eager only to turn a quick profit .
All genetically modified foods must be clearly labelled to allow consumers make an informed choice when feeding their families and loved ones .
Recent advances in bio-technology were first brought home to us by British scientists when they produced Dolly the Sheep - the world 's first genetically-cloned sheep .
And , with proper safeguards , biotechnology has the potential to help mankind defeat world hunger and disease .
Without proper safeguards , however , the consequences of altering the order of nature are unthinkable .
Safety must always come first .
The Labour Government has proven its commitment to the welfare of consumers by creating the FSA ( Food Standards Agency ) .
Its Tory predecessors , in contrast , were committed only to the welfare of the food industry and created BSE .
Only Labour will stand up for ordinary people against Monsanto 's madness and ensure that the food on our plates is safe to eat .
The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0126 / 99 by Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on presidential elections in Kazakhstan ; -B4-0161 / 99 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the ARE Group , on presidential elections in Kazakhstan ; -B4-0184 / 99 by Mrs Schroedter and Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the V Group , on violation of international human rights standards in Kazakhstan ; -B4-0186 / 99 by Mr Swoboda and Mrs Hoff , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the presidential elections in Kazakhstan ; -B4-0196 / 99 by Mrs Castellina and Mrs Sornosa Martínez , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on presidential elections in Kazakhstan ; -B4-0205 / 99 by Mr von Habsburg , on behalf of the PPE Group , on presidential elections in the Republic of Kazakhstan .
Madam President , the presidential elections in Kazakhstan on 10 January were a slap in the face for the partnership and cooperation agreement that the Union signed with that country .
Democracy and human rights are now a fundamental element of these agreements , but the conditions under which the elections were held did not correspond to the promises which the Kazakh Government made .
The OSCE rightly refused to give the elections a seal of legitimacy , and the Union too must also - and not for the first time - clearly link the continuation of cooperation with progress in democratisation .
President Nazarbayev must move quickly to take corrective measures , and we must hope that he has the means to do so .
The suspension of cooperation must be a real option if he cannot guarantee that the forthcoming elections will be truly democratic .
I know that this is easy to say here in the House , but if we do not take this approach with a country like this , with which we have signed agreements , then we are in nowhere country .
In the meantime , we must step up cooperation with social organisations and the free press to promote democracy in Kazakhstan .
As I have said , this is not a task we are setting ourselves , it is a request we are making to the Kazakh Government .
Madam President , it is essential that we work for consolidation of the democratisation process in Kazakhstan , ensuring that developments take place in the interest of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
The partnership agreement signed with the EU stipulates that Kazakhstan must comply with OSCE rules for free and fair elections .
The serious crimes committed in connection with the presidential elections in January deserve firm condemnation .
We do not wish to see a repeat performance , with infringements of civil liberties , when elections are held later this year .
Freedom of the press and the right of individuals to stand as candidates are fundamental elements of democratic elections .
I would like to use this opportunity to ask the Commission what steps it intends to take in order to ensure that the existing partnership and cooperation agreement with Kazakhstan is fully implemented . And how does the Commission plan to assist in strengthening the faltering democratisation process there ?
We must help to ensure that democracy fares better than it did at the ill-fated presidential elections in January .
Madam President , on behalf of my Group , I wish to say how profoundly disappointed we were in the conduct of the recent presidential elections in Kazakhstan .
It is clear that these elections did not conform to OSCE standards for free and fair elections which are part of the commitments entered into with the signing of the partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Kazakhstan .
This House should make it absolutely clear to President Nazarbayev , as both Mr Bertens and Mr Holm have said , that implementation of the PCA will depend on progress with the democratisation process and full respect for human rights , especially in the forthcoming local and parliamentary elections .
At the same time the Commission must monitor the human rights situation in Kazakhstan closely and report back to this House on progress , or the lack of it .
Kazakhstan is a vast country with great economic and political potential .
It should not allow that potential to be stymied by its failure to guarantee civil and human rights .
Madam President , I believe that when we talk about Kazakhstan , we often tend to wag the finger at the Kazakhs and tell them that they ought to start functioning as a perfect democracy with immediate effect .
In so doing , we forget that Kazakhstan has only been a free country for ten years and it has actually done remarkably well to come as far as it has done in that time , not to mention the fact that Kazakhstan is a very important partner for us in that region , a partner which , I am glad to say , has freed itself of at least some of the shackles of Russian rule .
We should show a great deal more understanding towards the Kazakhs , as well as remembering that we did not become perfect democracies overnight ; we too required a lengthy development process .
So we should exercise the same patience with the Kazakhs that we keep demanding for ourselves .
The only reason why I wanted to say that is that I believe we ought not to forget , in our dialogue with Kazakhstan , how important this country is , not only for our own future but also for that of the entire region .
We should therefore take due account of this important role and show patience ; of course , we should keep telling them how to improve , but without that unbearably schoolmasterly tone which we are all too often inclined to adopt .
After all , we must not forget that the Kazakhs are a people with a great history of which they have reason to be proud ; if we act like the world 's teacher , they will react in a way that neither benefits us nor promotes the achievement of our objective .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as chairman of Parliament 's delegation for relations with Kazakhstan and other countries in Central Asia , I closely followed the news we received about the progress of the presidential elections held in Kazakhstan on 10 January .
Unfortunately , this news was not as encouraging as we had hoped as regards the observance of essential and indispensable democratic standards .
Kazakhstan is an important country surrounded by other important countries - Uzbekistan , Turkmenistan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan and even Mongolia - all of which are of enormous interest to the European Union . This is due not only to their significant potential in terms of natural resources - natural gas , oil , gold , wool - but because the European Union is the global power that at this moment in time can contribute most to resolving the deficits that oppress these countries most after almost a century of Soviet influence : the democratic deficit , the human rights deficit , and the deficit in terms of learning how to establish themselves in a free market economy .
That is why this resolution comes at just the right time . All it does is to draw attention to the democratic safeguard clause in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Kazakhstan .
It is also timely in that free elections are going to be held in Kazakhstan this year .
However , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with Mr von Habsburg .
I would like to end by warning you that this resolution must be seen more as a statement of help and understanding than as a reproach .
We cannot expect to see perfect results immediately .
What we really want is for the process of democratisation to continue .
We want it to progress as quickly as possible , to continue and to be free of obstacles .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the points that have been made about the need to see Kazakhstan in a historical perspective and about the importance of Kazakhstan to us and in the region and also about the fact that we have to encourage Kazakhstan to move further , to say when things have gone wrong but to do it in the right way .
The resolutions are based in part on the statement made on 20 January by the presidency on behalf of the European Union .
It was clear ahead of the presidential elections that the way in which they were to be conducted fell short of OSCE standards , and that is why the OSCE did not send a full monitoring mission , nor did the EU participate .
I also agree with the preliminary statement issued by the OSCE Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights that we have a basis for important further cooperation with Kazakhstan in these fields .
President Nazarbayev announced last October a wide-ranging programme aimed at the gradual democratisation of Kazakh society .
The Kazakh Government has assured us that it intends to cooperate with the OSCE and the EU in implementing this programme , in particular regarding the law on parliamentary elections which will be held in the course of this year .
I expect the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Kazakhstan to enter into force in the coming months .
The first cooperation Council has already been scheduled for July , and it is the Council 's intention to continue the exchanges of view on the democratisation process and to incorporate these into the political dialogue foreseen in the PCA .
The European Parliament will also open a direct dialogue on these issues with members of the Kazakh parliament through the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee which is one of the three institutions which will oversee the PCA .
Despite the flaws and irregularities which marred the presidential elections , the atmosphere in Kazakhstan remains relatively liberal .
These elections were the first in the history of the country to be contested by a number of candidates .
I am firmly of the view that the only way to improve the situation is through constant patient work on the part of the EU and other donors and international organisations .
The PCA offers us the basis for this .
Moreover , we are about to launch a major TACIS project to support the entry into force of the PCA and you will recall that the PCA incorporates by reference the principles set out in the OSCE documents .
Commissioner van den Broek intends to visit Kazakhstan shortly , and we will reiterate our determination to implement the principles we have jointly subscribed to and our readiness to assist with the further development of democratic institutions and the rule of law .
The Commission will keep Parliament informed of developments in Kazakhstan and other countries of the region with regard to the implementation of our agreements .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0165 / 99 by Mr Fassa and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the war between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0182 / 99 by Mr Telkämper , Mrs Aelvoet , Mr Schörling and Mr Tamino , on behalf of the V Group , on the new outbreak of hostilities between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0195 / 99 by Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0210 / 99 by Mr Hory , Mr Castagnède and Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea .
Madam President , after the cease-fire , the senseless war between Ethiopia and Eritrea has broken out once again .
I really wonder whether we will ever manage to make the two sides realise that there can only be losers here .
The issue now is who actually started the fighting - a fratricidal struggle between two obstinate leaders who six years ago lived in one country .
Both sides claim land on the basis of old colonial maps , and both are too stubborn even to talk to the peace negotiators and listen to what they have to say .
There are mutual recriminations , with each accusing the other of having started the trouble .
All the efforts of the UN , IGAD and the OAU have come to nothing , but I hope that they will not give up .
International pressure must be brought to bear on both sides to bring about a new cease-fire for a start .
Eritrea and Ethiopia must realise that they have a great deal to lose if Lomé cooperation is suspended .
Both sides will eventually come back to the peace proposals put forward by the OAU , or at least I hope they will .
I also hope that they will come to their senses quickly .
The longer it takes them to realise that there can be no military solution to this conflict , the more enormous will be the cost .
The disastrous effect that this is having on the people and the economy of both countries is indescribable .
I can tell you this from first hand experience , as I spent some time there when both countries were still united .
I have to say that the situation in this area of Africa deserves to be given our fullest attention .
Madam President , may I make an initial remark outside my allotted speaking time .
At our last part-session , we said that the presidency of the Council should attend these debates .
It would be good if that were the case , but unfortunately I see nobody from the presidency .
Perhaps you could arrange that for next time through the Bureau .
On the border between Ethiopa and Eritrea , serious conflicts occurred between those two countries in May and June of last year .
There were battles in which thousands died ; in June 1998 a moratorium was signed , but hostilities have broken out again .
We have a frontier conflict here which the population certainly does not want .
International conciliation efforts appear to have failed .
Nevertheless , we should not stop trying to achieve peace in that region , because peace will never be achieved there by military means .
It is right to say that we shall have to exert pressure on both countries .
That is why it is also right to threaten them with suspension of support under the Lomé Convention and of development aid from the European Union and its Member States .
But this pressure may not be enough .
Perhaps it would also be important and appropriate - and we saw this when we met the two ambassadors in the Committee on Development and Cooperation and in the Executive of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly - for us to draw up a development plan , subject to both sides withdrawing their military hardware , to their showing willingness to negotiate , and to their being prepared to develop democracy and the rule of law and to grant reciprocal inspection rights . We would then deliver a development plan and would step up the current level of development aid as an initial measure .
Madam President , sadly what we all feared has happened . It was widely predicted .
Armed conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea has broken out again with unprecedented violence .
Although the information reaching us is very patchy , it is clear that there have already been thousands of victims , military and civilian , and the conflict , which apparently flared up after a small border problem , is threatening to become one of the bloodiest wars in the history of Africa .
In this Parliament we have always been concerned about relations and tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea , and Parliament 's Committee on Development and Cooperation succeeded in getting the ambassadors from both countries to attend several meetings it organised - something which no-one else has managed to do .
Today we call on the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to cease hostilities immediately .
We also call for absolute compliance with the moratorium on air raids , which has already been violated , unfortunately .
The leaders of the two countries of the Horn of Africa now have the historic responsibility of choosing between peace and even worse crimes against their peoples .
The OAU proposal for an agreement between the two countries must be accepted by both parties without further delay , before the situation on the ground renders it obsolete .
All arms supplies and military assistance to the two warring sides must immediately cease , as called for yesterday by the United Nations Security Council .
The European Union must join the Organisation for African Unity in applying intense pressure and offering political and diplomatic mediation , which has been totally inadequate in the last few months .
The United States of America might have been expected to take on the task over the last few months , but it has proved quite incapable of doing so .
So we call on the Council to take a clear and strong political initiative along these lines , and on the Commission to ensure that the thousands of refugees and victims of the conflict receive the maximum humanitarian assistance wherever possible .
Madam President , alas the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea has a long history , but so have human rights abuses in Ethiopia , as all of us know only too well .
One can but continue to deplore the fact that international mediation efforts have failed to secure a peaceful settlement , and the two countries must surely share the blame .
The double tragedy is that the population of the two countries is poverty-stricken and suffering in so many ways .
This makes it all the more difficult to link development aid and Lomé-related benefits .
But it may be that a hard line will need to be taken by the EU .
Clearly , the OAU and the UN have a continuing role to play , but is it out of the question for the ACP-EU Joint Assembly to play a key role as well in trying to resolve this desperate situation ?
Madam President , in yesterday 's International Herald Tribune , the following appeared in the section ' News from 50 years ago ' .
I will quote it in English and hope that the interpreters can follow me : ' 1949 : Eritrea 's fate .
Rome . Foreign Minister Sforza said that the interests of three powers - Great Britain , Italy and Ethiopia - are involved in the problem of Eritrea , former Italian African colony .
Count Sforza expressed the hope that Eritrea would not be annexed to Ethiopia .
The attempt to reconcile these interests at the expense of Eritrea by territorial partition recalls the old scramble for Africa .
Count Sforza said it was repugnant .
He said Eritrea could achieve independence after a period of trusteeship administration . ' End of quotation .
Fifty years later , on 11 February 1999 , the headline in the International Herald Tribune reads ' Addis Ababa rules out cease-fire in border war ' .
So that is that !
The article goes on to say that Washington is particularly angry that Antonovs and Migs are being used to bombard Eritrean territory .
This is exactly what Ethiopia has been doing for some time , arrogantly disregarding all advice or agreements , simply because it enjoys political support in the world .
However , I think that we cannot allow this to continue : we need to adopt a rather more critical approach .
Ethiopia 's diplomatic circles may be bombarding us with paper to try to convince us that its cause is just , as it has every right to do , but at the same time various issues relating to the border war and attacks on the Oromos - the largest minority in the area , some of whom have been imprisoned - are being brushed under the carpet .
Our urgent resolution today is a desperate attempt by the European Parliament to prevent the war in the Horn of Africa from escalating and further destabilising the region , and it even calls for more humanitarian aid .
Quite honestly , I think that we should be talking about stopping financial aid , since it is obviously being used to buy Antonovs and Migs .
We all know that Russia will not supply on credit , because it needs cash in hand .
If it appears that Eritrea too is not prepared to listen to what we say , then it should suffer the same fate .
Although the tone of our resolution is very mild and no mention is actually made of stopping financial aid , I would like to ask Commissioner Brittan what he thinks about this , because it is just a waste of money , like in Angola .
Madam President , after the madness of the red dictator Menghistu and the tribal hatreds of the Yemen , the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea places the Horn of Africa centre stage again , while Europe looks on with nothing but words to offer .
Antagonism which could have been resolved through democratic dialogue has instead deteriorated into a tragic situation inflamed by ethnic claims .
The Africans therefore need to consolidate still delicate regional balances by combining as much of their authority as possible , and in particular by involving civil society so as to put the necessary pressure on the governments involved to find a peaceful solution to the conflict .
This is where Europe should intervene , speaking one language : the language of development aid , guided and determined by the drive to achieve political and social stability , which remains the only means of preventing conflicts and reducing the number of zones at risk .
Madam President , in the resolution we are discussing today , great importance attaches to paragraph 6 , which actually says everything .
That is where we say precisely what is to be done , namely that the payments made by the European Union to Ethiopia and Eritrea should be linked to both countries ' compliance with certain conditions .
I believe that this is enormously important if we bear in mind on the one hand that the war which we now experiencing between Ethiopia and Eritrea was entirely foreseeable , and on the other hand that the settlement of this conflict will surely be frustrated by a real lack of democracy in both countries .
To my mind , it is a very serious problem when I see , for instance , that newspapers in Ethiopia , which are naturally controlled by the government , are even now reporting continuously on the amounts of money they have already amassed for the next ' election campaign ' .
I have to say quite honestly that I fear the campaign chest contains some money which our taxpayers might have provided , whereas the opposition has to try desperately to raise funds abroad in order to conduct its election campaign , in order to establish itself as a proper opposition , and the resources for that are non-existent .
This is extremely regrettable , and I very much hope that the appropriate steps will be taken within the European Union to ensure that the funds we provide are used for legitimate purposes .
I am sure the Commissioner will agree with that .
We have to call on both sides to cease all hostilities and stop fighting because clearly negotiation is the only way to solve the problem .
The Commission has underlined on several occasions , to both governments , the need to resolve and settle the conflict by peaceful means alone .
A military option or so-called solution will entail - and is already entailing - enormous human suffering and loss .
We will continue to support all efforts aimed at peaceful resolution of the conflict , in particular the OAU efforts and proposals .
We will continue to put the maximum pressure on both parties , are willing to take any action needed to help find a solution and are currently examining what could be done .
I listened with interest to Mr Moorhouse 's suggestion that the EU / ACP Joint Assembly could play a role , and will draw that to the attention of my colleagues dealing on a more day-to-day basis with this issue .
As regards the humanitarian situation the Commission is providing humanitarian assistance to both countries and has responded to appeals from both to assist the displaced population in the area of conflict .
The Commission has allocated EUR 1 790 000 to two NGOs : Norwegian Church Aid and the Lutheran World Foundation for food and non-food assistance to persons affected by the conflict in Eritrea .
In Ethiopia the Commission has allotted EUR 1 890 000 through CISP , an Italian NGO , also for food and non-food assistance .
Furthermore , EUR 300 000 was approved for ICRC activities in Ethiopia and in Eritrea .
The Commission will continue to monitor closely the situation and is ready to mobilise additional resources if needed .
I should like to comment on the wider point that has been raised .
The Commission is preparing a communication to the Council on cooperation with ACP countries involved in armed conflicts .
In the meantime , in the absence of a European Union position on the matter , the Commission does not think it should take unilateral and isolated measures in the case of this conflict .
But the Commission has decided to allocate structural adjustment programme funds in smaller tranches and link further disbursements to a periodic review of the conflict and its possible impact on public spending , particularly in the social sectors .
Moreover , when releasing financial assistance to countries in conflict , the Commission will send a letter to the head of state or government requesting assurances that no funds are diverted for belligerent purposes .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Greg Summers
B4-0188 / 99 by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the death penalty against Greg Summers - Texas , USA ; Leonard Peltier
B4-0169 / 99 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the case of Mr Peltier in the United States ; -B4-0175 / 99 by Mr Weber , Mrs Ewing and Mrs Maes , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the detention of Mr Leonard Peltier in the United States and refusal of proper medical treatment ; -B4-0179 / 99 by Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mrs Schroedter and Mr Kerr , on behalf of the V Group , on Leonard Peltier ; -B4-0199 / 99 by Mrs Pailler , Mr Coates , Mr Manisco , Mr Vinci , Mrs Sierra González , Mrs Ojala , Mrs Eriksson , Mr Alavanos , Mr Novo and Mr Ephremidis , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the case of Leonard Peltier ; Religious freedom
B4-0131 / 99 by Mrs Lenz , on behalf of the PPE Group , on religious persecution , xenophobia and racism ; -B4-0132 / 99 by Mr van Dam , on behalf of the I-EDN Group , on anti-Christian violence in India ; -B4-0189 / 99 by Mr Hallam , on behalf of the PSE Group , on anti-Christian violence in India.Greg Summers
Madam President , it is a sad fact that the European Parliament is once again having to draw attention to terrible events that are taking place in a so-called civilised country .
I am referring here to the use of capital punishment in the United States of America .
Despite the horror that we have expressed in a number of urgent resolutions , a horror that we share with many human rights organisations all over the world , with the churches and with Amnesty International , the number of people being sentenced to death in the United States is increasing , often because their trials are not conducted with due care .
This afternoon we are calling for attention to be given to the case of forty-year-old Greg Summers who , although innocent , has been sitting for years on death row in the Alace Unit in Texas waiting for the lethal injection that is shortly to end his life .
Our resolution calls on the judicial authorities at least to examine the application for a review of his case .
We also call on the United States , and in particular the authorities of the State of Texas , to abolish the death penalty immediately and to sign up to a worldwide moratorium on the execution of death sentences .
Finally , there are a number of amendments calling for attention to be given to other similar cases , and it goes without saying that we will vote for them .
Madam President , the European Parliament has always rejected the death penalty outright on humanitarian grounds .
Once again , circumstances compel us to appeal to the government of a civilised nation , the United States of America , not to carry out a death sentence . This time we are appealing on behalf of Greg Summers .
He has always protested his innocence .
There are doubts as to whether the trial was properly conducted .
An appeal was lodged with the competent court in Texas , and there has still been no response to it .
For that reason , our first request to the United States and the State of Texas is that this appeal should be considered .
Secondly , we call on them to refrain in principle from carrying out death sentences , commuting them instead to life imprisonment or other custodial sentences . Thirdly , we call for them to join in a worldwide moratorium on the death penalty , and we call on the institutions of the EU to pass this on to the relevant authorities .
Let me turn to our group 's amendments on two cases involving Germans - the brothers Karl and Walter LaGrand , who have been sentenced to death in Arizona .
This would be the first time since the Second World War that Germans were sentenced to death and executed .
We call on the United States not to carry out their death sentences , and we hope that these amendments will be incorporated into today 's resolution .
In both cases , we propose that the death sentences be commuted to life imprisonment or another appropriate custodial sentence .
Leonard Peltier
Leonard Peltier has been sitting in gaol for 23 years now , and the American authorities have finally admitted that he was wrongly imprisoned .
It is absolutely incredible , and it is something the House should not just criticise but condemn .
I hope that his case will be reviewed very quickly , and it would appear appropriate that a pardon should be granted .
Human rights must be defended all over the world , it is as simple as that .
Partly as a result of his treatment in prison Mr Peltier 's health has visibly declined , but he is still being denied appropriate medical treatment for reasons which no one will explain .
Like anyone else , this man deserves proper medical treatment in hospital , the prison hospital if necessary .
A few months ago , I put a number of questions to the Council here in the House about the Peltier case , but the President-in-Office said that he did not think it necessary to take action , and it was not in his power to do so .
I would now urge the Commission to take the case up , and I think that the Union as a whole should at least enter into discussions with the United States about its human rights policy .
Madam President , during December 's part-session , the American delegation led by Angela Davis , who had come to prevent Mumia Abu-Jamal from being executed , alerted us to the fate of Leonard Peltier .
I can still remember the alarming remarks made by their spokesperson , Bobby Castillo , who had experienced American prisons .
As a leader of the American Indian Movement , Leonard Peltier has played and continues to play a major role in the defence of the rights of indigenous people .
Following the events of June 1975 , in the Pine Ridge reserve , South Dakota , he was given two life sentences , although no proof of his guilt was ever furnished , and despite the fact that he had been illegally extradited from Canada .
After 23 years in prison , his health has deteriorated dramatically and , although he permanently suffers as a result of complications from an operation , the prison 's management deny him access to adequate treatment in a specialised hospital .
Amnesty International , the IFHR and France Liberté have launched a new campaign to defend Leonard Peltier and fight the unacceptable number of human rights violations in the United States .
Mumia Abu-Jamal , who is still on death row , has sent him a message of support .
We should , for our part , once again participate in this action and ensure that public opinion is alerted throughout Europe .
If Parliament adopts the resolution cosigned by my group , it will be sending a clear message to the American authorities and prison directors .
Leonard Peltier must be given the chance to get better and receive the appropriate medical treatment in the clinic of his choice .
He must be released from prison so that he can take up his legitimate struggle for the defense of the rights of the indigenous people that the United States continues to scorn .
Madam President , I have always advocated the principle whereby the European Union must first of all put its own house in order before giving human rights lessons the world over .
The latest report on human rights in the European Union shows that we are far from being beyond reproach in this area .
In other words , if I take the floor today to speak about the case of Leonard Peltier , it is because all other possible avenues have genuinely been exhausted and time is short , given the worrying state of Mr Peltier 's health .
There are , in fact , two issues to our message to the United States . The first concerns the procedures used that resulted in Leonard Peltier 's sentence , and the second concerns the prison authorities ' refusal to let him receive the appropriate medical treatment .
We must remember that Amnesty International expressly admitted that it had reservations about the procedures that lead to Mr Peltier 's sentence and that the government authorities themselves admit to the vagueness that surrounded the sentence .
Moreover , the trial revealed the unusual methods used during the case 's preparation , as my colleagues previously mentioned .
These facts should have lead to a retrial , but this case confirms that no court , be it American or European , will easily reopen a trial on which a sentence has already been passed .
Herein lies a future struggle .
However , as the previous speaker pointed out , the most incomprehensible and intolerable aspect of this case is the refusal of the American authorities to let Mr Peltier , whose health has considerably deteriorated , receive the medical attention he needs .
The fact that prison facilities are unable to treat his condition is completely unacceptable as an argument to deny him the treatment he needs .
Solutions do exist and have already been put forward .
The refusal of the prison authorities to let him receive such treatment amounts to a blatant violation of human rights and of the commitments made by the United States .
This is why our group will support the call for appropriate treatment and the request to grant Mr Peltier clemency .
Madam President , there is an annual pantomime that always sends something of a shiver down my spine or at least leaves me open-mouthed in amazement , and that is the occasion when the President of the United States delivers his address on the state of the nation and the world .
All the countries of the world are given plus and minus points .
Words of praise and censure are pronounced .
What it boils down to is that the whole world has to submit to American values and ideals .
I believe it is very important to do what Parliament is doing today , to hold a mirror in front of the Americans and to tell them that , if they must try to force their values on everyone else , they should also acknowledge that there are sections of the population of their own country - some of them native Americans - who may have other ideals in some respects , a different bond with their own country , with their own native soil , than the Americans who arrived later .
In this situation , it is very useful for us to keep returning to the specific case of Leonard Peltier .
This is a case that has attracted international attention .
There is an international Peltier Committee , of which I , for example , am a member and which has been dealing with the case for many years .
I consider it particularly important that the European Parliament too has adopted a resolution calling for the case of Leonard Peltier to be placed on the agenda of the next talks between the delegation for relations with the United States and its American counterparts , in order to expose something of the hypocrisy that has so often dominated the US line of argument in this matter .
Peltier has now been kept in prison for 23 years under exceedingly dubious circumstances .
He is in very poor health .
He has frequently been transferred , which has happened whenever public pressure has mounted and has become too great a burden for the prison in which he was accommodated .
This just goes to show that not only the US population but also the international community are really unwilling to accept such injustice from a country that is constantly preaching justice .
Madam President , it is with a feeling of dismay and deep anguish that we again raise our voices on behalf of Leonard Peltier , languishing in an American jail for 23 years for crimes he did not commit and after a court case which cast serious doubt on the administration of justice in the United States of America .
Representative , Joe Kennedy , the son of the martyred President , recently said : ' This government has the moral duty to correct this injustice .
Seeing that justice is upheld for Leonard Peltier would amount to a major act of reconciliation for past injustice done to the native American peoples . '
The anguish of millions of people who follow this case increases by the day with the rapid deterioration of his health .
After an egregious case of medical malpractice in prison hospital , Peltier is suffering a fibrosis of the masseter muscles and ankylosis of the mandibular joint .
That means that he cannot eat - that his mouth cannot be opened any more .
The United States Bureau of Prisons still denies his request to be operated on by proper surgeons .
Enough is enough .
In the name of humanity we urge the United States Administration to take prompt care of its native son .
We ask President Clinton to use his powers of pardon to release Leonard from prison immediately .
Madam President , half an hour ago , in the discussion on Kazakhstan , I said that we should not go around teaching the world how to behave .
This time , however , it is quite a different matter , because we are now dealing with those who constantly seek to lecture us , as Mr Habsburg-Lothringen was saying before . In other words , we do have the right in this instance to say that things simply cannot go on like this .
The whole process , which I have studied very closely , raises all sorts of doubts .
Not a single piece of conclusive evidence was brought against Peltier .
The way in which the American judiciary dispensed so-called justice in this case is simply indefensible for a highly civilised country .
We should therefore point out to our American friends , to whom , of course , we owe a huge debt of gratitude , that something has to be done about Peltier .
To deprive a person of 23 years of his life , to cast an Indian into prison and give him no opportunities to move about , to give him literally not a single moment of freedom and to leave him languishing in uncertainty is utterly indefensible .
Having followed the history of the Peltier case , I would almost make so bold as to say that , even if he had done something , which I do not believe , he would already have paid twice over for everything that happened .
If we are convinced that he is innocent into the bargain , that is all the more reason for us to make every effort to ensure that the Americans make justice prevail in their country too - and if not justice , then at least clemency .
Madam President , I would like to echo the sentiments of Mr von Habsburg .
Truly this is a cross-party approach which we must take to the American authorities and insist that they respond to the many pleas which have been made for clemency on behalf of Leonard Peltier .
It really is ironic that at a time when the future of the American President himself is being decided by Congress - on an issue which bears very little similarity to the case against Leonard Peltier - neither he nor , in fact , his predecessors , have responded to the pleas of clemency made and awaiting a response for the last 6-7 years .
Therefore we in this Parliament should insist that when Mr Clinton resumes work , presuming he is not impeached , this is an issue which he should address as a matter of urgency .
It is an issue which symbolises the treatment of American indigenous peoples , a matter very dear to the heart of this Parliament and I hope that we adopt the resolution .
Religious freedom
Madam President , if the European Parliament resolves today to speak out against the increasingly frequent and violent infringements of religious freedom , such a resolution will be a token of our great concern .
Freedom of religious observance is a sign of respect , not only for a very profound sense of devotion within many people but also for freedom of expression and association , and hence for a significant part of the corpus of human rights .
We are well aware that the violation of religious freedom can have many different causes .
We also know that these waves of persecution are not always unleashed by governments .
The causes vary from one country to another .
There are power struggles for the control of sources of raw materials and water , as in the Sudan , where an armed majority is let loose on a large minority ; hatred , envy and social and political tension can focus on ethnic groups , as in India and Pakistan and now in Indonesia too .
There are intolerant state religions , as in Iran , Afghanistan and other countries ; intolerance can also come from adherents of non-established religions .
It would be impossible to list all the countries involved .
The toleration of these persecutions and the forms they take cause us grave concern .
They range from horrific murders , as in the case of the Australian missionary Graham Staines and his two children in India , to arrests , torture and the disappearance of individuals ; they extend to trials on trumped-up charges .
Extremism , xenophobia and racism often rear their ugly heads , with governments either impotent or unwilling to curb them .
And yet there are many constitutions , even in those very countries , which enshrine freedom of religious worship , and states have signed international covenants and UN conventions which are supposed to guarantee religious freedom .
But there are also new religious laws with provisions that hover dangerously on the brink of intolerance , and the European Parliament wishes to draw attention to these new risks .
Religious groups themselves , however , must also remain tolerant towards those with different beliefs from their own , and must respect freedom of conscience and of the individual as well as obeying the law of the land .
That goes without saying .
Abuse of religious freedom is symptomatic of the abuse of human rights .
That cannot be said often enough .
Respect for the religious beliefs of minorities is also a sign of properly functioning constitutions rooted in natural law and guaranteeing tolerance and peaceful interaction between the various sections of the population .
We in Europe have bitter historical experience of the effects of intolerance .
We have overcome our intolerance , and we are now trying in this House to help others to do the same .
Political and social tensions have been used time and again in the past as an excuse for savage religious persecution .
On the threshold of the third millennium , and in view of the increasing degree of global interdependence , I believe we must call on governments and on the representatives of the major religions , who also exercise power in their own name , to observe and to act upon the warning signs .
By including democracy and human rights clauses in its treaties with non-Member States , the European Union tries to ensure observance of human rights in the countries with which it cooperates .
The European Parliament will not cease to ask searching questions on these matters .
Suppression of religious freedom - let me emphasise again - is a clear symptom of human rights abuses , the causes of which are rooted in national circumstances that need to be improved , circumstances that not only result from religious strife but are also due in particular to social and political factors .
The Commission supports interdenominational organisations in many countries ; in that way , it reaches the people and gets to the roots of the problems , and we want to ensure that the resources we provide for this purpose are not affected by the developments on which we have been focusing today and that these channels remain open to us .
That is the background to the resolution which we have tabled today .
Madam President , 50 years on from the introduction of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , more and more new rights are being added to it .
In fact , people have been saying , quite rightly , that it is all beginning to get out of hand .
But this does not mean that the old , established rights are now universally respected .
Quite the reverse .
There are still problems with the rights of religious minorities , which we are discussing today in connection with an urgent resolution on the issue .
In many countries , people are still not free to express their religious beliefs in public or to follow their faith as they would wish .
They are subject to persecution , repression and discrimination .
Recently in Parliament we have talked about Pakistan and Iran , for example , and now unfortunate events in India are giving us cause for concern .
For years now , but increasingly so in recent weeks , Christians in India have suffered attacks by Hindu activists .
In fact , over the last year there has been an enormous increase in the number of attacks on Christian schools and churches in India .
Priests are accused of forcing people to convert to Christianity by bribing them with money and jobs , for which they must be punished .
Missionaries in particular are bearing the brunt of the attacks , because they are seen as the legacy of British rule , although strangely enough a lot of the missionaries are actually Christians of Indian origin , a fact that seems to be overlooked here .
Recently , a large group of Christians and Muslims protested against the fact that the authorities are doing nothing to counter these forms of aggression .
The attacks have been condemned in the media , and it is certainly not true that the majority of the population approve of them .
But this does not make the attacks any less worrying .
One possible reason for them is the increase in the number of Christians in India , and strangely enough they are the ones who have been bearing the brunt in recent times , whereas before that it was mainly Muslims who were the target .
The reason for this shift is clear : the Muslims in India are concentrated in certain areas , where they are an important factor when it comes to the elections .
The Christian minority is smaller in number and is largely scattered all over the country , so it is not important in electoral terms .
Fortunately the Indian Government has now promised to set up a committee to investigate the recent attack on an Australian missionary and his children aged seven and ten .
Yet it still appears indifferent to such occurrences .
There is clearly a link between the increase in attacks in India and the fact that the BJP , an extremist Hindu nationalist party , has come to power .
It believes that too much attention is paid to religious minorities in India , and these attacks help it in its attempts to change this situation .
With this resolution Parliament is making a clear appeal to countries and governments to take a responsible approach in dealing with religious minorities living in their territory .
In particular , it calls on the Indian Government to investigate the attacks of recent weeks and to try to prevent them in future .
If the situation does not change , the European Parliament and the Member States may wish to consider whether the events in India should affect their dealings with that country .
Any respectable government must help to ensure that minorities in its country can live in freedom and can pursue their faith as they see fit .
Human rights here involve not just rights for individuals , but also an obligation upon governments to give minorities the freedom that is God 's gift to everyone .
Madam President , as someone who has a parent who was born in India and has many friends from India in the various and diverse communities of faith which make up India 's rich mosaic of cultures , I can assure you that it gives me no pleasure to move this resolution today .
There have been Christian communities in India since St. Thomas landed in Kerala in AD 52 .
By and large the Christians have lived alongside their neighbours for many years in peace .
But the horrific death of Graham Staines and his two sons , in January , sadly brought to public attention a worsening persecution .
These murders were the apex of a spiralling campaign of violence against Christians of all denominations .
In a courageous address to his people the Prime Minister of India highlighted other incidents which are not acceptable in a modern , tolerant democracy .
These killings and other attacks have been unreservedly condemned by the World Hindu Council .
The perpetrators of these atrocities do not represent the people of India or mainstream Hinduism .
This resolution will be a significant message to those extremists that the people of Europe are in solidarity with all those who value and defend religious and communal tolerance .
Finally , not as a spokesman of my group but as an individual who worships Sunday-by-Sunday in a British church where we have members of the congregation who see India as their mother country , let me assure the people of India that they are in our prayers and that we pray for both the persecuted and the persecutors .
India , you have our love , our respect and our prayers in this difficult time .
Madam President , I oppose religious persecution wherever it occurs .
However the text of this resolution , I believe , is ill-judged and unfair in singling out one country when throughout the region and elsewhere there are many similar cases .
We should realise that Christianity has flourished in India for 2000 years - longer , in fact , than here in Europe .
I have been given permission to move on behalf of my group an oral amendment , which is to add to rectial C. the words : ' and applauding the Prime Minister 's speech to the nation on 30 January supporting this and opposing sectarian violence ' .
We will be supporting that during the vote but unfortunately I will not be here because of the difficult timing of flights out of Strasbourg , so I have to leave before the vote .
The officials have a copy of that text and so will the Socialist Group representatives .
Madam President , the Liberal Group has always stood up for human rights in general , and of course the right to freedom of religion deserves attention as part of this .
I know that I am entering dangerous territory here , but from time immemorial , the greatest violations of human rights have been carried out in the name of religion .

It has happened regularly throughout history that religious minorities have not been entitled to exercise the same rights as religious majorities , and this is still true today , with religious riots and other problems in India and on Ambon , and structural repression in Iran and Afghanistan .
We are not here just to protect Christians , I hope - we must protect and make room for all religions , and this means standing up for Jehovah 's Witnesses in Russia , for example , who are currently facing prosecution in Moscow .
The Liberal Group calls on the Commission and the Council to remain vigilant and to take account of religious freedom when assessing the human rights situation in third countries .
I hope that there will be an opportunity in the next legislative period to produce a comprehensive report on human rights and the role of religion .
Sadly , I will not be here to see it .
Mr Bertens , I deliberately allowed you to exceed your time , as you are one of the most regular attenders in this House .
We have some time in hand , but I would ask you not to exceed our time-limits .
Mr President , attacks and assaults on religious minorities are unfortunately frequent in India .
Although the Indian Constitution expressly guarantees religious freedom , the violence goes on .
Human rights are also constitutionally safeguarded .
This resolution was tabled following the murder of a Christian missionary , but we must not limit our attention to Christians alone ; other religious minorities in India , such as Sikhs and Muslims , are subjected to even greater religious persecution .
There is no inevitability about these attacks ; people are not programmed to use violence . Not at all .
The truth is that several extremist groups are fanning the flames , among them the VHP , which patently has links running high up the political ladder .
Nor should we forget the origins of the stand-off in India between different religious groupings : social strife , poverty and illiteracy .
Efforts must be made to tackle these problems ; then we may well see less religious tension .
India is not the only country where religious groups are pitted against one another , however .
Similar problems exist elsewhere in Asia , for example in Pakistan , Bangladesh and the Maldives .
It is incumbent upon all of us to work for human rights .
Religious freedom is one important element , together with freedom of speech , freedom of movement and the right to non-discrimination .
We must also counter violent crimes against individuals on the basis of their sexual orientation .
A great deal remains to be done in defence of these principles .
Mr President , I belong to a political party that has itself experienced in its own country what it is like when a government tries to clamp down on the freedom of expression of a growing opposition party , so I have every sympathy for anyone whose freedom of expression or religion is under threat .
We will therefore naturally be supporting the joint resolution on freedom of religion in India .
We unreservedly condemn the use of violence against Indian Christians , and we demand that the national government and the state authorities responsible for maintaining law and order should take firm measures where necessary not just against the perpetrators of the violence , but also against the police officers who simply stand by and watch .
I would point out here that in Orissa , where a missionary and his two children were brutally murdered , it is not the BJP that is in power , contrary to what some people think , but the Congress Party , to which the likely murderer also belongs .
The violence against Christians should also not make us forget that for the last ten years , particularly in India , thousands of Hindus have been systematically murdered by Muslim fanatics in riots and pogroms that have sadly been much worse than the current violence against Christians .
For example , in 1990 almost the entire Hindu population of the state of Kashmir , around a quarter of a million people , fled after a series of massacres in which more than a thousand people were killed .
The instigator of this ethnic cleansing , Amanula Khan , the leader of the Kashmiri Muslims , is still given a hero 's reception in various European countries , including my own .
I think a little consistency is called for here .
In this respect the joint resolution , which I think is very general , could also have made reference to the systematic and particularly barbaric persecution of Christians and all non-Islamic religions in the neighbouring country of Pakistan .
That omission has now been put right .
For the rest , we shall be happy to support this resolution .
Mr President , despite the important contribution made by representatives of all faiths to the humanitarian mission of aid , care and relief for the underprivileged , religious intransigence seems to be becoming increasingly radical in many parts of the world .
Last month we heard that , in clashes in Djakarta , Islamic fundamentalist mobs were busy burning Catholic churches and hunting priests and nuns , while the forces of public order looked on powerless .
In India violence against the clergy is currently being encouraged by anti-Christian - but also anti-Muslim and anti-Sikh - rhetoric from fundamentalist groups who claim that they are determined to end any form of religious conversion in the country by the year 2000 .
This illustrates the lack of effective protection for religious minorities working in India , but above all it shows that the real aim of racist fundamentalism is to restrict freedom of religion and opinion .
All this should prompt Europe to stress its wholehearted support for the basic principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , making respect for those principles a prerequisite determining the very nature of the bilateral relations Member States maintain with countries which flagrantly disregard them .
Mr President , I shall begin with the resolutions on the death penalty .
The Commission shares the general concern of the European Parliament on this issue , especially in respect to the United States .
We believe that in all cases in which the death penalty is imposed the guarantees laid down in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other international instruments should be respected .
We welcome the adoption by the Council of Ministers of general guidelines on the issue of the death penalty in June 1998 .
These guidelines make it clear that the objective of the European Union is to work towards the universal abolition of the death penalty .
We also welcome the adoption by the UN Human Rights Commission on 2 April 1998 of a resolution which calls for countries that have not yet abolished the death penalty to apply a moratorium on the execution of death penalties with a view to abolition .
EU Member States co-sponsored the resolution , which had been introduced by Italy , and it is striking to note that the United States voted against it .
The Commission is greatly concerned about the rising number of executions taking place in the United States .
The European Union has raised this question a number of times with the US authorities .
As the Commissioner responsible for relations with the United States , I have no embarrassment or hesitation in raising this issue with them : it is appropriate that one should do so with a country with which we have close links and which has expressed on numerous occasions its concern about human rights elsewhere .
The European Union follows closely individual cases in the United States and has made a number of démarches in specific instances .
In the event that it concerns a person having the nationality of one of our Member States , the Union will pay special attention to compliance with the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 1963 , which in Article 36 provides arrested foreigners with the right to consular assistance .
I turn to the specific case of Mr Peltier , who , of course , is not on death row but is a long-term prisoner .
I can only say that anybody who heard the speeches made from diverse parts of the House , with different political viewpoints , could not but be moved by what was said .
The Commission , through its delegation in Washington , is looking into the circumstances of the medical condition of Mr Peltier and will do its utmost to support the actions of the European Parliament in this regard .
We will carefully follow up this case , and look forward to the exchanges on this issue at the next meeting between the European Parliament Delegation for relations with the United States and the United States ' Congress .
Not only is it legitimate that this subject should be discussed but , in the circumstances described , it is inevitable and natural .
On the question of freedom of religion , I am glad that it has been broadened out and has not concentrated entirely on the situation in India , because it is right to say that there are problems , to put it mildly , with regard to freedom of religion in many countries , and it would be misleading to focus only on India .
As far as we are concerned , freedom of religion is a fundamental human right and we should defend it wherever it comes under attack .
Nonetheless , there has been a certain topicality with regard to the reports about attacks on Christians in India , which are deeply worrying .
The Commission 's delegation , which continues to keep us fully informed on the situation as it develops , is fully associated with Member States ' missions in monitoring the situation .
Sadly , ethnic and religious violence is not a novelty in India , but violence against Christians on the scale reported is new .
The issue is now highly politicised in India and it has the potential to affect the political situation there - reference has been made to the statement by the Prime Minister which , of course , we have noted .
The issue is dividing not only Opposition and Government but is also controversial within the BJP itself .
There is no doubt that the principle of secular government and the protection of minorities is deeply ingrained in Indian democratic tradition .
There can also be no doubt that opinion leaders and civil society in India are deeply shocked about the events and the damage done to India 's image , and that is amply reflected by the wide press coverage which these events have received since they began .
The Commission is convinced that responsible Indian politicians , together with a strong consensus in civil society , can succeed in mobilising the necessary political momentum to control violence .
We strongly support the continuation of the quiet and persistent work of our representatives on the ground , our ambassadors , NGOs and concerned Indian citizens as the best guarantee to check the current situation , and for that they were recently thanked by the Archbishops of Delhi , Mumbai and Bangalore .
The Commission fully endorses the objectives of racial tolerance , social harmony and full respect for human rights which underpin the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on the situation in Guinea-Bissau :
B4-0136 / 99 on behalf of the UPE Group ; -B4-0168 / 99 on behalf of the ELDR Group ; -B4-0173 / 99 on behalf of the PPE Group ; -B4-0183 / 99 on behalf of the V Group ; -B4-0191 / 99 on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-0202 / 99 on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ; -B4-0211 / 99 on behalf of the ARE Group .
Mr President , the situation in the West African state of Guinea-Bissau is extremely worrying .
After the November 1998 agreement and the new agreement at the start of this year , violence has broken out once again between the troops of President Vieira and General Ansumane Mane .
The conflict of June 1998 has returned and people are once again fleeing in large numbers .
The civilian population are suffering yet again as a result of the destruction caused by this war .
The Abuja peace agreement has been suspended and the foreign troops are committing countless human rights violations .
It is extremely important that the Abuja agreement should once again be applied in full .
All foreign troops - except of course for the ECOMOG forces - must leave the country and the government of national unity must try to organise proper elections , which would be an almost unprecedented event .
Europe must be prepared to do something to help here .
Great efforts are needed in West Africa to prevent conflicts from spilling over into other countries .
There are far too many transnational conflicts .
We must do everything we can to prevent the proliferation of light weapons , and the Union must offer ECOMOG technical and financial support and humanitarian aid for the people .
Mr President , Commissioner , war has returned to Guinea-Bissau .
The European Parliament must show its solidarity with the people of Guinea-Bissau , who are suffering in this civil war .
Hundreds of people have died , thousands of civilian refugees have had to leave their country , hospitals are short of medical supplies and are struggling to cope , and hunger and disease are spreading .
There was an agreement in Abuja which provided for a cease-fire and arrangements to contain the conflict .
Despite this , military operations have started again , and everything points to this being the responsibility of President Vieira 's troops .
We deplore the political irresponsibility and shortsightedness of political and military leaders who put their own interests above the interests of their people .
The European Parliament must demand respect for the Abuja agreements which provide for the formation of a government of national unity and the organisation of presidential and legislative elections , respecting the independence and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau .
There is a danger that the conflict will become international , given the situation in Casamanca .
The presence of foreign troops , notably from Senegal and the Republic of Guinea , whom international human rights organisations are accusing of human rights violations against civilians , is aggravating that danger .
So the withdrawal of all foreign troops is a fundamental prerequisite for restoring peace .
The only troops that should stay to guarantee the cease-fire and ensure compliance with the agreements are the ECOMOG troops .
The people of Guinea-Bissau desperately need help , and this means strengthening humanitarian aid and ensuring that aid actually reaches the people who need it .
Here I would stress the importance of neutral non-governmental organisations operating on the ground .
Finally I call on the European Union to support the efforts of the Prime Minister designate , Francisco Fabu , to establish a government of national unity capable , above all , of serving the interests of the long-suffering people of Guinea-Bissau .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is happening in Guinea-Bissau is tragic . There are thousands of displaced persons , and widespread hunger and misery caused by a war which it seems nobody wants and is of no use to anyone .
It is vital to restore peace and to silence the guns in Guinea-Bissau .
It is vital to observe the Abuja agreement and rapidly establish ECOMOG , the peace-keeping force of the Economic Community of West African States .
President João Bernardo Vieira and General Mané have to bear the heavy responsibility of enabling and ensuring compliance with the agreement they have signed , by stabilising the situation in Guinea-Bissau , installing the new government of national unity , organising free elections and allowing the country to develop .
Europe can and must help , and that is what our compromise resolution is about .
Humanitarian aid and technical and financial support are needed , but we can also help by firmly condemning the escalation of the war and demanding the immediate withdrawal of the foreign military forces involved in the conflict .
Without that withdrawal the human rights abuses will continue and peace will not be possible .
In this case , Parliament 's recommendation that the Council should speak with one voice on this matter is very apposite .
And given much of the news published in the media , I would like to ask if the Commission can give Parliament any information guaranteeing that there are no military forces from any Member State of the Union involved in this sad conflict , which we hope to see ended as rapidly as possible .
Mr President , the acts of violence in the West African State of Guinea-Bissau are causing us serious concern .
President Jean Bernardo Vieira and General Ansumane Mané concluded a peace agreement in Abuja on 1 November 1998 , and it is absolutely essential that they observe the terms of that agreement .
The Council and the Commission must insist on that .
The agreement requires the withdrawal of foreign troops , especially from Senegal and the Republic of Guinea .
Here too , it is up to the Council and Commission to exert pressure .
The deployment of ECOMOG troops was requested , permitted and wanted .
The peacekeeping forces of the Economic Community of West African States are essential as guarantors of the peace .
Since 3 February another cease-fire has been in force .
We support the territorial integrity of the country , or so I believe .
We call on the government to reform itself into a government of national unity .
If that is done , the Commission should then provide appropriate aid , since thousands of people have fled their homes .
Refugees are being produced here , and famine is being produced here .
We should also mention that much of the misery has been caused by weapons from Western Europe .
The politicians and the armed forces must abide by the terms of the peace agreement .
If they do not do that , they are irresponsible , uncaring and blind to the lessons of history .
They must observe international law and human rights .
Their observance of international law and human rights is the basis on which we can provide humanitarian aid and support ECOMOG through the Council and the Commission .
I believe that would be a strategy for underpinning the peace .
It is up to the two sides in Guinea-Bissau .
Mr President , Commissioner , first I would like to welcome this joint motion for a resolution and stress our joint condemnation of the new wave of violence in Guinea-Bissau and our demand for full implementation of the cease-fire agreed on 3 February .
Recent events have frustrated the hopes raised by the Abuja agreement of 1 November , hopes that the conflict might be over and that Guinea-Bissau , and especially its martyred people , might enjoy the peace needed to recover from a situation of enormous economic backwardness , aggravated by the destruction and chaos provoked by the conflict which broke out last June .
That hope must be urgently rekindled , above all in the Guineans who have witnessed and been victims of this senseless confrontation , which can only be ended through negotiation , peace and respect for the agreements .
We also want to highlight and denounce the destabilising role of foreign troops since the beginning of the conflict . That role is all the more serious because it may be one reason why the Abuja agreement is not being respected .
Withdrawal of all foreign military forces not in the territory in strict compliance with that agreement , like the troops from Senegal and the Republic of Guinea , is a prerequisite for implementing the agreement and for the government of national unity to take office in line with that agreement .
The West African intervention force has a peace-keeping mission , and that mission must not be complicated by other foreign forces hindering its action or pursuing other purposes .
This conflict must not be turned into some kind of cockfight for the only perch in the chicken coop .
A political solution must be found which guarantees peace , respects what has already been agreed , does not undermine the independence and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau and puts an end to a tragic situation which is destroying a country and a people .
Initiatives to bring humanitarian aid , particularly food and medical aid , to the people are urgently needed and should be welcomed and encouraged .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is a sad fact that the situation in various parts of Africa brings one question to mind : how far can the absurd , the ridiculous and the irrational go ?
Guinea-Bissau is one of the poorest countries in the world .
Before the recent conflict that began eight months ago , it had an average per capita income of around USD 220 , which is equivalent to less than half an ecu per person per day .
The situation was beginning to improve . The country was starting to see an increase in reserves , inflation was falling and annual growth stood at 5 % .
This has all disappeared over the last eight months .
The country will now have negative growth , in other words over the next few months the annual growth rate will be -5 % .
The war there was undoubtedly the result of the conflicting ambitions of a president who seems to have been in power for ever and an ambitious general . As we know , it has left the country in a situation in which its citizens are fleeing , some are becoming refugees , people are starving and its limited reserves have been squandered .
The conflict is even becoming international , with the clear involvement of troops from Senegal - moving from the conflict in the southern region of Casamance - as well as troops from the Republic of Guinea .
There is no doubt that the international community must do everything in its power to try to put an end to this situation .
We must be able to restart the aid programme that the international bodies had launched and which has once again been paralysed .
We must ensure that foreign troops are withdrawn and that only the ECOMOG peacekeeping forces remain . Finally , given that the cease-fire that was renewed in February - only a few days ago , in fact - has already been broken , we must provide the Prime Minister designate with the power he needs to allow the people of Guinea-Bissau to resolve their future in peace .
Mr President , I can be comparatively brief because the Commission shares the view set out in Parliament 's proposed resolution .
We are closely monitoring developments in Guinea-Bissau and are aware of the tremendous difficulties faced by the civilian population .
Through ECHO we are providing , I hope , speedy and effective humanitarian assistance to meet the population 's needs .
We also support the mediation efforts currently underway and call on the parties involved in the conflict to comply with the Abuja agreement .
We are ready to resume cooperation with Guinea-Bissau once democracy has been restored .
We are aware of the role played by ECOWAS in the international community 's efforts to maintain stability in the region and we support the Abuja agreement including the deployment of ECOMOG troops in Guinea-Bissau .
Reference has been made to the suggestion that troops of some Member States are participating .
I am aware of those rumours but I am not in a position either to confirm or to deny them .
We are consulting Member States , however , on ways to finance aid in the form of supplies and non-military equipment for the ECOMOG forces .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions concerning natural disasters :
Storms in the Canary Islands
B4-0128 / 99 by Mrs Sierra González and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ; -B4-0163 / 99 by Mr Escolá Hernando and others , on behalf of the ARE Group ; -B4-0193 / 99 by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-0207 / 99 by Mr Fernández Martín and others , on behalf of the PPE Group ; Earthquake in Colombia
B4-0192 / 99 by Mr Newens , on behalf of the PSE Group ; -B4-0203 / 99 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ; -B4-0206 / 99 by Mrs Banotti and others , on behalf of the PPE Group.Storms in the Canary Islands
Mr President , the order of speakers was not really very important .
What we are talking about here is the catastrophe that devastated the Canary Islands , and I must point out that this catastrophe adds to the problem of the region 's ultraperipheral location .
The storms affected its entire port and coastal infrastructures , as well as its agriculture , in other words the tomato and banana crops which are fundamental for the region 's economy .
We do not need the full minute we have been allocated as we merely want to urge the Commission to make additional efforts in its structural programmes to help this remote region to overcome this catastrophe .
It is called a ' natural ' catastrophe , although we may soon have to consider the fact that such catastrophes are not so natural and that they are sometimes the result of the damage we have done to the environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , at the beginning of January a violent storm struck the islands of Tenerife , Gran Canaria , Palma and Hierro , doing untold damage to port infrastructure , coastal roads and shore installations . It also affected the tomato and banana crops , and other fruit and horticultural production .
As these are islands , there is no alternative infrastructure , so it is vital to the life of the archipelago for it to be in full operation .
Agricultural production in the islands in 1997 amounted to 105 495 million pesetas and the damage to agricultural production represents 14.4 % of the damage to infrastructure and about 16.7 % of 1997 turnover .
Furthermore , the largest tomato producers in the Canary Islands have suffered damage amounting to 5 664 million pesetas , equivalent to 19 % of production , and the damage in the banana sector amounts to 7 393 million pesetas , corresponding to 20.5 % of 1997 production , while damage to infrastructure amounts to 2 470 million pesetas .
That is why we are asking the Commission to check the extent of the damage quickly , and to include the Canary Islands and specific projects for repairing damage caused to the coastal infrastructure in the Union 's structural programmes .
We are also concerned about the effects of the storm on the turnover of agricultural producers for 1999 ( and consequently , on the Canary Islands ' economy ) and we call on the Commission to provide the aid necessary to mitigate the damage suffered in this sector .
Ladies and gentlemen , while I have the floor I want to take the opportunity to express my deep sadness at the news of the devastation caused by the Colombian earthquake of 25 January 1999 , which is said to be the worst earthquake to have struck the country this century , killing over a thousand people and injuring countless others , most of them from the poorest communities in the region .
So I want to express the solidarity of the Group of the European Radical Alliance with the victims and the families of the dead , and with the people of Colombia .
According to news from the area , the Colombian army apparently faced great difficulty , despite sending thousands of soldiers to the region , in preventing widespread looting in the city of Armenia , where the looters fired on the rescuers and public disorder is hindering rescue operations .
There is also the danger of corruption , which may also prevent all the international aid reaching the people it is actually intended for .
So I urge President Pastrana and the Colombian Government to take firm measures to restore public order in the disaster areas while respecting human rights , and to take all measures necessary to ensure that emergency aid reaches its proper destination .
But most of all I hope this terrible event will not disturb the peace process under way in Colombia , which is already difficult enough .
Finally , Mr President , I also want to express our satisfaction that the Commission made EUR 1.5 million available immediately , including EUR 0.5 million not spent last year , and to applaud the constructive cooperation of the Red Cross , Oxfam and other NGOs operating in the region .
And I call on the Commission and the Governments of the Member States to cooperate with the appropriate NGOs in making every possible effort to resolve this crisis and to implement a special development programme to meet the medium- and long-term needs of the earthquake zone .
Thank you , Mr Posada .
Of course you did not mention just the problems of the Canaries , but those of Columbia as well , which is the next item on the agenda .
Mr President , we are fortunate that Commissioner Brittan is present here with us because last night he took the trouble to stay here until midnight to discuss an issue that is very closely related to the ultraperipheral regions and the Canary Islands , that is , the banana industry .
Mr Brittan , I am addressing you directly because if you read our motion for a resolution you will see that it relates to the serious damage that has been caused to agriculture in the Canary Islands .
To be specific , and although this is not mentioned in the motion for a resolution , I can tell you that as far as banana production is concerned , there has been so much damage that neither in 1999 nor in 2000 will we come close to the minimum guaranteed production of 420 000 tonnes per year . This is because not only parent banana trees but also young banana trees were destroyed .
I am telling you this because when we hold talks in Washington with a government that talks about defending free competition , I think we should let them know that our banana plantations have to contend with adverse climatic conditions and that in some regions of the Community , both in the West Indies and in the Canary Islands and Madeira , such catastrophes often occur .
I believe that this is an important argument .
However , the aim of the resolution we are moving is rather different .
I would like to read something unusual to the Commissioner as I think it is very interesting .
It comes from the Las Palmas newspaper La Provincia today , 11 February 1999 , which states that the representative of the federation of fruit and vegetable exporters in Las Palmas , Roberto Góiriz , welcomed the agreement that the European Parliament is about to adopt and pointed out that it would be an institution based in Strasbourg that would eventually find the solution to a problem that affects everyone living there .
It is unusual that regions as remote as our own now look to the Commission as a source of inspiration and a source of aid .
The Commission has always been very receptive to the problems experienced in these regions .
We are now asking , among other things , that it should implement as soon as possible the new Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which provides for special measures for these regions precisely because of the adverse conditions affecting their economies .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of Mr Fernández Martín , as he has had to leave .
As has already been pointed out , and as you are all aware , at the beginning of January the Canary Islands were hit by a violent storm that has led to significant economic losses in terms of both infrastructure and agricultural production .
I must emphasise that the losses do not just translate to the significant figures contained in the resolution of around EUR 90 million between the banana and tomato crops , which , as you know , form the basis of the region 's economy , a fact that has been highlighted .
In addition to these losses , there were also significant losses in terms of infrastructures , totalling approximately EUR 15 million .
We therefore call on the relevant institutions within the European Union , and particularly the Commission , to take account of the scale of the destruction and to launch specific projects to remedy the damage caused to the infrastructures . We also ask that adequate measures be taken to provide effective and rapid aid to the people affected by this catastrophe and to the regional government to repair the damage that was caused .
Earthquake in Colombia
Mr President , the tragedy caused by the earthquakes in the Colombian regions of Pereira and Armenia come on top of other violent catastrophes that have destroyed people and property in Central America and parts of the Caribbean .
Europe 's response in every instance has been rapid and united . This has allowed us to alleviate some of the devastation and bring a little hope to the victims .
Clearly , the extreme circumstances affecting Columbia were aggravated by the destruction of infrastructures , which delayed the arrival of aid and the implementation of the emergency plans .
It is therefore extremely regrettable that some unscrupulous people are exploiting the tragedy to rob , steal and trade in the scarce resources that were already in the region or that were able to get through .
Nonetheless , these regrettable facts must not overshadow the heroic acts or the excellent example of civic-mindedness demonstrated by the non-governmental organisations , the civilian population , anonymous individuals and the army , who are all involved in the recovery and rescue operations .
We must highlight their positive responses , as well as the rapid reaction of ECHO and the European Commission in distributing the aid that is so important at the moment . I congratulate them on that .
After the damage has been assessed , we will have to follow up the present project with a further programme aimed at helping the recovery of those regions that have been totally devastated .
Unfortunately , we can do nothing for those who have disappeared apart from extending our condolences to their families .
Indeed , there is very little we can do to predict other earthquakes .
However , we can see to it that the donations from European and other countries are used as transparently and effectively as possible so as to prevent any doubts about embezzlement or the misuse of the funds .
I would like to end by saying that this resolution supports the commitment made by President Pastrana to combat corruption . We call on his government to make every effort to guarantee security in the region and respect for human rights .
Mr President , there is very little I can add to what our colleague Ana Miranda de Lage has just said on this issue .
In my view , the same thing has happened with this earthquake in Columbia as happened with Hurricane Mitch . As usual , it is the poorest people that are affected .
More than 1 000 people have died and many have been injured .
In my opinion , we must first of all welcome the rapid response of the European Commission in releasing EUR 1.5 million , which is a considerable amount , and its work in collaboration with non-governmental organisations such as the Red Cross , Oxfam and others .
It is important for the European Commission to guarantee , in some way , that the aid sent reaches those who are genuinely affected .
On previous occasions , a certain section of the population has taken advantage of the confusion - as is now the case - and exploited the breakdown in public order to use or sell goods that were intended for those who were most severely affected . There have also been cases where the aid was not distributed as it should have been and did not reach those most in need .
So the European Commission can perhaps play an important role in this respect .
We must also welcome the fact that Mr Pastrana has made a commitment to eliminate corruption and that while those most in need are receiving aid , human rights are being respected in Columbia .
Mr President , I can certainly subscribe to the previous speakers ' remarks , on behalf of my group .
It is not the first time that Colombia has been hit by such a great disaster , and on this occasion it appears to have occurred in a part of Colombia with relatively few problems .
It is all the more tragic that a region inhabited by people who , though dependent on help , had hitherto managed to eke out a decent living , has now been struck by such a disaster .
Our urgent plea to the Commission is that it should cut through the red tape wherever possible , that it should ensure as far as possible that the aid goes directly to the people in need .
We are pleased that action has been taken so quickly , since we often criticise Colombia here .
It is our biggest headache in several respects , as you well know , Commissioner .
I believe that if we can take this occasion to show clearly to Colombia and President Pastrana that we are also capable of constructive intervention when practical humanitarian assistance is needed , we shall have achieved a great deal .
Mr President , in joining in the expressions of sympathy for the victims of the Colombian earthquake , let us ensure that the European Union provides the long-term assistance required to help people rebuild their lives .
Still today the communities affected lack basic storage containers for clean water , have too few latrines or waterproof shelters and not enough equipment for food preparation or tools to help clear and reconstruct their homes .
Barefoot children lack shoes to climb over the rubble of their former homes , and lives have been destroyed .
Though agencies like Oxfam are seeking to help 8 000 families per month , over 400 000 people have lost their belongings or their livelihoods .
We must learn the lessons too , for despite the early announcement of assistance which we welcome , no international aid had arrived locally a full 48 hours after the earthquake struck .
Finally , in a situation which should unify the disparate groups in the Colombian conflict for absolutely clear humanitarian reasons , I have to express disbelief at reports that paramilitaries may have used the disaster to cover the killing of human rights defenders in the NGOs in Colombia and that it may have been the pretext for withdrawing a bill condemning forced disappearances at an extraordinary session in the Colombian Parliament last week .
We call on President Pastrana not simply to attack fraud and corruption but also to promulgate that bill .
The twenty-fifth of January is a date which will be etched in the memory of the Colombian people but , regrettably , for the wrong reasons .
It was a tragedy of immense proportions , as has already been pointed out , resulting in over one thousand deaths and many thousands more being injured .
It must be said that the Commission is to be congratulated on the speed with which it responded to the crisis and in particular the way in which it cooperated with NGOs in the region .
However , the aid sent from the European Union and other donor countries is a mere token , given the scale of the destruction and suffering , and particularly in view of a statistic mentioned by Mr Howitt : almost half a million people have lost their homes and their belongings .
Therefore , a very comprehensive aid and development programme is required to meet the long-term needs of the country and its people .
It is vitally important that , if this aid is forthcoming , it is properly coordinated and channelled to those who need it most .
The resolution is right to point out the danger of corruption and the need to eliminate it .
I welcome , as does the resolution , President Pastrana 's commitment to ensure that this does not happen .
The resolution is also right to point out that , in trying to restore public order , it is vitally important that human rights are not violated .
Mr President , everyday life in Colombia is grim .
Every month we could discuss the latest human rights violations , the paramilitaries , attacks on the Indios and the black population , people driven from their homes and the disappearance of individuals .
This time , however , the cause of our concern is what we call a natural disaster , namely the earthquake in the city of Armenia .
It has heaped untold suffering on the population , and I do not propose to repeat everything my honourable colleagues have already said on the subject . Nevertheless , the natural disaster has been compounded by a home-made disaster in the form of corruption and incompetence , partly within the Colombian government apparatus , which are hindering the effort to ensure that help reaches the victims and reaches them quickly .
We must be particularly worried by reports that the allegedly rapid assistance provided by the European Union has failed to arrive in many places .
There is an urgent need to find out how accurate this information is .
An official report on this matter is urgently required .
In the wake of the earthquake , the paramilitaries have launched a campaign to annihilate human rights activists .
Politicians and others at home and abroad insist that it is high time President Andrés Pastrana took decisive action .
Alas , we have seen too little of that .
Here too , there is an urgent need for the Commission to demand that the Colombian Government act to stamp out these violations of human rights in the aftermath of the earthquake .
Mr President , dealing first with the situation in the Canary Islands , the Commission is well aware of the terrible storms which hit the islands between 6 and 9 January .
I am grateful for the further information supplied by the honourable Members in their resolution and also in the speeches that have been made .
As far as the issue of bananas is concerned , I am well aware of the particular role that industry plays in the economy of the Canary Islands and have particular sympathy for what has occurred , coupled with the other problems which we dealt with last night .
I would like to express the Commission 's sympathy and support for the local population affected by the storms .
We are very sensitive to the difficulties that have arisen as a result and we will be looking carefully at the situation as a whole in the light of the instruments and regulatory provisions that may be available to give assistance .
So that those involved can make a proper study for the Commission , what we would like the Spanish authorities to do , is to provide , as soon as possible , detailed information about the nature of the severe weather , its impact on production and production potential in the region as well as the damage caused to the infrastructure .
If we receive a formal request from the Spanish Government at the next meeting of the monitoring committees for structural assistance in the Canary Islands and the Objective 1 Community Support Framework for Spain , we will look into the possibilities of reprogramming current structural assistance in partnership with the national and regional authorities as well as any allocation from other resources available as a contribution to repairing the infrastructures damaged by the storms in question .
Turning to the situation in Colombia , preliminary official figures show that the number of dead has risen to over 900 , of whom 582 are in the Department of Quindio and the number of injured to approximately 3 400 , and 200 000 persons are homeless .
Clearly the immediate priority is to respond to the emergency needs of the most vulnerable sections of the population throughout the region hit by the disaster .
A detailed needs assessment confirms that it is essential to provide temporary shelter , food , blankets , kitchen utensils , medicines and chlorine as a matter of urgency .
Pending a more exhaustive analysis of needs , a relief programme , amounting to EUR 1.5 million has so far been prepared by ECHO .
The Commission was able to announce on 26 January a timely contribution to international relief efforts , and I am grateful for the kind words that have been spoken this afternoon about what the Commission has been able to do .
This first contingency plan is being implemented by various European NGOs in cooperation with the Colombian Red Cross .
ECHO is considering the adoption of a further relief programme for the victims of the earthquake .
In the context of their mission to Colombia next week , the Commission services will begin to study possibilities for the long-term rehabilitation of the earthquake areas .
But I would add that we fully share the view expressed in the European Parliament that President Pastrana 's government must take steps to restore public order and combat corruption , whilst fully respecting human rights , and should ensure that the killing and kidnapping of human rights activists and of local NGO workers is fully investigated and the results of any such investigation are acted upon with firmness and speed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
In view of the fact that the debate has ended early and we cannot proceed immediately to the vote , I am obliged to suspend the sitting until voting time .
The sitting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.

We now come to the vote on topical and urgent debate .
After the vote on the joint motion on Kazakhstan
Mr President , I congratulate the House on its unanimous adoption of the resolution on Kazakhstan .
I have the German version in front of me .
It consists only of the following phrase : ' beauftragt seinen Präsidenten , diese Entschließung an die und die weiterzuleiten ' ( instructs its President to forward this resolution to such-and-such ) .
The only other thing on this sheet is two straight lines .
I just wanted to ask whether others have read the resolution and whether their versions contain the text .
Mr Posselt , I am sure every Member has read it .
There must have been a mistake in the particular text that you were given .
After the vote on topical and urgent debate
Mr President , I have to say that my previous remark was not meant as a joke but as a formal protest .
The resolution on Kazakhstan , at least in the German version , consists of two straight lines .
Laughter
May I ask you to declare the vote null and void .
According to our Rules of Procedure , a vote is invalid if the text is not available .
Failure to annul this vote would establish a precedent .
Mr President , that is not the case .
There is a complete version of the German text .
Perhaps you have been given the wrong sheet , Mr Posselt .
I will gladly provide you with a copy so that you know exactly what you voted for !
Mr Swoboda , I have also been shown a full version .
I was suggesting to Mr Posselt that there was something wrong with the printing in the version he had obtained .
Mr President , could it be that an honourable Member of the Christian Social Union has one or two blind spots ?
Laughter
Surely not .
VOTES ( continuation )
Mr President , I wish to make one or two points about the vote .
Firstly , I apologise that there are more than 200 amendments ; we tried as best we could to reduce the number .
I should like to explain the meaning of ' compromise amendments ' in connection with tonight 's vote .
They are not compromise amendments in the way we normally understand them , that is to say compromise amendments between political groups .
They represent the results of an informal trialogue which took place in Brussels over the last couple of days and weeks and amount to a considerable amount of work put in by myself and the other water rapporteurs .
It is absolutely imperative that we , having agreed those compromise amendments between the water rapporteurs , now agree to endorse them because the German presidency , which was not represented at last night 's debate , has stated in a letter : ' The German presidency is hoping to achieve a common position on the draft directive at the March Council .
They will do their best to include in that common position the text that came out of the informal consultations . '
A prerequisite will be that this text is included in the decision on the proposal that Parliament will be taking tonight .
So we need to fulfil our side of the bargain : endorse the so-called compromise amendments , and then we have the beginnings of something we can take further after the second reading when we move to co-decision .
Mr President , at the end of the votes this morning , I requested that the vote on this report be postponed to the next part-session in Brussels .
I would like to repeat this request , given the importance of this report , and ask that the vote be taken in Brussels .
You are quite correct that the point was raised this morning but the Rules say that it either has to be a political group or 29 Members .
I have had no formal request from any of the political groups or any wish expressed by 29 members .
So I intend to take the vote .
With good will I do not think it will take us very long .
Mr President , what you have just said about the request is proper but the trouble was that I could not get the consent of my Group to have this matter put over until next week .
I apologise to the Spanish delegation .
After the vote on Amendment No 165
Mr President , I wonder whether the political groups which are asking for so many roll call votes are aware that each roll-call vote costs the European taxpayer EUR 300 .
Mr President , may I simply ask the questioner whether he knows how important it is for the public to know who bears political responsibility and how much that knowledge is worth ?
Mr President , there is not the slightest doubt that our citizens have the right to know , and we are under an obligation to inform them . But not about every proposal and every political group .
Colleagues , we have had a long week and we are all tired .
Let us move on .
Mr President , I merely wanted to reassure the honourable Member .
We are all in favour of budgetary thrift , Mr Anastassopoulos , and when I cast my eye over your group and see all the empty seats , it is clear that many Members will only receive half of their per diem allowance today , which will no doubt please you .
Laughter
I am tempted to have a roll-call vote on whether roll-call votes are worthwhile but that would be absurd .
Parliament adopted the legislative resolution
Mr President , this has been a very long and complicated vote but it is a very satisfactory conclusion .
However , I want to draw the House 's attention to the fact that , firstly , it was made necessary by the fact that the Council reached a political agreement on this at a very early stage .
This is an example of the unwisdom of the Council in reaching these political agreements .
Secondly , the satisfactory result would not have been possible without the immense work by Mr White .

But I want to stress that it would not have been possible without the cooperation of his fellow rapporteurs on water , Mr Eisma and Mr Florenz ; it would not have been possible without the coordinators of all the political groups ; it would not have been possible without close cooperation with Commission staff , with the chairman of the German presidency 's Working Group on Water and without the secretariat of the Environment Committee .
I hope that people recognise these people are due recognition , because without them Mr White would not have been so successful .
I am glad to hear the water directive was ' overflowing ' with cooperation .
Mr President , I am interested in the number of roll call votes we have been having on this report .
In the vote on the previous report you always identified the group which called for the roll call vote , which caused some discomfort for our colleagues in the Green Group .
In this instance , not once have you identified who has asked for the roll call vote .
Surely we should be told who has asked for a roll call vote .
If you really want I can read it all out but it will only take up more time .
On Amendment No 44
Mr President , I should like to point out to the House that in Amendment No 44 , in the second indent of point 2 ( a ) , the German wording ' entfernen pyrotechnische Komponenten ' must be replaced by ' neutralisieren pyrotechnische Komponenten ' in order to make the wording consistent with the rest of the legislative text .
In an engineering dissertation the wording would be excellent , but it is entirely unsuitable for a legislative text .
As the rapporteur confirms that , we will ensure that the German text is amended accordingly .
Parliament adopted the legislative resolution
I have received a request under Rule 129 from the Group of the United Left to refer this report back to committee .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I request that the Quisthoudt-Rowohl report should be referred back to committee , under Rule 129 , for the following reasons : we think the adoption of the report at this time may be interpreted as interference in the electoral processes of a sovereign state , Israel , and - regardless of its merits or intentions - as explicit support for one of the more controversial parties in the election , specifically that of candidate Benjamin Netanyahu .
Mr President , if we had to refer the reports back every time there were elections in the countries concerned , we would no longer vote on any reports .
I therefore do not believe that we can refer this report back .
Applause
Mr President , I believe we should vote on this report now .
Any delay would be detrimental to Israel as well as to the Palestinians .
Parliament decided against referral back to committee
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I just wanted to table an oral amendment , but one that I feel is appropriate .
I propose that after the words ' regional integration ' , we add ' through the abolition a priori of the principle of non-reciprocity in ACP / OCT / UPR relations as soon as the new EU / ACP general agreement enters into force ' , so as to provide us with a better understanding of the amendment .
Mr President , the Socialist Group supports Mr Aldo 's motion for a resolution in general terms .
However , the oral amendment he is proposing is quite serious , so we cannot accept it at this stage . It is not a simple formal amendment ; its content is very significant .
We therefore oppose the oral amendment .
More than 12 Members indicated their opposition to the oral amendment
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
In the 21st century , good quality water will perhaps be of greater strategic importance than oil , which is a good reason for thanking Mr White for the efforts he is making now to ensure that we have good quality surface water by 2010 .
The river basin approach enables the Member States to pursue policies which are specifically tailored to river basins , which we think is an excellent idea .
If the best use is made of local knowledge , such as the water boards can provide , it will help to achieve better results .
Involving those who are directly concerned makes it much more likely that new policies will be accepted .
Establishing a new framework directive is certainly going to take some doing : the way it was dealt with at first reading was extremely confusing .
Our examination of the draft framework directive was postponed several times , mainly because of the ' premature position ' that the Council adopted last June .
All in all , it was a strange state of affairs .
After that , with the Amsterdam Treaty in mind , progress started to be made towards reaching a political agreement , though this has only been successful in a small number of areas because certain Member States refuse to be flexible .
This is a pity , because it is often much easier to reach agreement at an early stage before opinions become too firmly entrenched .
The compromise amendments which I and others have tabled are a rather disappointing result after a very promising start .
Amendments Nos 189 to 193 on the wetlands are designed to maintain a buffer water capacity which is essential in order to prevent floods and drought .
Compromise Amendments Nos 194 and 195 take account of the fact that the protection of marine waters is already covered by international agreements .
We are in favour of organising occasional conferences on water policy , which all parties concerned , including NGOs , should be able to attend , as proposed in Amendment No 198 .
The re-injection of water for certain necessary activities must still be possible , provided that it is done in a responsible manner , and Amendment No 201 creates adequate safeguards here .
With the emission limit values , all the various sources must be considered , not just the major polluters .
The difficulty here is in enforcing the polluter pays principle , and we therefore wonder whether Amendments Nos 65 , 67 and 68 can really be implemented in practice .
The Commission 's proposal establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy is a reworking and combination of a number of directives currently in force on the quality of surface and bathing waters , waters used for fish and shellfish farming and waters for human consumption , on the protection and management of groundwater , the treatment of municipal waste water , control of effluent and pollution by nitrates .
In addition to simplifying the situation , the main new feature of this proposal for a directive is its underlying approach , which is based on the notion of river basins .
Good management of these will ensure that the quantity and quality of surface and groundwater are safeguarded , whether these waters belong to one Member State only or straddle a border .
By the end of the year , the Commission is to put forward technical specifications which will form the basis for all data collection and analysis operations , notably regarding the definition of river basin districts and the analysis of their physical , demographic and economic characteristics , analysis and monitoring of water quality , and the evaluation of water quantity and quality .
Each management plan will consist of a programme of measures to be fully operational by 31 December 2007 at the latest .
The objective of ' good status ' must be achieved by the year 2010 .
Responsibility for implementing these requirements will very largely rest with the Member States .
In response to this proposal , I tabled 17 amendments on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , most of which were adopted either on their own or as part of a compromise amendment .
These amendments naturally included wetlands and their specific ecosystem in the context of these Community measures .
But we also pointed to the importance of agriculture and the specific link between this industry and water .
We needed to take account of the special features of agriculture to ensure that it was not restricted by too bureaucratic an approach .
We voted against compromise Amendment No 201 on the underground storage of natural gas and LPG .
The Commission proposal introduces a derogation for existing stores , but would ban any plan to develop further storage of natural gas in aquifers , whilst the French experience of storing gas underground ( since 1957 ) and LPG in abandoned mine workings ( since 1965 ) indicates that all requisite measures for protecting the environment are in place .
We did , however , vote for Amendment No 160 , which authorises underground storage where this does not compromise the environmental objectives of this directive .
This directive recognises the importance of the advances in certain areas and therefore concentrates on the quality of water , leaving aside the quantitative aspects of the problem .
There is a serious shortage of water in southern countries , which means that it is becoming a limited resource .
We must therefore restrict the temptation in wealthier , more developed and more powerful regions to transfer water from other areas , as is the case with the River Ebro .
Through Amendments Nos 16 , 18 and 75 the White report puts an end to such practices by limiting this water policy .
I was therefore happy to vote in favour of these amendments and the entire report .
To begin with , we should welcome today 's adoption at first reading of this framework directive on water policy which Parliament has been pressing for hard for a long time .
This text will clarify and simplify the existing Community legislation , which is fragmented and labyrinthine .
Secondly , I must deplore once again the fact that political agreement was reached in the Council before Parliament had had its say .
Moreover , after his report was adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , Mr White , outside all the normal channels of official procedure , negotiated 12 ' compromise ' amendments with the representatives of the Council .
I find it most regrettable that he did not take the trouble to inform the Committee on the Environment at any stage of his dealings .
Over and above that , I deplore the fact that he added on his own initiative a thirteenth Amendment No 201 which was never agreed with the Council delegation .
The rapporteur made this addition without respecting the elementary rules of transparency , and without even consulting the authors of the amendments which his compromise proposal was designed to replace .
This is no way to do things .
On principle , therefore , and also because the content of Amendment No 201 was not consistent with the wishes of the PPE Group , we voted against this amendment .
Despite Mr White 's best efforts , his attempt to reduce the number of amendments to this text as far as possible only succeeded with the Council on points which , whilst useful , were thought to be of minor importance .
We have had to vote in today 's sitting on nearly 200 amendments .
That proves , Mr President , that Parliament is using the powers granted it under the Treaty , despite the dubious practices employed by the Council of Ministers .
This explanation of vote is mainly concerned with those sections of the report dealing with PVC .
Although we appreciate that PVC is not the only issue here , we are ready to back those amendments which seek either to ban or to restrict the use of PVC .
We naturally support reduced use of traditional PVC , but we do feel that today 's technology offers ever more ways of cutting back on those component substances in PVC that are a danger to the environment and health .
We also know that industry , and in particular the automobile sector , is working actively on many fronts to find alternatives to PVC , or to use less hazardous forms of it .
We therefore hope that the Commission will very soon come forward with a proposal for a directive on the whole issue of PVC , without this being restricted to any particular sector .
As to the disposal of PVC , we believe that the optimum solution is reuse or recycling ; the second-best choice would be incineration , coupled with energy production .
Landfill has to be seen as the option of last resort .
Adopting Amendment No 25 fails in our opinion to do justice to the important area of producer liability .
We therefore voted against this amendment .
The following order of priorities is used in the treatment of waste in the European Union : prevention , reuse , recycling , incineration and landfill .
The same order must therefore also be used in disposing of vehicles , particularly when we consider that there are huge numbers of end-of-life vehicles each year and that the first priority must be to ensure that the dangerous substances they contain are given appropriate treatment .
As regards the prevention of PVC waste , we feel that this would be better dealt with in a horizontal directive , and we are expecting a proposal from the Commission on this shortly .
This is why we voted against Amendments Nos 8 , 19 , 21 and 56 .
The best way of ensuring successful collection is to enable the last owner to deliver the vehicle to an authorised treatment facility free of charge .
The treatment costs can then be passed on in the price of new vehicles .
In many countries , however , it happens all too often that vehicles are dumped illegally , even in surface water , with all that this implies .
We voted for Amendments Nos 22 to 25 , even though they do not take adequate measures to prevent these problems from happening .
The existing arrangements for the collection of two and three-wheeled vehicles must be left in place , and it is therefore a good idea to exclude them from Article 5 .
We voted for Amendment No 18 , despite the fact that all the provisions on prevention , reuse and recovery have been dropped .
On the subject of treatment , we wholeheartedly supported Amendment No 30 , and the same applies to Amendment No 34 on the percentages for reuse and recovery .
As everyone probably knows , the complete dismantling of end-of-life vehicles is currently possible and economically viable .
This would mean a reduction in the shredding of such vehicles .
The targets set out in Amendment No 34 are certainly attainable : in the Netherlands , for example , we have already reached 86 % .
We are in favour of Member States concluding agreements with the economic actors concerned , so that the directive can be implemented flexibly .
I am glad that the European Commission and Parliament are at last planning to legislate on the recycling and proper disposal of end-of-life vehicles .
Motor vehicles are one of the most important areas of capitalist production .
In the European Union , as we approach the year 2000 , close on 10 million vehicles are scrapped every year .
To quote just one of the many eloquent figures , the non-recyclable waste which remains after crushing and shredding makes up 10 % of the total volume of hazardous waste .
In the case of vehicles and other major consumer items , a fundamental principle could usefully be adopted on a large scale .
The producer should also be made responsible for disposing of and recycling his products .
The purchase price would of course reflect the cost of this responsibility .
In this way numerous pollutants , often harmful to the environment , would be eliminated and this would enable the process of recycling and disposal to be organised more efficiently .
European standards should be put in place for the various product categories to regulate their collection , processing , reuse , recycling and the monitoring of these operations .
I think this idea will also enable many pollutants to be eliminated at the production stage , since the producer himself will have to make provision for recycling his products in the simplest and safest way possible .
I naturally welcome any proposal which aims to improve waste management in the European Union .
Clearly , the waste which results from lack of control in the motor industry has become unacceptable , and measures are needed to address the problem .
To that extent , I support the report and the means of improving waste management contained in it .
However , I am not satisfied that due regard has been given to motorcycles .
Motorcyclists , if anything , have been more environmentally friendly than those of us who travel on four wheels .
There is a strong tradition of recycling motorcycle parts .
I was therefore concerned when the original proposal was put forward that it appeared to ignore this tradition by putting two-wheeled vehicles in the same category as four-wheeled vehicles .
My own view is that motorcycles , as well as vintage cars , should have been excluded from the legislation and that separate legislation should be drafted which would ensure compliance with genuine environmental concerns .
Mr Antony 's tirade in this morning 's debate on research and development cooperation with Israel in which he accused Israel of producing ethnic weapons that would select their victims on the basis of race tell us more about Mr Antony 's views than Israel 's research policy .
Only a racist could give credence to such nonsense .
Only someone who believes the world is composed of sharply-defined ' races ' arranged in a neat hierarchy with them at the top of the food chain could imagine such a horror .
It is not possible .
There are more similarities in the genetic make-up between so-called ' races ' than between individuals within such ' races ' .
Anyone who started such a programme would have already demonstrated they lack the scientific knowledge to carry it through .
As I said this morning I will be voting to support this report with the few reservations I indicated then .
Mr Antony 's views have only reinforced this decision .
The document we are considering is what is called an own-initiative report in the European Parliament . Such reports present the European Parliament 's point of view on issues directly or indirectly connected with the European Union , some of which may not have been dealt with in Community legislation .
This is therefore the European Parliament 's unilateral position , and it does not have any immediate or concrete impact on the issues it relates to .
Nevertheless , the report does have the merit of drawing attention to real problems , and that means it can initiate the legislative and decision-making process applying in the European Union , as the Commission may implement some of the report 's highly positive recommendations for the ultraperipheral regions , namely :
1.The creation of a devolved Commission service in the ultraperipheral regions will help to physically strengthen the presence of the UPRs within the Community as a whole.2.Establishment of enlarged regional markets for the exchange of products originating in the UPRs , the overseas countries and territories and the ACP countries in the same geographical area.3.Facilitating the development of inter-regional exchanges , with the focus on the areas of training and culture , sea and air communications , environmental protection and so on.But I do have one reservation about this report , which is that it might open the door to interests alien to the ultraperipheral regions , allowing them to misrepresent the specific nature and particular circumstances of what is meant by ultraperipheral , which is already defined in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Amsterdam Treaty .
I pointed yesterday to the unacceptability of the retaliatory customs measures announced by the US against European products , even before the WTO has looked at the new common organisation of the market in bananas .
And this threat of sanctions has a definite effect , because even before it is put into practice , it is prompting the economic players to react .
No WTO member has the right to take such measures unilaterally : they must use the procedure for settling disputes laid down by the WTO .
What do we see on the European side ?
Firstly , we are seeing every day the very regrettable consequences of the European negotiators ' failure to secure adequate guarantees in the GATT agreements allowing us to preserve our preferential relations with the ACP countries .
Secondly , we deplore the apparent willingness of certain European Member States to sacrifice European solidarity on condition that the US exempts them from its sanctions .
Lastly , the attitude of the German Presidency does not seem to be altogether unambiguous , in that it has sought a direct settlement with the US without consulting its partners .
We for our part wish to encourage the European Commission to show the utmost firmness - which for once it seems intent on doing , albeit very late in the day - and consequently the Europe of Nations Group chose not to sign the compromise of the PPE and PSE Groups , the content of which seemed to us insufficiently robust , but proposed a more forceful compromise text instead , together with four other political groups .
We wished in particular to reaffirm in strong terms our support for our ACP partners , to whom we are linked by an international agreement .

We wished also to indicate Parliament 's fundamental disapproval of unilateral measures and deplore in no uncertain terms the USA 's declared intention to apply Section 301 and ' super 301 ' , the spectre of which we were told had been banished for ever thanks to the Marrakesh agreements .
In the absence of a European ' super 301 ' we would also like to know how the Commission will react to safeguard our interests if the US should take the unilateral measures it has threatened .
That concludes voting time .
Statement by the President
At a meeting today the Conference of Presidents decided , pursuant to Rule 10 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to bring forward the second March part-session to 22 and 23 March .
The part-session will begin at 5 p.m. on Monday 22 March and will continue on Tuesday 23 March .
Voting time will be at 3 o 'clock on Tuesday .
The Conference of Presidents has decided to include in the agenda of Monday 22 March a Commission statement followed by a debate on the action to be taken on the report of the Committee of Independent Experts .
The deadline for tabling motions for resolutions will be Thursday 18 March at 5 p.m ..
The deadline for tabling amendments and joint motions will be on Monday 22 March at 10 p.m.
The other items on the agenda will be decided by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting on 4 March .
It should be noted that it will be possible to hold a political group meeting on Wednesday 17 March at 6 p.m. and possibly on 18 March at 10.30 a.m. as well as on Monday 22 March before 5 p.m.


Committee meetings already scheduled for 22 and 23 March will be postponed until 24 and 25 March .
Further details will be provided by the committees involved .
Mr President , I am afraid I do not intend to respond to the remarks made by Mr Hänsch , who was probably inspired by the Carnival in the Rhineland , because he could not possibly have been inspired by the election results in Hesse . No , my intention is to raise the question of the Kazakhstan resolution again .
Since making that point before , I have received faulty copies from other Members , and I now have this pile of 63 faulty copies of the Kazakhstan resolution , each comprising only straight lines .
Following our earlier exchanges , I checked at the desk outside - this is no laughing matter , gentlemen - to see whether proper texts were available there .
They do not have a single text that is properly printed .
I do think we ought to take our parliamentary work seriously enough for me to be able to ask you to check what has happened here and for you to ensure that it does not happen again .
We are going to check again but I have been assured that a fresh batch of properly printed resolutions were made available at the distribution desk .
Mr President , I would appreciate it if you could tell me whether or not the statement you have just read out has been printed and is being distributed in some way to Members . We have naturally taken note of it , but there are too many changes to the calendar .
It would therefore be better if we received a written copy this evening , perhaps in a fax to our offices .
Mr President , I should like to ask whether there will also be a vote in plenary on this change of date , because as far as I am aware , the original calendar of part-sessions was adopted by us here in the House . If there is to be a vote , when will it take place ?
I understand that the answer is No .
The Conference of Presidents has the power to alter the date .
I cannot answer detailed questions as I am no more informed about it than you are .
Mr President , I am interested in your announcement about the changing of the date of the mini-session .
I am sure you are aware that visits are arranged for people from many parts of the world in the light of the timing of the mini-session .
This change will certainly cause great difficulty as far as some of my visitors are concerned .
Could you give me an explanation , that I can pass on , as to why the mini-session has been changed ?
I am sure there must be some very clear political reason but I did not quite understand what it was - I did not quite hear what the explanation was .
As I say , I am learning as I go along .
I am told it is because the original date clashed with the European Council meeting and we wish to meet before that meeting .
Mr President , just to give an explanation to Mr McGowan .
The problem is that we have to hold a debate on the results of the Committee of Independent Experts in that mini-session .
This has to happen in the presence of the Commission .
But on the same date the Council is meeting in Berlin and it is impossible for the Commission to be in two places at the same time .
Therefore , the only solution was to find another date for the mini-session .
As it is a sensitive issue , we could not postpone it until the month of April .
That is the real political explanation .
Of course , normally we would hold the mini-session on 24 and 25 March , and the committee meetings would take place on 22 and 23 March .
So this is reversed : the mini-session will be on 22 and 23 March and the committee meetings on 24 and 25 March .
That is the whole explanation .
It is useful to have someone who attended the meeting to explain the situation .
However , the plenary is not the place to debate this .
It was a decision taken by the Conference of Presidents .
If you have a problem with it speak to your group leaders and raise the matter in your political groups .
Combined transport : dimensions and weights ( continuation )
Mr President , I hope that I can find my bearings again in the debate which we interrupted .
The role of combined transport is to shift goods transport from the roads to the railways .
It is capable of doing that despite its structural disadvantages , thanks to the preferential measures designed to enable it to compete with the transport of goods by road .
Nevertheless , it has not developed to the extent that we transport policymakers had hoped and expected .
The main reason is that the railways are taking a very long time to develop into modern service enterprises , if they are developing in that direction at all .
Combined transport is also the forerunner of a future model , namely that of intermodal transport , which will improve the flow of traffic for all types of carrier .
A decisive breakthrough in the development of intermodal transport will naturally require a sea change in the political regulation of transport in Europe .
What we are asking about today are the conditions under which the present superannuated form of combined transport can be sustained for long enough to develop into that model of the future , without it grinding to a halt and simply being overrun by the road-transport juggernaut .
The new proposal for a directive starts off in the right direction , broadening the definition of combined transport to pave the way for intermodal transport .
We are naturally calling for a precise limitation of the ratio of road legs to total mileage .
The second step in the Commission 's proposal , namely the European harmonisation of preferential measures , also points in the right direction , in my opinion .
The issue of grants poses fewest problems .
The maximum weight of 44 tonnes and the exemptions from driving bans , however , remain bones of contention .
I personally consider them necessary for a transitional period until a level playing field has been created for all modes of transport and intermodal transport has become an everyday phenomenon .
I share some of my colleagues ' fears , however - firstly that the abuses which are already occurring today will become more widespread , and secondly that the increase in exemptions from driving bans and derogations from weight limits could open the political floodgates for the extension of these privileges to road hauliers in general .
For that reason , we insist on follow-up negotiations to review the situation .
Madam President , both Parliament and the Commission agree that there is a need to actively promote combined transport by increasing the efficiency of the means of transferring transport of goods from road transport to more environmentally-friendly , safer and more energy-efficient modes which are less prone to congestion .
I welcome Parliament 's support for this approach .
However , I regret that the report before the House rejects two of the three main measures proposed by the Commission to promote combined transport and substantially amends the other .
The suggestions set out in the report would not achieve what both of our institutions and the majority of Member States want and that is the further development of combined transport as an efficient and viable alternative to current dependence on road transport .
Therefore , it would be useful to pursue discussions on this text at a later stage to allow us to take Council 's view on this proposal into account .
Meanwhile , on Mr Wijsenbeek 's amendment , it is generally acceptable , since it developed some of the ideas in our proposal , while remaining faithful to the existing directive .
But I am aware that Mr Wijsenbeek 's colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism do not share his views .
Let me briefly comment on two of the three components of the proposal : exemptions from driving bans and derogations from weight limits .
The Commission proposed Community-wide exemptions of the road legs of combined transport from restrictions on driving at weekends , during the night , holiday periods and during periods of high pollution .
Such exemptions would improve the competitiveness of combined transport , by comparison with road transport , and would ensure greater reliability and regularity of combined transport services without jeopardising social and environmental standards .
Obviously combined transport would have a major advantage if clients could have their goods moved and delivered when unimodal road haulage was forbidden .
At present , there are about 47 lorry bans in existence in the Community , with many detailed exceptions to them for combined transport services .
That needs serious improvement because combined transport obviously involves several links and if one is not allowed , for example on Sunday night , the whole chain is jeopardised .
If a ban ends at 10 p.m. there just is not time after the trucks have reached the terminal to form a rail train that would allow arrival the next morning .
That means all transport operation starting at 10 p.m. would go totally by road ; and in international road container traffic , that means average driving distances of about 1 000 kms .
Is it really safer , or more socially acceptable , or more efficient to do that than to have a road journey of about 100-150 kms to or from a rail terminal on a Sunday ?
The environmental congestion , social and efficiency arguments all point in one direction .
Secondly , we believe that transport operators should have the option of using a maximum authorised vehicle weight of 44 tonnes for road transport when it is specifically used as part of a combined transport operation involving the movement by different transport units in the whole Community .
That is not just a marginal incentive .
It may lower costs by 10 % and is , of course , only applicable over the shorter road legs of the combined transport journey .
It is an efficient way of making combined transport more attractive .
For these reasons , I am at this stage only in a position to accept two technical amendments in addition to Mr Wijsenbeek 's ones , Nos 3 and 6 , and I have to reject the other ones .
It would be most productive to revisit this issue at a later date , against the background of the Council 's common position , and after detailed discussion of the arguments .
I hope we could then take a joint view about how a satisfactory compromise could be developed so that we could fulfil our common objective of supporting combined transport .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Article 366a of 4th ACP-EC Convention
The next item is the recommendation ( A4-0013 / 99 ) by Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the draft Council Decision on the framework procedure for implementing Article 366a of the fourth ACP-EC Convention ( 5644 / 98 - C4-0156 / 98-96 / 0050 ( AVC ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , about two years ago the Council consulted the European Parliament about the procedure for implementing Article 366a of the Fourth ACP-EC Convention , which deals with how the European Union reacts to serious human rights abuses or the total failure of democratisation processes and so on , as a result of which the Union may suspend cooperation with the country concerned .
The whole issue has been dragging on for two years now because of a fundamental disagreement between Parliament and the Council about the role that Parliament should be allowed to play in this process .
Originally it was the view of the vast majority , in fact nearly all Members of this House , that we wanted the assent procedure to be applied , but this was rejected out of hand .
We then decided to go for the consultation procedure .
In connection with this , I had informal contacts - not really enough to merit the term negotiations - with the UK Presidency on behalf of the Council , but these proved fruitless .
The issue was raised again during the Austrian Presidency , which then ensured that the Council was formally consulted to see whether it would agree to the consultation procedure .
The result was that only two of the fifteen Member States were prepared to agree to Parliament 's request .
So once again we came back empty-handed .
Since then the Council has made a small change to the text of the proposal , which had originally called for a qualified majority for any decision to be taken in this context .
The qualified majority still stands , but unanimity is now required in the case of full suspension of the application of the Convention .
It is important to note that up to now this has never actually happened , even in very difficult situations such as with Nigeria a few years ago .
It was always the case that a number of articles were suspended , but never the entire Convention .
The situation today is as follows .
If Parliament decides to refuse to give its assent , then in any event as soon as the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force - and that is not so far off now - all that is required under the provisions of the Treaty is that we should be informed .
That is the only right we have in this context .
So there is little point in obstinately refusing to give our assent here in Parliament , given that this will only result in the unanimity rule applying for the remaining months if cooperation is to be suspended .
This is certainly not likely to promote rapid and appropriate action by the Union in cases of serious human rights violations .
So because we would much prefer rapid action to be taken where possible by a qualified majority , I did not think I would be justified in calling for us to stick to our guns and refuse to give assent to the Council 's draft decision .
Against my will , therefore , but in consideration of the practical consequences , I therefore recommend that we accept the decision as it stands , knowing that we have one small consolation , which is that whenever such a measure is to be taken , the Commission will inform Parliament at the same time as the Council , so that Parliament can react in good time .
I have to say that it is thanks to our particularly close cooperation with the Commission on this document that we are able to relinquish the genuine consultation that we should have had with rather less distress than would otherwise have been the case .
Madam President , we have already debated the implementation of Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention on many other occasions . It lays down the procedure for suspending cooperation with countries in violation of the essential provisions of Article 5 .
This was one of the principal innovations of the Fourth Lomé Convention , and it makes cooperation dependent on respect for human rights , democracy and the principles of good governance .
I also want to thank Mrs Aelvoet on behalf of the Socialist Group . Under her wise guidance as rapporteur the European Parliament tried to democratise the procedures the Commission proposed , by making Parliament 's opinion compulsory through the assent procedure .
But the Council 's intransigence , plus the objective legal restrictions of the Lomé Convention , made it necessary to move towards a compromise .
As the rapporteur says , all things considered , the result is better than nothing .
The decision in the Council is no longer required to be unanimous but is to be by a qualified majority , and the Commission undertakes to inform Parliament in good time of any major change in the implementation of the suspension procedure .
Parliament will obviously be extremely vigilant and insistent about this .
It is , effectively , better than nothing , so our group will vote in favour of the draft decision , as recommended by the rapporteur .
Madam President , as always Mrs Aelvoet has produced an excellent report on a very delicate subject .
However , it is a sad indictment of the world we live in that Article 366a has to be written into the fourth ACP-EU Convention at all .
Having just returned from Africa yesterday and hearing of the latest events in Zimbabwe , it is vital the Commission has the power of suspension and is able to act quickly .
Of course it would be good practice if Parliament - and by that I assume the Committee on Development and Cooperation - could be consulted before suspension took place .
But I have to be honest and say that we live in the real world .
There will be occasions when the Commission has to act quickly to convey the message to any nation abusing human rights before it has the opportunity to ask Parliament .
The key to the report is the sentence that the Commission , wherever possible , will inform Parliament in advance of any suspension or indeed resumption of cooperation .
I believe that is a fair compromise between the Commission and Parliament and therefore support the proposal that Parliament give its assent to the draft Council decision .
However , there is an interesting situation which will arise after the year 2000 , under the new Lomé Agreement , whatever that may be .
As the Commission will know , the proposals for any new ACP-EU agreement could be based on regional cooperation and integration , with funding being distributed via the regional organisations rather than through individual nations and national indicative programmes .
I wonder how Article 366a can operate in such circumstances , as the Commission will have lost the ability to sanction an individual nation within a region .
It would be unfair to sanction the entire region .
Perhaps Commissioner Brittan could pass on that particular question to the appropriate Commission service for an answer at a later date .
As there are a number of difficult situations building up in various African states I hope the Commission will use Article 366a in its widest form .
Human rights , to me , should include pluralism , good governance , an independent judiciary , a free press , as well as free and fair elections .
My group will be supporting this report .
Once again , I congratulate Mrs Aelvoet on the work she has done on behalf of this Parliament .
I should like to thank and congratulate Mrs Aelvoet for all the work that she has done to make it possible for Parliament to give its consent and for the realistic and reasonable approach that she has shown , as have other speakers such as Mr Corrie and Mr Vecchi .
I would like to reiterate what we stressed when the interim report was discussed here last June , namely , that we intend to keep Parliament fully informed of any initiative which we might take or any proposal which we might submit to the Council with regard to the implementation of Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention which sadly , as has been said , is not something that can be regarded as a purely theoretical possibility .
I would add that in the only case so far in which Article 366a was invoked , against Togo , the Commission immediately informed Parliament of its intentions , as the rapporteur has acknowledged in her report , for which I thank her .
We will continue , as ever , to take very seriously any opinions or resolutions adopted by Parliament which might affect implementation of the consultation and suspension procedure laid down in Article 366a .
With regard to Mr Corrie 's query about how it would work in a situation where the regional element is to the fore , I will certainly convey that query to those who are handling this matter on a day-to-day basis .
The Commission is pleased that with Parliament 's assent the framework decision will take effect , giving us a proper and transparent procedure for taking appropriate measures if essential provisions of the revised Fourth Lomé Convention are violated .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Macro-financial assistance to Albania
The next item is the report ( A4-0041 / 99 ) by Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision providing macrofinancial assistance to Albania ( COM ( 98 ) 0507 - C4-0590 / 98-98 / 0273 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this debate on the granting of EUR 20 million in macro-financial assistance to Albania , I think it is extremely important to look at the political and economic context in which the assistance is being provided .
Let me pick out a few points .
Albania freed itself from Marxist dictatorship much later than other countries in the eastern bloc , and this means that the problems of developing a pluralist society are persisting for longer than in any of the other countries , where some progress has been made .
The economic and social conditions are such that , in my view , Albania can rightly be described as a third world country on the Union 's doorstep .
The collapse of the pyramid schemes , the plundering of the munitions depots - which we all remember very clearly : a Kalashnikov now has a street value of five to ten dollars - the effects of the conflict in neighbouring Kosovo : all of these things have led to the enormous tide of refugees who are now on the move , with economic refugees coming to the Union and political refugees fleeing Kosovo for Albania .
In short , Albania does not just have serious internal problems to resolve .
Because of its geographical situation , it cannot escape being politically influenced by surrounding countries in the Balkans .
Mr Imbeni made this point very clearly during the Kosovo debate yesterday .
However , there are some glimmers of hope .
Last November a new constitution was approved with a 90 % turnout , and a new leader , Mr Majko , seems to be making good progress towards guaranteeing independent roles for the president , the legislature and the judiciary .
However , Albania 's political recovery is closely linked to the priorities to be met for economic recovery .
Last October , the Albanian authorities in Tirana assured the group of donors that they will promote the development of an action plan to combat corruption and introduce legislation to create the climate needed to encourage investment , which is currently at a very low level - there is almost no investment from outside the country - so that investors will also have a better guarantee of getting their money back in future .
It is also important here to monitor whether the new Customs Code does indeed consolidate customs and tax revenue collection , and then the main concern is the further winding-up of the pyramid selling companies , though it is still not known whether Albanians will ever see any of their money again .
Unfortunately , we can do nothing to ensure that they do .
Since 1991 the European Union has been the largest donor to Albania , and in view of the country 's economic and financial situation , international aid is still desperately needed , if only to keep the current account going .
This is why it is vital that we should flesh out the ECOFIN Council decision of last April as quickly as possible .
The Commission is in an excellent position to do this , with its considerable experience of Albania .
Up to now we have mainly provided donations , but this time it is a loan .
However , in my view we must prevent Albania from falling into the disastrous vicious circle of being financially dependent on outside help .
For this reason , in the extremely successful cooperation which I had with Mr Brinkhorst from the Committee on Budgets , for which I would like to thank him - unfortunately he could not be here this evening - I proposed that a coherent assessment should be made of the direction and state of progress of the political and institutional reforms in Albania .
I have therefore asked the Commission not just to rely on the technical evaluations of international financial bodies such as the IMF , but to involve the Committee on Monetary Affairs and the PHARE committee in its assessment .
The aim is for Parliament to have a comprehensive picture of the reforms before the second tranche is paid .
The intention is not to put Albania under the microscope , but to promote sound and efficient management .
In my opinion , this is not just what EU citizens want , it is what Albanian citizens want as well .
I should like to thank the members of the Committee on External Economic Relations for their critical yet supportive views , and I hope that tomorrow the House will accept the amendments which are before us , because almost a year has already passed between the ECOFIN decision and the start of implementation , and Albania is simply raring to go .
Madam President , we know that Albania is still facing many intractable problems , especially problems in connection with internal security and public order which are affecting all other areas .
Nevertheless , in the midst of all these problems , relatively speaking I am amazed at the success this small country has had in implementing the six-month contingency programme from October 1997 to March 1998 , which allowed it to tackle the social crisis and the civil war in the spring of 1997 .
We therefore have initial proof at least that , by following a specific programme in a well-disciplined manner and with adequate technical support , the Albanian Government can be effective and make progress .
However , as was clear from the serious regression which took place in September last year , the problems of Albania centre more around the lack of communication and dialogue among the country 's political powers and their inability to reach agreement on a minimum joint programme to extricate the country once and for all from the crisis it is in , rather than on the genuinely deep economic recession .
The European Union and international organisations must give generously all the help they possibly can to enable this country to find positive solutions to its problems .
Albania is part of Europe , it has contributed to the history of Europe and , from this standpoint , it is a potential applicant country for the European Union .
It must nevertheless be made clear to all the political powers in Albania that responsibility for the progress and future prospects of the country lie fairly and squarely with them .
The European Union is granting macro-financial aid to support the efforts made by Albania , but this must in no way be taken as a shifting of responsibilities .
The Albanian Government must intensify its own efforts to solve its problems , and it must push forward policies and economic reforms to ensure that democratic institutions run smoothly and that the rule of law operates correctly .
The adoption of the constitution was of course a major step in the right direction . However , we must have guarantees that human rights will be respected , that there will be a smooth transition to a market economy , financial stability and , above all , a revitalisation of the credit system .
Corruption must be stamped out and organised crime combated .
Structures and procedures must be created to guarantee transparency and to ensure that public money is handled honestly .
Only in this way can a climate of security be created for investment .
The EUR 20 million are rather less than what the Albanian Government had hoped for and , more importantly , less than what the country needs to tackle its problems .
Nevertheless , strengthening the credibility of the country and ensuring economic and political stability will gradually increase its ability to take on loans and , above all , will attract foreign investments , which Albania desperately needs .
We all know that my country , Greece , sincerely hopes that progress will be made , and it supports in every way the attempts of the Albanian Government to carry forward the necessary policies and institutional reforms which will bring Albania closer to the European model .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs van Bladel for her excellent report .
It has our full support .
As she said , and as my honourable colleague Mrs Karamanou has just stated , Albania is not only one of the weakest countries in economic terms , it is also lagging far behind the other countries in the development of democratic structures .
Its situation is similar to that of Bosnia-Herzegovina ; in other words , Albania has to be financially drip-fed by the European Union .
We not only provide food aid .
We not only provide general reconstruction aid .
The European Union also spends money on the refugees from Kosovo who have found a temporary abode in Albania .
But the crucial point - and this is where we start to see the light - is that the last government reshuffle and the adoption of a constitution in Albania have laid the foundation stone for the construction of a stable system of government .
It is important to us , of course , to have a partner in whom we can have at least a reasonable degree of trust , and whom we can provide with the necessary funds to develop the structures of government and to ensure that the police and the armed forces return to their role as servants of the democratic order instead of being a law unto themselves , with all the problems which that has entailed in Albania over the past two to three years .
It is also crucial that Albania should gradually win over the confidence of the international financial system and of investors , that Albania should thereby become an interesting location for prospective investors in the long run , and that at the same time the conditions should be created in which welfare capitalism can flourish .
We have come a long way .
What we must do is to make sure that the control which is now required can also be extended to cover macrofinancial aid to a certain degree .
The very idea of macrofinancial aid , of course , is that it is not designed to fund specific projects , but to provide the state with a pool of funds with which it can perform and develop the tasks of government .
But I nevertheless consider it important that we strike a good balance between trust and verification , a balance that will also encourage the Albanians , the Albanian Government , to progress along the right path .
I have the impression that this financial aid of ours represents a small mosaic tile that Albania needs in order to go on constructing a stable future , and I hope that we shall soon see appropriate verification measures from the Commission to help ensure that this goal is achieved .
Madam President , my comments on the report and the rapporteur 's amendments are very brief .
Our group supports them in their entirety .
As regards the aid , although we feel this should be granted under the most favourable conditions possible for the time being , there must also , of course , be a number of conditions attached , as both the Commission and the rapporteur propose .
Let me just mention one of these .
We think that it is high time that the investigation into the pyramid selling schemes was completed ; the capital collected should be paid out to the creditors and legislation should be introduced to combat money laundering .
The schemes demonstrate the need for better financial controls on all sorts of institutions , including banks .
That said , the greatest risk still remains , as the rapporteur pointed out , that one hand will be paying out what the other receives , in other words that one loan will be applied for in order to pay another loan off .
This would be a disastrous development for a country that does not need one loan after another but productive investment , including from the European Union , so that it can generate its own , independent economic development .
This is what Albania needs in the long run .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must compliment Mrs van Bladel on her report .
Obviously the European Union has made a good many mistakes over Albania , and this EUR 20 million loan will not fundamentally change the situation .
That said , this loan will be something of a shot in the arm for Mr Majko , who is making heroic efforts but has very little room for manoeuvre .
It is the European Union 's general attitude on Albania which is wrong .
We are witnessing the growth of criminal activity , encouraged ultimately by the European Union .
The Union should be far bolder in its policy .
We should do what to some extent our Greek friends are doing - but not other countries , starting with Italy - and set very generous immigration quotas in order to break the power of mafia groups which feed on the traffic in labour and other commodities , such as drugs .
We should generously open our universities and give thousands of study grants to Albanian students .
Measures are needed to block the rise of opposition to the legal authorities in Albania , to prevent pyramid selling operations and situations of general political instability , notwithstanding the good intentions and intelligence of the current Albanian leadership .
In the absence of such measures , Albania will mark time for a good many years to come .
I therefore call on the Vice-President of the Commission in particular and the Commission in general to urge the Member States not to regularise the situation after the event , as has been done now in Italy , where 250 000 people have been legalised as immigrants - because in the meantime the emigration mafia have netted their profits .
We should act ahead of the event and set quotas in all countries of the European Union .
I think that if the burden were spread over the Union as a whole it would not be too severe , and this is what we need to do to tackle the root of the problem .
Madam President , I should also like to begin , of course , by expressing my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , who in my opinion has truly produced a very , very good piece of work .
I believe that when we speak of Albania , we must not forget that it is a country which has had to make an unimaginably huge leap forward within a few years and still has an enormous amount of ground to make up .
During the Enver Hoxha era the country was virtually dragged back into the Stone Age , and now it needs to progress by leaps and bounds at a time when the entire surrounding region is far from stable .
I believe our aid can only be a drop in the ocean , but it may serve a useful purpose inside the country , helping to overcome the barriers that exist there .
We must remember that Albania is divided into two large areas , the north and the south , with the Gegs and the Tosks respectively , traditional enemies who naturally continued to wage war during the Stone Age into which Enver Hoxha led the country , and that many of the conflicts we see today have their roots in that antithesis .
It is even reflected in the party structure we find in Albania today .
The new Albanian constitution has naturally raised high hopes .
I very much hope that it will be possible to give the opposition a suitably constructive role to play in the Albanian political system , because I believe it has adopted very constructive positions in many areas .
Only then will it be possible for Albania to bring the problems with its neighbours under some sort of control .
Naturally - and this has been emphasised several times this evening - it will be necessary to introduce appropriate verification mechanisms .
Only if these mechanisms exist , particularly in relation to the Albanian democratisation process , will the aid from the European Union be able to achieve anything .
Many other verification measures have been mentioned , especially the mechanisms designed to curb the corruption , the arms trade and the drug trafficking that exist in Albania .
We cannot achieve complete control in these areas ; we can only do a little here to help the Albanians to help themselves , but we should do whatever we can .
In that respect , Mrs van Bladel 's report and the efficient aid that should result from it represent a step in the right direction .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the excellence of her report and also thank her for the support given by Parliament to the Commission proposal .
The purpose of the macro-financial assistance of a maximum of EUR 20m for Albania is to shore up the country 's official exchange reserves .
This operation forms part of the global strategy pursued by the international community , and in particular by the European Union , since the crisis began at the end of 1996 .
It supplements the actions we have taken under the PHARE programme , the priorities of which are institutional reform .
The specific purpose of this operation is to support the programme of structural economic reforms embarked on by the government under the aegis of the IMF .
Even during and immediately after the crisis that broke out in the country at the end of 1996 , after the collapse of the pyramid saving schemes , fiscal and monetary policy management was actually extremely prudent and , as a result , the macro-economic situation has improved in recent months .
The budget deficit as financed domestically has been reduced substantially , inflation has fallen dramatically , but the external payments position is still precarious .
The shoring up of foreign exchange reserves that the Community operation will permit will , therefore , help the Albanian authorities in pursuing a prudent macro-economic policy .
Of course , the Commission will pay special attention to efforts to combat corruption by improving customs procedures and the management of public expenditure .
I turn to some of the amendments : the Commission supports and welcomes Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 6 , some of which , in particular No 3 , will enable us to adopt a stronger negotiating position with the Albanians in sectors which we think are very important .
Generally speaking , our rejection of the other amendments stems from our concern to safeguard the effectiveness of the implementing arrangements and the integrity of the objectives being pursued .
These implementing arrangements have stood the test in numerous similar operations managed by the Commission , and to make them unduly onerous would prejudice the effectiveness of the operation .
For example , the mandate of the PHARE Committee does not provide for it to be consulted in advance on a macro-financial operation and on the financial conditions attached to the associated borrowing and lending operations .
But the Commission will ensure that the operation is fully consistent with and complements the objectives of the PHARE programme in Albania .
Under the proposed arrangements , the Commission will send to Parliament and the Council , at least once a year , a report evaluating how the decision is being implemented .
It does not make sense to go beyond that .
In the context of the evaluation provided for , the Commission will keep Parliament informed of the conditions attached to the loan .
Furthermore , we are , of course , prepared to reply to any questions Parliament might put to us , both during the operation and after it has been completed .
But negotiating the conditions of disbursement , which lies at the heart of such an operation , necessitates some room for manoeuvre and the observance of the confidentiality requirements that the authorities of the countries concerned might impose with regard to the substance and timetable of reforms .
It is essential to protect the objectives of an operation designed to underpin stability and economic reform .
Its scope would be over-stretched if immediate policy objectives were also assigned to it .
As we have invariably done in the past , the Commission will , of course , examine during the implementation phase whether the political context is compatible with disbursement in accordance with the principles of sound management .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m.
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , the work which we have carried out this week could not have been done without the help of interpreters .
It has come to my knowledge that we have 300 freelance interpreters whom the Commission has not paid properly since October .
This week the Commission published a document on how it is going to improve things in the administration .
We have 300 interpreters who have been without proper pay and who are experiencing some financial difficulties .
Could Commissioner Bangemann take this back to his colleagues , and would President Santer , when he has some time away from meeting farmers , arrange to meet the interpreters who work for us and settle this problem ?
We take note of that , Mr McMahon , but at the moment we are dealing with the approval of the Minutes .
I would ask that only Members who wish to speak on the Minutes should ask for the floor now .
If you have a point of order , please say under which Rule you wish to raise it .
Madam President , I would just like to reiterate something that was said yesterday in the minutes about the large number of roll-call votes .
We have 245 pages of roll-call votes , and it seems that the smaller the group the more roll-call votes it wants .
I defy anybody to tell me whether there is one citizen anywhere in the European Union who wants to know how David Hallam voted on the second part of Amendment 20 of the Florenz Report .
It is a ridiculous situation and a waste of money , and should be brought to an end .
That point was raised yesterday , Mr Hallam .
We take note of your comment .
Madam President , it is recorded in the Minutes that I raised an objection yesterday to the effect that we did not have a correct German text of the Kazakhstan resolution .
My objection was not about the lack of a correct text , but rather the lack of any text at all !
Lines drawn below the heading ' Kazakhstan ' and crosses and dots can scarcely be called an incorrect text ; quite simply , there was no text .
That is why I must insist on asking for a check to be carried out to ascertain why such a document was distributed .
The reason why some Members mistakenly thought that the proper text was available is that copies of the text were produced for a meeting of the group leaders yesterday morning , but by yesterday evening the distribution desk only had this version with the lines and crosses .
The point I am making is that all Members of the House must receive printed texts and not only individual representatives of the groups , otherwise we might as well abolish the Chamber and conduct all our business in the Conference of Presidents !
I can understand your dissatisfaction , Mr Posselt .
The matter has been looked into , and it appears that there was indeed a version such as you have described , although there was the other version too .
We shall investigate why the proper text was not the only one to be distributed .
At least the rest of the House did have the correct version .
But we shall look into how it was possible for this to happen .
Madam President , it grieves me to have to agree with Mr Hallam , but the point I would like to make also concerns the number of roll-call votes which was discussed yesterday .
What concerns me is not the actual number of votes - I know this is already in hand - but rather why every single Member has to be presented with this weighty tome , when far fewer copies could be produced for those sad Members who actually wish to go through and check how they voted .
Alternatively it could be available on the Internet which would save an awful lot of money .
Likewise , with the huge book of minutes .
I am sure it is very important , but there are large numbers of Members who have already departed from Strasbourg but are still getting a copy of this in their pigeonholes .
It represents a vast expense of time and effort , and could be made available just to those Members who want it or drawn down off the Internet when people wish to refer to specific items .
Ladies and gentlemen , I can understand your agitation , but the Rules of Procedure provide for this to happen .
If you wish to change this , you have the opportunity of submitting amendments to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Every Member is entitled to do that .
Ladies and gentlemen , I know there is dissatisfaction , but I should like to explain the legal situation to you once again .
According to Rule 10 ( 2 ) in Chapter II of the Rules of Procedure , which deals with the sessions of Parliament , Parliament shall itself determine the duration of adjournments of the session .
This therefore means that we decide once a year on the dates of our sittings for the year ahead .
In addition , Rule 10 ( 4 ) states that the Conference of Presidents , stating its reasons , may alter the duration of adjournments decided pursuant to paragraph 2 at least two weeks before the date previously fixed by Parliament for resuming the session ; the date of resumption shall not , however , be postponed for more than two weeks .
Now , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is saying that he opposed this in the Conference of Presidents .
However , it was announced to us - and most of the chairmen of the political groups are present here - that this was in fact the decision taken by the group chairmen in that body .
In legal terms , that is perfectly in order , even if you are expressing your dissatisfaction at what was decided .
The reasons are as follows - only a few Members were present yesterday , and Mrs Aelvoet made the same point , and she is also a member of the Conference of Presidents : the Conference of Presidents decided to bring forward the part-session in Brussels to Monday , 22 and Tuesday , 23 March to enable Parliament to express its views on the report by the Committee of Independent Experts before the European Council meeting on 24 and 25 March , and in the presence of the President of the Commission .
That is quite clear , and we do not need to discuss it any further .
The decision has been taken !
If you are unhappy , please take the matter up with your group chairmen .
There is no point in discussing it any further now , since the legal situation is quite clear .
Madam President , you were kind enough to announce that Mr Posselt 's legitimate objection will be examined .
May I ask another favour of you : would you please inform the House what will happen if it transpires that Parliament really did vote on a series of lines and dots ?
I am sorry to interrupt you , Mr Vallvé , but we are still dealing with the approval of the Minutes !
It says on this postcard that the new building is the new hemicycle , the new plenary chamber for the Council of Europe .
Did we really erect this building , I wonder , for the Council of Europe ?
Madam President , during the last two part-sessions of this Parliament we have sat in this Chamber and voted on hundreds of amendments in various different reports .
Many of those reports have then been sent back to committee .
Is it not about time that we looked at the Rules of Procedure and tried to decide that if any report comes forward with a certain number of amendments to it , it goes straight back to committee without wasting the time of this House ?
We would then have more time to get on with debates , which is what we should be doing as Members of Parliament .
Let me repeat : if any Member feels that the Rules of Procedure need to be changed - and incidentally there will be a debate on this subject in March - then they should simply take the necessary measures .
Each and every Member is entitled to propose amendments to the Rules of Procedure .
There is no point in just calling for these changes and then not following this up with any action .
If you think that things are not being done in an appropriate way , then you can submit your proposals .
Madam President , you rightly said , and substantiated it by reference to the Rules of Procedure , that the part-session dates are laid down and can be changed again within a certain time-limit .
I do not question that . Nevertheless , I should like to remind everyone that the report by this committee of wise men has been produced in response to the whole question of how we should deal with the discharge for 1996 .
To that extent , it is only right that the committee responsible , namely the Committee on Budgetary Control , should be able to deliver its opinion on the issue .
Applause
If we did that through resolutions by the political groups , that might be a solution , but at the end of the day this report is floating in thin air somewhere , in the sense that it is not in any way incorporated into our parliamentary work .
I wish to point out that we should initiate a proper procedure here to avoid the possibility of the report falling victim to political discrepancies and thereby failing to shed any light on the issue , in which case Parliament could do nothing with it .
That is why I insist that this report by the wise men be dealt with in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Applause
Thank you , Mrs Theato .
Your comments will be passed on and recorded in the Minutes .
They will be dealt with by the appropriate body .
Madam President , may we therefore assume that the committee meetings which would have been held on the 22nd and 23rd have now been postponed until the 24th and 25th ?
That is indeed the case .
However , you will be informed of that again in writing .
Madam President , still on the subject of the Minutes , may I say that you quoted the Rule correctly , but that Rule 10 in Chapter II also has a fifth paragraph , which states that , exceptionally , after consulting the Conference of Presidents , the President shall convene Parliament at the request of a majority of its Members or at the request of the Commission or the Council .
So this means that , provided a majority of Members so wish , we can indeed discuss these dates .
That is correct , Mr Rübig , but at the moment no such request has been submitted .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it was essential to find another date for the mini-session , because otherwise the Commission would have had to be in two places at once - with us in Brussels to hear Parliament 's assessment of the report of the committee of wise men , and in Berlin discussing Agenda 2000 with the Council .
That was not possible .
So we agreed at the Conference of Presidents - I did , my group did - that the mini-session should be brought forward .
That is one part of the story .
The second part of the story is the question of why this is being discussed here in the plenary .
I maintained that this should be dealt with through the Committee on Budgetary Control .
But I was in a minority , as other people were too .
So if the House thinks it would be better done through the Committee on Budgetary Control - as I do - we should plan to hold a vote on it , and we can easily do that at the March part-session here in Strasbourg , because that will be coming up first .
So I propose that we schedule a vote on this for the March part-session , and then it will be over and done with .
Thank you , Mrs Aelvoet .
Since some of the members of the Conference of Presidents are also present , that will no doubt be discussed again .
Madam President , I had not intended to intervene but some of the questions that have been raised here and in the debate are based , perhaps , on a certain misunderstanding .
Mrs Aelvoet has dealt with the issue of the date .
There was a preference in the Conference of Presidents to bring the date of the plenary session forward .
That was for a number of good reasons .
We wanted to have present at our debate President Santer from the Commission .
If the House insists on maintaining the original date , President Santer will , instead , be at a European Council meeting .
It would not make sense for us to have a debate without the President of the Commission .
A second point on the timing : this Committee of Experts will make its report available - if I recall correctly - on 15 March .
In my view , the Conference of Presidents rightly considers that this House should express a political view on that matter at an early date .
We should not have a report on which everyone in Europe has their say but the people who commissioned the report are not players in the field .
That too means we should come forward earlier , and not later .
The Committee of Experts was established , as you will see if you read the terms of reference and the original vote in this House , under the auspices of Parliament not one of its committees .
In the first instance Parliament will then need to have the work of that committee returned to it and express political conclusions in a debate in the House .
At the Conference of Presidents it was also said , acknowledged and understood that in the normal course of events , apart from that political debate , the substance and conclusions of the work of the experts will revert to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The Conference of Presidents assumes that the committee will then wish to incorporate any of the relevant observations and conclusions into its proper , ordinary work which serves this House so well .
So we should not have a debate based on misunderstanding .
No-one is highjacking the work of the committee .
The House set up a group which reports to the House and we have a general political debate .
But within the House there is a committee responsible for incorporating the substantive work .
Nothing was done at the Conference of Presidents to undermine , diminish or set to one side the substantive or procedural work of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
If that was the case I would have objected .
It was not the case and hence I did not object .
Madam President , Rule 24 deals with the duties of the Conference of Presidents .
It is high time the chairmen of the groups , Mrs Aelvoet especially , grasped the fact that our calendar of part-sessions is set by the plenary a year in advance .
If the dates of meetings of the Council of Ministers then clash with those of our part-sessions , it is the Commission 's duty , since it is the Commission which is under scrutiny here , to be with Parliament and not the ministers .
Mr Wijsenbeek , the Rules also say that in an exceptional case the reasons must be stated , and that has been done .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am disinclined to contribute to this debate .
I feel a little bewildered .
Various group leaders are each giving their version .
What we need is an accurate account of what was decided yesterday at the Conference of Presidents .
Parliament needs to be informed in the case of sensitive procedures like these .
That seems to me the right way to do things .
The wrong way is to have each member of the Conference of Presidents standing up here and giving his version of what was decided .
I am in favour of this decision , and I shall vote for it .
There was no majority in favour of some of my views , but I think that if Parliament is to function properly we must have decisions reported here properly , by the President of Parliament , for example .
Madam President , as Mr Wijsenbeek says , the Council manifestly takes no account of Parliament 's calendar , since it sets dates which clash with ones we ourselves earmarked over a year ago .
But I think we should have held the debate yesterday evening , when the announcement was made , and when there were still enough people in the Chamber to hold a vote , if necessary .
Personally , I suggest quite simply that we get on with our work this morning and proceed with the votes .
My colleague Mr Martin was in the Chair yesterday and announced the facts of the matter to the House .
The sitting then continued as usual , without any debate .
I would assume that most Members were at first somewhat taken aback and needed to reflect on the situation .
However , it must also be possible for such a topic to be discussed outside the normal schedule , since that is in all Members ' interest .
Madam President , I simply want to express my absolute agreement with the comments made by Mr Cox , not just as regards the outcome of the decisions which he expressed but the reasons which guided the decisions that were made yesterday in the Conference of Presidents .
He was absolutely correct .
Madam President , these dates were set by the former German Government .
I thought Mr Poettering would like to know that .
There would seem to be no further comments on the Minutes .
The Minutes were approved
VOTES
It is a good thing to be giving macro-financial assistance to Albania .
Events in Kosovo are having a major economic and social impact on that country .
Various international embargos , including that of the European Union , are a partial factor too .
So we cannot deny them macro-financial aid .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the Commission proposal .
I did not , however , vote for Amendments Nos 5 and 12 to the van Bladel report .
These amendments make the provision of aid contingent on political criteria which are far too demanding .
Of course a healthy political climate is necessary for economic progress .
But you could equally well put it the other way round .
We have taken on political obligations which we cannot evade , even if the political situation in Albania is other than we would wish .
My second reservation concerns the breadth of the criteria .
To my mind , a good customs code is not a sensible criterion for granting aid .
These reservations do not mean that I think aid should be given with no strings attached .
The European Union has a clear policy here .
There is the human rights clause , for example .
For individual countries , general criteria provide the guideline for decisions on whether or not aid should be given .
EAGGF : recovery of claims
The next item is the report ( A4-0009 / 99 ) by Mr Bardong , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 76 / 308 / EEC on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims resulting from operations forming part of the system of financing the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund , and of agricultural levies and customs duties and in respect of value-added tax and certain excise duties ( COM ( 98 ) 0364 - C4-0392 / 98-98 / 0206 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the directive we are debating today and on which we shall be voting relates to mutual assistance between Member States in the recovery of tax debts .
There is certainly a great deal of scope for such assistance .
Member States can even enforce judgments in these matters .
The proper functioning of the single market depends in part on the effectiveness of this mutual support .
That , sadly , is far from being the case at the present time .
Nevertheless , since 1993 , the annual number of recovery requests has averaged about 1 000 , the total sum claimed amounting to ECU 50 million .
This enforced payment of tax debts always becomes particularly difficult for both parties when the debtors have deposited all or part of their assets in another Member State to protect them from seizure .
The result is that only 3 % to 5 % of such debts are actually recovered .
Directives which were adopted back in 1976 and 1977 contained provisions designed to deal with this problem , not only for agricultural levies but also for customs duties , and subsequently for VAT and excise duty too .
In 1990 the Commission made an additional proposal , but it was voted down .
It is now proposing new amendments to improve and modernise this procedure , because some aspects of it are no longer in tune with present-day requirements .
The crux of the matter , to which I shall restrict my remarks , consists of three points .
Firstly , taxes on income and property are brought into the scope of the directive .
This may come as a surprise to many people , because it is not even mentioned in the title .
In Article 2 of the amended directive , however , it is explicitly stated .
We welcome that , and surely cannot do otherwise , but I wonder why the Commission did not deal with this more clearly and why this aspect of the directive is not really apparent from the title .
Secondly , when one state asks another to recover tax debts for it , the requested state must take the same trouble that it takes to collect its own taxes .
Thirdly , executory titles transmitted by a requesting state are to become directly enforceable in the requested state .
This means that there should be no more of the delays that have hitherto resulted from the need for official recognition of the titles , sometimes entailing an additional authorisation process .
Executory titles will therefore be directly enforceable , even in the other state in which the debtor is being pursued , and no requested state may insist on implementing its own validation procedure .
We believe that the Commission proposal is right in principle and is necessary if the single market is to function properly .
In our view , however , it does not go far enough in some points to provide the basis for really decisive improvements .
For that reason , the Committee on Budgetary Control is proposing a number of further amendments .
First of all , to combat fraud and tax evasion more effectively , we need to guarantee the assistance of the other Member States for a longer period of time .
Instead of a three-year lifetime for claims , the committee proposes five years .
If the period is made any shorter - and there could certainly be reasons for so doing - the notice or decision that the attempted recovery has failed will be delivered more rapidly , but fewer cases pending does not mean a higher success rate .
In addition , Member States must accord the same priority to claims from another Member State as they accord to their own claims .
Community claims , indeed , may even take priority over national claims .
These statements have only been included in the recitals .
We hope that they will ultimately be included in the operative section too , but for the time being we are happy to see them in the recitals .
At the same time , the Member States are absolutely free to decide whether and how the costs are to be shared in cases where recovery causes particular problems or is especially costly , for example when it is a matter of trying to combat organised crime .
Irrespective of the proposals before us , I believe that the Commission still has much to do .
For example , the training of tax officers in the Member States under the Fiscalis programme needs to be improved .
Efforts are also needed to assimilate or at least harmonise the different recovery powers of the various Member States .
At all events , this is another area where solidarity and mutual trust are indispensable .
These qualities are essential to the projects in question .
Allow me to say in conclusion that the financial interests of the Community and the Member States , as is often the case , would be well served by the plans presented here .
Not only the Community , but also - and to a greater extent - the Member States will benefit from an efficient recovery procedure .
Some of the calls for amendments which the Commission has now answered have come from the Member States .
They ought therefore to ensure that the Council makes the right decision .
As for the Commission , however , if you think about the length of time that elapsed before it tabled a proposal , the Commission does appear to have been rather dilatory .
Madam President , on a point of order . I ask for your clarification .
The title of the report we are discussing appears to concern the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund but the comments of the rapporteur went very much wider than that subject .
Is there an error in some respect in the title or is the report broader than that ?
Secondly , the text of the rapporteur 's report refers to tax havens and raises that question in relation to Amendment No 5 .
However , that amendment does not mention the subject matter .
I wonder whether there is another problem with this report there .
These are really things which should be discussed in committee , However , Mr Bardong will say something briefly on that as rapporteur .

Madam President , I shall be brief . The report and even the title of the report are certainly broader , or at least cover more types of taxes and public charges , than may appear from your documentation .
The effects on incomes are clearly formulated in the Commission proposals .
All I was criticising was the fact that they do not feature in the title too , because I consider them to be important .
We are not going to have a debate here which ought in fact to take place in committee .
Under which Rule do you wish to raise a point of order , Mr Mather ?
I am sorry , Mr Mather . To repeat , we are not going to have a debate here which ought to take place in committee .
You could have gone to the committee and expressed your views on this there .
Also , you did not ask for the floor through your group , and you cannot force your way into making a speech now , even though you were not down to speak .
Everyone might start to do that !
You must now listen to what other Members have to say , and then we shall vote on the matter .
Madam President , I did ask for the floor , and my name is down on the list to speak at this point .
I hope I am not pressurising you unduly on this Friday morning .
The title of the directive on which we have to take a decision today could hardly sound more technical , but for all that , I believe Mr Bardong 's report manages to pack a powerful political punch .
We know that any freedom can be abused .
This is also true of the freedoms which the common internal market offers the people of the European Union - freedom to travel without frontier checks , freedom to settle in another Member State .
Welcome though these freedoms may be , they have also occasionally been abused for purposes such as tax evasion .
The instruments we have today to protect ourselves against such abuses are not effective enough .
Since 1976 , there has been a directive which provides for mutual assistance between Member States , but the main purpose of the directive was originally to collect customs duties or levies in the framework of the common agricultural policy .
Today , with the spiralling volume of intra-Community exchanges , this provision is no longer sufficient .
That is why the Commission has put forward these proposals on which we have to decide - for example , the proposal that Member States should be able to collect each other 's fines and fixed penalties in response to a request for administrative assistance .
We in the Socialist Group support this proposal as well as the other proposals , because they target all forms of tax evasion and fraud .
The Commission is also proposing procedural improvements , for example that administrative assistance should be requestable in future even before all domestic means of recovery have been exhausted .
This is designed to prevent crafty lawyers from stalling for time and to eliminate abuse of the legal system .
As far as the rapporteur 's amendments are concerned , he has our full support for all of them .
I shall mention three points , some aspects of which have already been addressed by Mr Bardong .
Firstly , the statute of limitation proposed by the Commission is too short and should be extended from three to five years .
This view is substantiated by practical experience in past years .
Secondly , when a case of enforced recovery relates to both Community claims and claims in favour of a national budget , the Community claims should be accorded priority .
Thirdly , liability for the costs arising from administrative assistance should be determined by common consent between the Member States .
The precise division of costs is something that a directive does not have to dictate to Member States .
Let me sum up : despite the technical nature of your report , Mr Bardong , it is a very important document that will help to secure the long-term functioning of the common market in the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , beyond the technical complexity of the subject - after all even the title is quite a mouthful - I think this report should be hailed as a further contribution towards achieving the objective so dear to many European citizens , namely transparency .
Transparency in public administration means rectitude in Community systems for distributing resources and fighting fraud , both public and private .
The rapporteur reminds us that there has been a strategy for mutual assistance in recovering claims since 1976 , but because of anomalies in implementation , recovery cannot be fully guaranteed for either legitimate creditors or the Community and its budget .
The rapporteur - whom I compliment on the work he has done - mentioned an average recovery figure of 3-5 % , which verges on the ridiculous .
This figure is bound to worry people who are talking , with increasing conviction , of common fiscal systems , Community contributions policy , and intra-Community VAT and excise regimes .
Indeed , the introduction of the two latter regimes in 1993 has led to a considerable rise in claims to be recovered , and many Member States are already demanding their rights .
Member States themselves are calling for so-called direct taxation , mutual control of potential evaders and the fight against tax havens , which are easily established today not only inside the cumbersome banking systems of third countries , but also inside those of Member States .
It is a bold step from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund to tax havens , a strange departure by this report , but it serves to demonstrate that large systems , including fraudulent ones , start small , at individual level , and then become widespread .
That is why the strategy for demolishing them must be based on the general interest , but must also be able to reach right down to the very roots of fraud in order to eradicate it .
Madam President , Mr Bardong 's report now under discussion focuses on how the recovery of claims , agricultural levies , customs duties and taxes relating to the EAGGF can be made more effective .
The subject is a difficult one , as it is a delicate area .
I wish to thank Mr Bardong for what is a well prepared and expertly explained report .
Mutual assistance in the recovery of claims is becoming ever more important .
With the establishment of the single market it will be much easier for those with tax liabilities to move their assets and income from one country to another .
There is a danger that tax havens will start forming within the European Union .
This would mean conditions that were all too ideal , especially for organised crime .
The European Union 's problem is that it has its own budget but does not have the proper machinery to implement it .
Member States are taking practical steps to improve the situation regarding both the payment of levies and the recovery of claims .
However , the Member States are independent economic units which are primarily concerned with their own affairs in respect of revenues , and the recovery of other revenues takes second place .
Thus only 3 to 5 % of requests for recovery in the EU have been successful .
The second problem is that the act of recovery itself , the recovery of claims , the seizure of property and other matters connected with the process , fall under the second pillar of the Union .
The matters that fall under this pillar are not a proper part of the EU decision-making process , but they do call for cooperation among Member States .
Member States are very sensitive to the threat of violation of sovereignty in this area .
For that reason , the recovery of claims , and the degree of cooperation which that demands , are politically sensitive questions .
Despite everything , it is clear that the recovery of claims in respect of taxes and overpayments must be successful in the EU context too .
For this reason , Mr Bardong 's report and the Commission 's proposal are to be strongly supported .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Bardong for all the effort he has put into this important report , although I too wish to comment on its title , which fails to do justice to the full range of the subject .
A large part of the problem could well be that the Commission does not want to admit what is really at stake .
The question of how much power the EU should exercise in this area has been the subject of much debate , not least in our Member States .
Perhaps that is why the Commission is beating about the bush in this way .
Several speakers have commented on Amendment No 5 .
The Commission proposes that Articles 4 , 5 and 6 should apply only to claims not more than three years old .
I believe that it is right for us to be calling for five years , since these matters take a great deal of time to process .
If the articles in question are to have any impact at all , the Member States must have more than three years to complete their work .
Amendment No 2 causes some difficulties for me personally .
I am not sure that we should be saying that national claims are secondary in importance to claims payable to the Community budget .
This strikes me as unfair .
My feeling is that national and Community claims should be treated equally ; it would be wrong to give precedence to one set over the other .
As I said , however , this is my personal view .
The Green Group will be supporting the report , together with the amendments from Mr Bardong and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
This is a good report , Madam President .
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgetary Control are good too .
We shall vote in favour of them .
All of us here are aware that some shameless debtors may organise their insolvency in such a way that the creditor Member State is obliged to apply to another Member State to whose territory the recalcitrant taxpayer has transferred - or where he holds - assets that are available for enforcement .
I should like now to put a very specific question to Commissioner Bangemann .
One scenario envisaged by the Commission as part of Agenda 2000 is that Member States should cofinance the CAP .
In that case , who in the event of fraud will be responsible for recovering sums disbursed in error out of the portion cofinanced by the Member State ?
How would one recover a sum paid in error to a fraudster who had transferred assets to another Member State or who had assets in another Member State ?
Before proposing a scenario , we need to consider the legal procedures that are essential for it to come about , because in this case , where operations are cofinanced , it is the European institutions which decide on the amount of agricultural aid and thus the amount payable by the Member State in question .
The separation between the party deciding and the party paying will pose real legal problems when it comes to debt recovery , and these may hamper the implementation of cofinancing as envisaged by the Commission - one more obstacle along a road which appears decidedly rocky .
Madam President , I should like to convey my special thanks to Professor Bardong for his excellent work on an insoluble problem .
The report , which has been criticised in some points , such as the inconsistency between its title and its content , shows quite precisely the real sort of jungle in which we find ourselves .
I should like to say a few words on that .
There have been repeated references in this discussion to tax havens or , as we call them in German , ' tax oases ' .
Let us consider what that expression means .
Where do we find oases ?
In the desert , of course .
This means that when we speak of tax oases , we have to admit that everything in this landscape that is not an oasis is a desert .
That is the very nub of this entire discussion .
Our difficulties derive from the build-up of bureaucracies and technocratic measures ; above all , they are indicative of the way in which our whole tax system is becoming increasingly complex and incomprehensible .
In that respect the report is truly excellent , and I shall vote for it , because it is technically correct and shows us precisely where the problem lies , namely in the fact that in the individual states , but also to some extent in the Union as a whole , the situation is becoming ever more complex for our citizens , which naturally gives crooks the opportunity to exploit that complexity .
I should like to see us addressing that problem very seriously , because if we do not establish a clear picture here , if we cannot adopt and implement simple solutions , we shall continue to have the same problems .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I wish to draw your attention to the fact that during the speech of Mr Souchet and also during part of Mr von Habsburg 's speech , Mr Mather was using a mobile phone , which I believe is not allowed in this Chamber .
I should perhaps point out again that using mobile phones in the Chamber is not allowed .
Please switch them off !
Madam President , this is indeed a very important report .
I have to say that I am not a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , but I am certainly rather confused after everything I have heard .
Now I must ask Mr Bangemann this question : if the system is extended , can it happen that , for instance in the case of value-added tax , excise duty ? well , just give us some examples of charges that might be covered here .
If we were then to have a withholding tax on interest and dividends - which heaven forbid - what would the situation be with regard to recovery by one country on behalf of another ?
Please tell us what this monstrous title covers .
I am not at all sure any more whether I can support this proposal .
Is Commissioner Bangemann prepared to answer that question ?
Madam President , I shall answer any question from Mrs Lulling , since she voted in favour of the Commission .
Laughter
I shall also answer questions from the Members of Parliament who voted against the Commission , though somewhat more briefly !
Well , Mrs Lulling , the areas covered by the draft directive are indicated in the proposal .
Claims for value-added tax can certainly be subject to the recovery procedure .
It is indeed possible , and the proposal refers explicitly to that possibility .
At the present time , of course , we cannot include a reference to a withholding tax on interest and dividends , because it does not exist .
Should such a tax be introduced , a separate provision on its recovery would have to be inserted , because that type of tax is not covered by the proposed legislation .
Since there is no withholding tax on interest and dividends , there are no provisions for its recovery .
Should it be introduced - against your ardent wishes , which are naturally inspired by your concern for the future of Europe and for justice and are totally unconnected to the situation in your own Member State - the directive would have to be supplemented so that any outstanding amounts of withholding tax could be recovered .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the legislative resolution
European standardisation
The next item is the report ( A4-0501 / 98 ) by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament ' Efficiency and Accountability in European Standardisation under the New Approach ( COM ( 98 ) 0291 - C4-0442 / 98 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we have here is a Commission report on efficiency and accountability in European standardisation under the new approach .
The new approach for the field of technical harmonisation was introduced in 1985 and is based on four principles .
Firstly , the European legislator sets out the essential health and safety conditions which products must meet before they can be placed on the market .
The standards institutes then draw up the technical specifications which the manufacturer needs in order to manufacture products to those requirements .
There is , however , no obligation on the producer to produce on the basis of the standards .
Lastly , the authorities are required to associate products that comply with the harmonised standards with a ' presumption of conformity ' with the essential conditions .
The Economic Affairs Committee judges the new approach to be a good one , above all because the harmonisation of legislation is restricted to the essential conditions .
This is a policy matter and separate from the compilation of technical specifications , which is the business of the standards people .
In other words , every man to his own trade .
The market-oriented character of the new approach contrasts too with the mandatory nature of the legislation .
No one is forcing the manufacturer to comply with the technical specifications .
A new approach makes flexible legislation possible , which can be rapidly adapted to keep pace with technological progress .
More efficient and more transparent standardisation work is the province of the independent institutes CEN , CENELEC and ETSI , but the reviewing of progress and the process of checking that the institutes take account of deadlines remains a crucial responsibility of the Commission .
At regular intervals , the Commission has to remind the standards institutes of their duty of responsibility , using cost-benefit analyses .
It can also benchmark the standardisation process vis-à-vis our main trading partners and study market effects .
Lastly , and we attach great importance to this , it can take the Member States to task when it comes to transposing the European standards into national standards if they record a poor performance on the internal market scoreboard .
We are against a merger of the three institutes , for the simple reason that this would dramatically impair efficiency .
Nor am I sure that the use of formal voting is desirable at an early stage of the standardisation work with the aim of speeding up the process .
After all , the new approach requires the involvement and mutual trust of all the partners , namely the national standards institutes , small businesses , employers , employees , consumers and the environmental groups .
Another important factor is the extent to which national bodies recognise each others ' technical approval or declarations of conformity .
For many manufacturers this is a real problem , especially in the building materials sector .
In effect , they cannot export their products to all the Member States .
So the Commission needs to tighten up the procedures for dealing with infringements of the principle of mutual recognition .
More generally , firms need to have a clearer idea of whom to contact if they have complaints about the mutual recognition of test results .
A unit at the Commission ? Or is there another solution , Commissioner ?
The European Parliament has already said that the parties concerned , namely small businesses , employers , employees , consumers and environmental groups do not have the funds or staff to keep abreast of everything happening in the standardisation field .
So I suggest the Commission looks at whether they might get more help from Europe .
But there is not just a problem at European level ; consumers are involved , for example , in only seven Member States .
I think something needs to change there .
The Commission is asking CEN , CENELEC and ETSI to have an independent assessment made of the way in which the European standardisation process is funded .
I support it on that .
Lastly , we must ensure that standards institutes in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are involved more closely in the work of the European institutes , and that the parties concerned in those countries are able to count on aid from the European Commission .
These are the main observations of Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
My thanks to honourable Members for their interesting and useful contributions to this report .
I have two more questions for Commissioner Bangemann .
The first concerns closer involvement of the parties involved in standardisation .
As I said earlier , it is a matter of money .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if he has any concrete proposals which will allow small businesses and other organisations to take a more active part in shaping the European standards .
My second question concerns the problem of harmonising plugs and sockets .
I deliberately did not cover that in my report .
But the question comes up regularly and questions are asked about this .
As we all know , the debate has been going on for 30 years .
I would like to hear from Commissioner Bangemann if there is actually a solution - is it a matter of money , or technology ?
Is there actually the political will to do anything about this ?
These are my two questions to the Commissioner .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we want to move from an internal market to a domestic market , and for that we need principles , and an important determining factor here is standardisation .
Standardisation is an economic instrument which will guarantee us freedom of movement for goods and services in future too .
But we want modern legislation .
We want the new approach , and specifically in the area of standards we have seen that it is necessary to reflect together on how we can secure better procedures .
The story of the tractor seat has shown that it makes better sense to opt for the new approach , that is to say to let the standards institutes in the individual countries operate independently of one another .
I think it is important nevertheless to have legislation - a directive - for this area in order to provide a political framework .
But there is a clear division here between the legislator on the one hand , who does not want to have to compose weighty tomes full of rules which are often difficult to understand - we want legislation which is lean and efficient - while on the other hand there are the voluntary and independent standards organisations where manufacturers and users quite simply meet and discuss areas which they know extremely well and where they can decide very precisely what it is they want .
We had a good example here in the House with the bus directive , the so-called European bus .
We had 142 pages of proposals , and Parliament managed to trim this proposal down to three pages .
There is no reason why buses in Europe should all look the same , from a hot and dusty village in Sicily to the rush hour in London or the distant wastes of Finland .
We think the legislator should really confine himself to specific points here , to a few requirements which have to be observed throughout Europe , while the rest should be decided on freely within standards organisations , so that here too there can be competition which does not hamper innovation but ensures that good products get on to the market safely and fast .
A further part of the system is the CE symbol .
I think the CE symbol gives us a guarantee that existing legal provisions are not being flouted .
But in addition we need to have voluntary symbols of conformity which are designed to ensure that subsequent production is monitored by independent bodies .
Madam President , when my group told me that I had 1 1 / 2 minutes to speak on normalisation and standardisation this morning , I was worried that it was part of a New Labour process to apply standardisation to candidates across Europe .
But I discovered , to my relief , that it is in fact a very good report by my good friend , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , which I commend to the House .
There is a serious issue which I want to raise on the report and I hope Commissioner Bangemann might respond to it .
He may remember a constituent of mine , Simon Hossack , who wrote many letters to the Commission and I tabled many questions on his behalf .
He was an inventor who had produced a very ingenious device which made any electrical apparatus standard across Europe .
He found that it was impossible for him to market this device because the standards committees were dominated by the big plug manufacturers of Europe who were perfectly happy with the situation where a variety of different plug forms across Europe were allowed to operate because this allowed them to retain their market share .
By refusing to allow his device the standards committees prevented him from entering the market .
I know that Commissioner Bangemann as a good free-market deregulator would not approve of this and I hope that he will take account of this in making sure that the standards committees are fully representative of all the people in the Community , including new people who want to enter the market , as well as the existing large monopolies .
Finally , Commissioner Bangemann , I voted to sack you last month and I will vote to sack you again next month , so you can give me a very short reply .
Madam President , like the rapporteur , I think the Commission 's report on European standardisation under the new approach is broadly satisfactory .
It wants harmonisation of the legislation to go no further than is essential for safety and health .
The machinery of standardisation is based essentially on consensus between the professionals and the institutes .
The report does not prohibit manufacturers from making products which do not meet the standards , and the responsibility thus lies with the market .
There is of course one sector where problems remain , that of building materials .
But the general line adopted seems to be satisfactory .
However , it would seem opportune to mention here the problem of standards being used for protectionist purposes on markets outside Europe .
I am thinking of the USA and Japan .
The subject was not strictly speaking considered in the report , it is true , since the report dealt only with the functioning of the internal market , but I think it needs to be looked at by the European institutions .
In fact , the subject is not unrelated to the setting of internal standards for Europe : the external and internal aspects cannot be separated .
There is no reason , for example , why these internal European standards should make it easier for American imports to come in , unless there are reciprocal arrangements over the setting of standards in the USA , product for product .
So the European standards institutes cannot disregard the policy pursued on the other side of the Atlantic .
I should like to see this too being taken into consideration in the future .
My thanks , Mr President , to the rapporteurs and those honourable Members who have spoken . I shall try to deal briefly with some of the questions raised .
We follow the work of the three European standards organisations with close attention .
We meet with them at regular intervals .
The last time was just two weeks ago .
We talk about problems , for example the issue of transparency and efficiency , and we try to make the overall procedure as efficient and helpful for consumers and industry as possible .
Misconceptions will always arise , for example the misconception that our standards might create technical barriers , or alternatively that if we allow other countries such as the USA and Japan to use our standard , the Americans and Japanese will not reciprocate .
All these are misconceptions of the principle which underlies our standardisation work - and the work in the USA and basically in Japan as well .
I must repeat that , with an eye to the charge of protectionism levelled against us by the Americans .
We are not accusing the Americans of some kind of protectionism ; it is the Americans who constantly accuse us of it , the latest example being UMTS .
This is quite untrue , because - and I say this once again most emphatically , since it is the essence of this policy - with a few exceptions which are necessary for reasons of safety or security , there are no standards which are mandatory .
No standards which are mandatory ! In other words , anyone - including this ingenious inventor with his universal plug - can market his products .
He does not have to comply with a standard .
He can market a product which is constructed quite differently .
What we want , especially with interoperable systems , is that a standard agreed on by the parties concerned , including consumers , trade unions and so on , should also to some degree be attractive , so that people accept it .
The attraction is basically that the manufacturer of a product - without any need for recognition by other Member States - can make the claim that this product meets the requirements of the European Union .
That is then the CE symbol and it gives him an advantage , if you like .
That is the system .
Now to your individual points .
Firstly : we already fund small and medium-sized enterprises and their participation .
We have no objections at all to transparency .
Anyone with a legitimate interest is free to take part in this process .
It may be a little longer as a result , but it is altogether possible .
Thirdly , I should say for the benefit of the rapporteur , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens , that we have taken numerous initiatives involving potential new Member States of the Union , and with great success .
CEN , CENELEC and ETSI work very closely with the standards organisations of these countries .
We fund this work under PHARE and other accession-oriented financing programmes .
So in principle all that is being done .
One last comment regarding plugs : since the standards organisations are supported by business and industry and their work is funded by business and industry , it is perfectly understandable and obvious that in the current situation - which is not a problem for manufacturers , only for consumers - business and industry are not unduly interested in hearing that we ought to have standard plugs throughout the Union .
So they do nothing about it .
Member States too - and we could of course resolve this by political pressure , admittedly not for reasons of safety , but certainly very much in the consumer interest - are totally uninterested in applying a standard of this kind unless the standard adopted is the one already used in their own country .
Thus Denmark would be very keen to see Danish standards becoming European standards , and so on .
But that cannot of course be the right answer .
The right answer can only be to devise a European standard that is fully consistent with modern technical requirements .
We would then treat this standard the same as others ; it would not be mandatory , but would bring certain advantages to the manufacturer .
If everyone manufactured their plugs to this standard , this would then mean not only that future plugs and sockets would look like that , but also of course that all existing plugs and sockets would then have to be converted , and you can imagine how much all that would cost .
That is why neither business and industry nor the consumer is all that keen on changing things .
But this report goes to the Council as well as to Parliament , and we shall be discussing it again with the Council .
In effect , this is a clear example of something on which there has been no European standardisation , although it has nothing at all to do with the work we do , and do successfully .
The way we go about the work of standardisation is the best in the world .
To quote just one example : GSM , the second generation of mobile phones .
With this standard , European manufacturers have captured two thirds of the world market .
If we complete UMTS , the third generation , successfully - and work is still ongoing because there are a few problems with intellectual property rights - if we succeed in this , and American and Japanese firms have also been involved with the work right from the start , we shall probably capture a bigger share of the world market than we did with GSM .
So we have no need at all to be modest about standardisation .
We are the world leader here !
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on paragraph 5
Mr President , I just wanted to point out that in the English version on page 9 , it says binging instead of binding and I know Commissioner Bangemann would not want to be associated with binging .
Thank you very much for letting Mr Bangemann and Parliament as a whole have that information .
That warning will be noted .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the transport sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0438 / 98 ) by Mr Kaklamanis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament concerning the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership in the Transport Sector ( COM ( 98 ) 0007 - C4-0102 / 98 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a follow-up to the Barcelona Conference on Euro-Mediterranean Cooperation .
It also attempts to gradually implement the decisions taken at the meeting of the European Council in Cardiff on the same issue .
The report aims to turn the Mediterranean Sea into a bridge of political , economic , developmental and cultural communication between all the countries of the European Union and the third countries on the shores of the Mediterranean .
It discusses all modes of transport from the European Union to these third countries and vice versa .
It attempts to set out guidelines for developing modes of transport within the third countries of the Mediterranean and establishing links between them .
I hope that the Forum on Transport in the Mediterranean , which will meet on 24 and 25 March in Malta , will turn to good account the green light which I am sure the European Parliament will give today , and that the Council will draw up a list of priorities relating to the implementation of the plan to develop modes of transport in the Mediterranean region .
I hope that the EU 's budget will be able to reinforce this attempt , but I must confess that I am not very optimistic . You only need to look at the EU budget for 1999 , or at what has already been discussed in relation to the budget for the year 2000 .
I should like to draw the attention of the Commission to the question of the continuous monitoring of the proper use of funds which will be made available to the third countries of the Mediterranean region . We know that in a number of these countries there are problems of democracy and transparency , and that in some of them there are also problems of political stability .
The European Parliament strongly emphasises the need to protect the environment during the implementation of this programme - especially the marine environment - from all types of pollution , mainly involving toxic and nuclear waste .
I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to this last point in particular , because of the decision that has been taken by the Turkish Government to construct its own nuclear power station on the shores of the Mediterranean , in the region of Akuyu . This comes at a time when we know that the epicentre of the major catastrophic earthquake which struck Adana just a few months ago is just 50 kilometres from the proposed site of this nuclear power station .
Commissioner , the Malta forum will take place in March , and it is a great pity that the European Parliament will not be allowed to participate in it .
Moreover , it is Parliament 's view that it should have taken place earlier to enable us to put forward more specific proposals . Be that as it may , we hope that you will keep us informed of the decisions that are taken there , above all in relation to the list of priorities I mentioned earlier .
In conclusion , I would like to make a correction to paragraph 3 on page 6 . The Malta Euro-Mediterranean transport forum , which was to have taken place in February , will now take place in Malta on 24 and 25 March , and the corresponding changes need to be made .
My thanks go to my colleagues on the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Their amendments have done a great deal to improve my report .
I would also like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and indeed the Commission . Our opinions may have differed on certain points of detail , but cooperation overall has been very good .
Mr President , first of all may I thank the rapporteur for his report , and above all for his critical approach to the Commission communication .
We are constantly talking in Parliament - and not just here , but in international organisations in general - about globalisation .
This report brings home to us the fact that this concept of globalisation is not always appropriate .
The fact is that we cannot even manage to establish a proper order and structure in our immediate vicinity which is beneficial to a body like the European Union in matters that concern its immediate sphere of interest .
In talking of the Mediterranean region , I think we must of course look too at its common history .
We should not forget that the Mediterranean was once really an inland sea in Europe and only later became Europe 's southern frontier .
This common history means that the goals we have set ourselves , such as the creation of a free trade area by the year 2010 , should really be perfectly feasible if the necessary infrastructure can be put in place , if it is possible to do that .
Inadequate infrastructure , especially in transport and telecommunications , is the main barrier to the development of this area 's foreign and interregional trade .
I think it is most important to look at transport not just for the states immediately bordering on the Mediterranean but for the region as a whole , including the various Balkan states .
These countries must be included , and they must be included in a report of this kind .
I think a critical eye is important and necessary to ensure that this debate , this support and also the involvement of Parliament continue , and that communication between Commission and Parliament also continues in future to help bring about progress in this region .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think it is very positive that we are talking about the Mediterranean today , the southern border of the European Union , and that we can hold a debate specifically on transport in the Mediterranean .
It is nearly four years since the 1995 Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference , and I believe that the Commission has acted positively in presenting this document on transport in the Mediterranean .
Transport is the means of communication which makes trade possible .
The last speaker said that the Mediterranean was an inland sea , but for many years it divided the North from the South , a developed North and an undeveloped South , a North with a stable population and a South with a rapidly growing population , a generally Christian North and a Muslim South .
And this division has made dialogue and mutual understanding difficult .
The major challenge of the Barcelona Conference was greater mutual understanding and a closer relationship between the North and the South .
There is talk of a free trade area for the year 2010 , but this needs groundwork .
Communications must be improved as must the relationship between North and South .
If that relationship does not improve , then unfortunately the only transport on the Mediterranean will be those little tubs full of immigrants , struggling across the Straits of Gibraltar to find the answer to their problems in the European Union .
Better transport and more mutual understanding can lead to development in this area , which should be an area of close relationships and mutual comprehension to the benefit of all concerned .
As our poet says , there should be ' un pont en la mar blava ' , a bridge across the azure sea .
Mr President , the Commission is very busy .
We all know that , and not a great deal can be done about it in the short term .
What we need to do is to set priorities amongst all the work which is planned .
A number of comments on this initiative therefore suggest themselves .

I do not altogether agree with the objectives of the agreements , although I do believe that the effort put into ties with the Mediterranean countries is certainly justified , in view of the agreements reached by the various parties .
In the first place , I think the Union has a duty to improve relations between the Union and the Mediterranean countries .
Once we have done that , we can worry about relations between the various Mediterranean countries themselves .
These countries must also make efforts of their own to improve their position .
Moreover , the Barcelona declaration on the Euro-Mediterranean partnership mentions transport , and specifically infrastructure .
This means that the European Union does not have to concern itself with promoting particular transport services in the Mediterranean countries .
It must , however , ensure that investment is consistent with the policy of sustainable transport initiated by the European Parliament .
This must lead to prime consideration being given to sustainable connections between the sea ports of Member States and those of the Mediterranean countries .
Only at a later stage should connections between the Mediterranean countries themselves be addressed .
Naturally , these connections too must be consistent with efforts to achieve a sustainable system of transport .
I am all the more sure of this when I see that the trade flows between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries , in themselves not all that large , are considerably larger than the trade flows between the Mediterranean countries themselves .
To my mind , this makes the reservations which the rapporteur mentions in his report somewhat relative .
In short , we have to respect and abide by agreements .
So I would like to see us upholding the agreements we have concluded with and in respect of the Mediterranean countries .
But this must not be at the expense of other , equally important tasks .
Hence my amendment , which seeks to ease somewhat the pressure which the rapporteur is putting on the Commission .
Mr President , following approval of the communication being debated here today , the recommended working party has already been set up .
The programme has been drawn up , so we have made a fair amount of progress .
We shall of course monitor the work of this forum and make suggestions in the context of the priorities set at the Barcelona conference .
We do not need to change those .
For example , environmental measures too have already been dealt with there as a priority .
We shall also - and this is the other matter arising from the debate - support and prepare the first meeting of the forum to be held in Malta on 23 and 24 March .
The European Parliament will be fully briefed on this .
All the texts presented and adopted there will be published .
Here too , there is already a clear emphasis on environmental activities .
So I think that we are currently well advanced with our efforts and have no need to fear a lack of success .
Of course - and that is really the problem with all this work , and with industrial cooperation too - success depends not only on our goodwill , but on that of our partner countries as well .
This goodwill on the part of our partner countries is certainly there , but to varying degrees .
Some partner countries in the Mediterranean area will certainly react very positively to all these activities .
Others would like to , but for a wide variety of reasons cannot , so we shall probably have to reconcile ourselves to a variety of results .
But that is not down to us , it is down to the partner countries themselves .
We in any case will do everything necessary to ensure a successful outcome .
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Parliament adopted the resolution
Europe 's relations with its neighbours to the south will undoubtedly be the major challenge in the years ahead .
The minimum degree of economic prosperity , social balance and security that is desirable in the region depends on the revival of a dialogue which is currently faltering , and which needs to produce greater consideration for the interests of the countries on both sides of the Mediterranean .
In 1995 , the Barcelona conference came up with an answer , launching the MEDA programme which built a new partnership on three pillars - political , economic and human .
The communication placed before Parliament outlines a general strategy for transport .
This text has the virtue of restating the importance of transport links towards the south , which have to be balanced against the extension of the trans-European networks , the TENs , towards the east .
But like our rapporteur , I wonder if the will to rebalance the TENs is really there .
There are no concrete plans for financing them at all .
Are they to remain merely a pious wish ?
We need to launch , support and give practical form to a genuine Mediterranean project .
There is no apparent will to do this , and that must be deplored .
Let us get away once and for all from all the shilly-shallying and endless fine words that never turn into deeds .
If we look at the fact that the MEDA programme has been translated only into one or two association agreements , it must be said that all this falls well short of the intentions stated and the resources promised at various summits both before and after Barcelona .
Salmon
Mr President , the Commission deeply regrets the heavy losses suffered by the Scottish salmon-farming industry due to the presence of infectious salmon anaemia ( ISA ) .
This is a severe blow to a sector which is already under strain on account of the fragile market situation for salmon .
The Commission services are following very closely the evolution of the disease and the measures taken by the UK authorities to combat the disease .
We trust that the measures taken are in compliance with EU legislation .
These measures impose compulsory slaughter at infected sites and movement restrictions on suspected farms .
We are concerned about the consequences of both the disease and the eradication policy for the sector .
I draw your attention , therefore , to the possibilities that exist under Community legislation for Member States to grant national financial aid in case of disease outbreaks in the aquaculture sector .
Any request to the Commission from the competent authorities in the UK to establish a compensation scheme will be examined rapidly .
Provided such a request meets the required criteria under the present rules for approval by the Commission , we will not hesitate to act accordingly .
We further believe that the disease is so serious and its presence puts such a heavy burden on the future of salmon farming in the Community , that eradication of the disease is justified .
If this policy proves unsuccessful , we could , of course , consider submitting proposals to change this policy .
Mr President , it is very apt that Commissioner Bangemann is taking this speech at the end of the week .
He may remember a previous occasion when he and I had an exchange of views about the Commission 's position , after I had spoken to Scottish farmers .
I welcome wholeheartedly the Commission 's views .
It is a very serious issue in the Scottish farming industry .
It is a disease which started in Norway and has affected several farms in Scotland .
It started off in Glen Nevis in a fish farm in the Highlands .
It is extremely serious indeed coupled with the threat from the Norwegian government dumping salmon within the European Union at prices which threaten the livelihood of many salmon industries .
In Scotland and Ireland we have about 6 000 people employed in aquaculture .
It is important that we ensure that the type of chemicals that the salmon industry uses are not harmful to the marine environment .
As in all fishing policy we have to marry the exploitation of resources with the proper treatment of the environment and conservation of stocks , although the salmon farming world would obviously not want to conserve the stocks .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statement .
This week my own government has very generously committed itself to offer GBP 9 million - GBP 3 million a year over a three year period - to assist the salmon farmers .
They are asking for matching funds and it is going to be administered by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the industry itself .
This follows on from discussions which the Scottish office has had with the industry .
I welcome the fact that the Commission is not going to stand in the way of Member States because the second major condition is that the EU competition policy allow these salmon farmers to benefit from this assistance .
This is particularly important , given the ownership of many of the salmon farms in Scotland by Norwegian companies .
Indeed in the Shetland Islands , 50 % of the salmon industry is owned by Norway so it is extremely important that the Commission does not stand in the way and responds , as the Commissioner very generously promised , extremely rapidly to the moves and to any approaches from the Scottish office .
I will be contacting Callum McDonald and John Sewell immediately after this meeting urging them to put in a quick request to the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Commission for the vigour it has exercised in tackling this issue of salmon in Scotland .
Meanwhile , I would like to point out that Scotland is not the only region to have suffered from salmon diseases , which are partly due to the very efficient breeding of salmon in nets , as practised in Norway .
Stocks of salmon are under threat in Finland too as a result of this sort of intensive farming , particularly as the dreaded salmon parasite has spread to the waters of southern and central Norway .
It has spread north up as far as the Skibotn river , and therefore to the top of the arm of Finland , as it appears on the map , and the Tenojoki river is under imminent threat .
The Tenojoki is Europe 's longest salmon river .
The Finnish authorities have been involved in intensive talks with their Norwegian counterparts , but no solution has been found for the protection of natural salmon stocks in the Tenojoki river .
An added danger is the net breeding that is practised by the Norwegians in the Teno fiord .
On the one hand , it threatens the genes of the salmon in the Tenojoki and their future survival in Europe 's northernmost salmon river , and , on the other , the spread of the salmon parasite threatens the whole salmon stock in the Tenojoki .
I would hope that the European Commission will embark on vigorous action to save the salmon stock in the European Union 's longest salmon river for future generations and prevent it from being sacrificed on the altar of intensive fish farming .
Mr President , this is the third instance of this type of infectious anaemia in the North Atlantic .
Previous outbreaks occurred in Norway and Canada , and now Scotland is affected .
These situations arise because large numbers of salmon regularly escape from fish farms .
Last year , for example , at least 70 tonnes of salmon disappeared from a fish farm near Oban .
To make matters worse , we happen to know that the presence of infectious anaemia was suspected at this particular site .
I believe it is only a matter of time until the disease spreads to wild salmon too - in which case we really will have serious problems , given that wild salmon stocks are already so depleted .
A whole host of problems surround aquaculture and salmon farming in general .
All aspects of the question need to be brought together ; perhaps a thorough investigation of the whole practice of aquaculture is now called for .
I wonder whether the Commission would support such an initiative .
Another parasite called gyrodactylus sallaris is also present in Scandinavian waters .
Norway recently came forward with a plan to treat 20 rivers with rotenone .
That was an extreme decision , since such toxic treatment also extinguishes all other forms of life .
What a desperate attempt to get to grips with this parasite !
Perhaps Commissioner Bangemann could tell me whether the Commission is aware of the presence of this parasite in fish in Scotland , Ireland or elsewhere .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his helpful statement and for his recognition of the fragility of the salmon market and for the concern he expressed about the consequences of this disease for the hard-pressed fish-farming industry , particularly in Scotland , where it is of vital economic importance to areas such as the Highlands and Islands where there is very little alternative employment .
Around the coastline some 340 salmon farms are supporting some 6 000 jobs in some of the most rural areas of Europe .
It is an industry that is well organised and well managed , but it is in crisis due to infectious salmon anaemia .
This disease , which is a kind of salmon ' flu , was exotic to the European Union until it first appeared in Scotland in May 1998 , since when millions of healthy fish from just ten affected farms have had to be destroyed .
ISA has been known to cause very high mortalities in farmed salmon cages , but it is a disease that cannot affect human beings and it does not render the affected fish inedible .
European Union directives as well as UK regulations aim for eradication .
However , the eradication policy does not address the social and economic consequences of the destruction of millions of fish .
The reality is that mass destruction brings with it the prospect of financial ruin for many of the small family firms which are involved .
It can destroy the whole financing of smaller enterprises .
Since this issue was put on Parliament 's agenda , the Secretary of State for Scotland has acted , recognising the employment consequences .
As Mr McMahon said , the government has promised GBP 9m over three years , but this being on a matched funding basis with the industry , it is now under negotiation .
It may not be possible for the small farms to meet the matched funding and so what sounds generous may , in fact , for some small enterprises be meaningless .
Banks have indicated that they will not lend on the security of fish stocks , so unless the larger companies are prepared to act as a financial umbrella , it is difficult to see how the offer will stave off financial ruin for these small firms .
The big companies might be able to buy up the small ones , but in many cases it is the small companies which have a fine investment record in our rural areas .
Norway has tacked this problem with a policy of containment rather than slaughter and the question must be asked whether consideration should be given in the European Union to alternative methods of combating the disease .
It is vital that we take action .
Scottish salmon farms are standing at a critical juncture , with decisions on buying next year 's smolts now imminent .
It is essential that urgent consideration be given to what further measures , including compensation , may be possible to assist the small-scale enterprises I have referred to .
I cannot emphasise enough the seriousness of this situation .
Swift and determined action is essential if we are to avoid the severe consequences being felt in some of Europe 's most economically vulnerable communities .
Finally , Commissioner , may I ask you to confirm whether you would be prepared to consider the introduction of a Community-funded eradication programme should the current national proposals fail ?
Mr President , it may seem odd that with my constituency in Hampshire , I should want to intervene in a debate about Scottish salmon .
My constituency is called Itchen , Test and Avon , and these are three rivers famous for their salmon .
I listened very carefully to Commissioner Bangemann .
He mentioned the treatment of the areas affected .
Does he specifically exclude any veterinary or pharmaceutical treatment of the disease , either where it occurs , or as a prophylaxis in areas which could in future be affected ?
Mr President , as I said , the Commission is awaiting the proposals of the British Government .
Some measures have been announced but we have received no plans giving detailed and concrete proposals and their financial impact .
But , as I indicated , we appreciate the seriousness of the situation , so no measure is by definition excluded .
I have outlined the policy we are following for the time being .
If it becomes necessary to add a new policy , we will , of course , try to be as helpful as possible .
That also applies to research measures - as far as I know - I am not an expert in research .
As far as we are aware , we have not undertaken any research so far .
But , as always , in our fisheries policy there may be funds available immediately .
If there is a need for additional research from the Community side , of course we could do that as well .
I repeat , we are waiting now for concrete proposals and then we will do our utmost to authorise them and , if necessary , add something more .
Thank you very much , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
Parliament has now completed its agenda .
The Minutes of today 's sitting will be submitted to Parliament for its approval at the beginning of the next sitting .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the end of our work in what has been an interesting week .
I gather from Parliament 's services that we have broken a record .
We can put this week in the Guinness Book of Records , because we have held over 150 roll-call votes .
I cannot comment on the advantages or otherwise of roll-call votes from my position in the Chair .
They are governed by our Rules of Procedure .
But in any event , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that each and every one of you has made a great effort , and so have Parliament 's services .
Our officials and interpreters have had to make a special effort