Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 12 November 2009 .
Statement by the President
I would like , most of all , to express the hope that our work with other European institutions in implementing the Treaty of Lisbon , which enters into force in a week , will flow smoothly .
I am constantly working on this matter , and am in contact with both the President of the European Commission and the Prime Minister , who represents the Swedish Presidency .
I would also like to repeat that the European Parliament is ready to proceed with the hearings of the commissioners-designate .
We are prepared for this , and I have also informed both institutions of this - the Council and the Commission ( that is , the President of the Commission ) .
Next week , on 1 December , it will be World AIDS Day .
It is important that we always , and not only on this day , remember the victims of this terrible disease .
Remembrance of the victims and knowledge of the disease may contribute to a reduction in new cases in the future .
In two weeks , on 10 December , it will be the 61st anniversary of the adoption and proclamation by the General Assembly of the United Nations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Its adoption was a consequence of the events of the Second World War .
The Declaration was adopted unanimously , and it is worth stressing this .
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights can be considered the first significant achievement of the United Nations in the area of the protection of human rights .
I draw your attention to this important date , because this area is one of the main interests of the European Parliament , and rightly so .
We should always remember this matter .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Order of business : see Minutes
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to the Charter of Fundamental Rights relating to people with disabilities within the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Council of Europe is currently working on a new draft anti-discrimination regulation and I would like to highlight three aspects .
Firstly , according to the charter , no one can be discriminated against directly or indirectly because they have a child or family member with disabilities .
Secondly , from now on , insurers cannot refuse to issue insurance because someone has a genetic disorder or disability .
Thirdly , the rights promoted by the European Union 's institutions and Christian Democracy attach a great deal of importance to respect for the quality of life of people with disabilities .
I would like to draw my fellow Members ' attention to all these points because I would like to ask you to support the creation of the Disability Intergroup this week .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union , in which one in seven citizens belongs to a national minority , can be proud of its extensive guarantee to respect their rights .
The significance of the European Union 's motto - unity in diversity - is worth stressing here .
All of us in this Chamber know that a true democracy can be recognised by the way it treats its minorities .
The Lisbon Treaty unambiguously imposes an obligation to respect the rights of people who belong to minorities , and the Charter of Fundamental Rights forbids any discrimination based on the grounds of ethnic origin or membership of a national minority .
Unfortunately , there are still countries in the EU which , despite their adoption of international legal obligations in this area , are moving towards the assimilation and outright deprivation of the national identity of their minorities by deliberate policy .
Lithuania , for it is this country to which I refer , has , for over 20 years , been discriminating against its citizens in different areas of life .
Not only has this been done in a planned way but , since its accession to the European Union , these practices have even increased .
The ruling of the Lithuanian Constitutional Court on the spelling of Polish surnames only in Lithuanian transcription is an example .
( PL ) Mr President , on 14 October , the European Commission announced its annual enlargement strategy .
In this document , the Commission presents an evaluation of the progress made by the Western Balkans and Turkey at a time of world economic crisis , and the most important problems which those countries will have to face up to in the near future .
In my short speech , speaking as a member of the European Parliament delegation to the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , I would like to encourage Turkey to continue the efforts it has undertaken for reform , the objective of which is full democratisation of the country and rapid resolution of conflicts with neighbouring countries .
Accession negotiations have reached an advanced stage and require Turkey to make yet greater efforts at meeting the criteria for membership .
The perspective of accession to the EU should be an incentive to strengthen democracy and observe human rights , and also to further modernisation of the country and the achievement of European Union standards .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every six seconds , a child dies of hunger somewhere in the world , and the number of people suffering from malnutrition has just reached the one billion mark .
This very serious situation was condemned at the G20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September .
At that summit , it was announced that USD 20 billion would be given to support agriculture in developing countries .
Incidentally , the same thing was said at the G8 Summit in L 'Aquila .
However , at the World Summit on Food Security held on 16 November in Rome , under the auspices of the Food and Agriculture Organisation , the situation was entirely different : snubbed by almost all of the G8 leaders , it did not end in the ratification of the measures previously anticipated .
It is therefore hardly surprising that no precise figure appears in the text numbering forty or so articles , not even the USD 44 billion that the FAO says are needed annually in order to sustain the agricultural systems of the poorest countries .
The authors of the final declaration have merely paid lip service to the promise made by the G8 members - that is , those at L 'Aquila - on this matter .
I therefore deplore these double standards and question whether the G20 will be capable of implementing these measures .
As the famous French comedian Pierre Dac used to say , ' Infinite patience is required to wait eternally for what never comes ' .
( ES ) Mr President , the situation in the Western Sahara is very serious .
The alerts from the Human Rights Observatory in Asturias - my region - and from many other organisations deserve to be taken seriously .
There are seven prisoners awaiting military trials for having visited their families in Tindouf , there are political prisoners , there is torture , people have disappeared , and a peaceful heroine and candidate for the Sakharov prize , Aminatou Haidar , the Saharan Gandhi , has been expelled by the territory 's occupying power .
This is something unprecedented in international law .
Mrs Malmström , Members of the European Commission , new leaders in the Council : the European Union should get involved to support this extremely repressed population .
On the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall , there is another wall very close to us acting as a barrier to freedom .
Listen to Aminatou !
Save her life !
( SV ) Mr President , in recent weeks , we have once again received reports about the poor state of health of the Baltic Sea .
I really must , therefore , say a few words about this today , too , also because we had conciliation between the Council and Parliament last week on the budget for 2010 .
The budget includes the additional EUR 20 million that Parliament wanted to be allocated to the Baltic Sea Strategy , which is gratifying .
I will therefore be sure to remind the Commission , when it is represented here , that we need a legal basis for the Baltic Sea Strategy in order for us to actually be able to put it into practice and for the funds that have now been reserved to actually be put to use .
As already mentioned , the reports that we have received over the last few weeks indicate that action is urgently required .
Various things need to happen - and quickly .
I therefore hope that we will all roll up our sleeves and start to actually do something very soon .
Action is needed , not only by us , but also on the part of the Commission , the Council and the parties affected .
( FR ) Mr President , on Thursday , I was in Tunis for the trial of the poet and writer Taoufik Ben Brik , indicted in Tunisia on obscure common-law charges that fool no one .
Since the ' elections ' in Tunisia , held on 25 October , those who defend human rights have been subjected to an outburst of violence and harassment on such a scale as I have never before witnessed , familiar though I am with that country .
On 25 October , President Ben Ali no doubt realised the full extent of the Tunisian people 's disaffection with their leader ; and the embassies and the European Commission , which unfortunately does not have the political visa to attend this kind of trial , have displayed a general lack of interest in the issue that is unfolding .
I think we must be very clear today .
We are guilty of failing in our legal duty to rescue .
What is stopping the embassies and the European Commission from rigorously questioning Mr Ben Ali - in the name of our binding agreements and mutual commitments with Tunisia - about his actions , which are entirely contrary to those commitments ?
( PT ) The trade agreement signed on 4 November between the European Union and Israel , which is aimed at liberalising trade in agricultural products , processed agricultural products and fish and fishery products , is unacceptable for various reasons which we will point out here .
In the first place , it is unacceptable because it is aligned with neo-liberal policies that exacerbate the current economic and social crisis , especially in agriculture and fishing , but this fact becomes particularly serious when these policies are promoted through an agreement with a country that is violating international law and the most basic rights of the Palestinian people ; a country which does not respect its obligations as agreed in the roadmap for peace , keeping Gaza under siege , building more settlements , continuing to build the wall and expelling Palestinians from Jerusalem .
This is a country that is continuing to escalate the violation of human rights and international humanitarian laws .
We denounce and condemn the signing of this agreement , which will include the trade of products from Israeli settlements in Palestinian territories , highlighting the European Union 's undeniable and unacceptable complicity with Israel in the face of the serious violations I have just described .
We wish to voice our complete solidarity with the Palestinian people here , and stand up for their right to build a free , independent and sovereign state .
Mr President , Russian exile Pavel Stroilov recently published revelations about the collaboration between the British Labour Party and the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
Soviet archival documents state that , in the 1980s , Neil Kinnock , as Leader of the Opposition , approached Mikhail Gorbachev through secret envoys to see how the Kremlin would respond if a Labour Government stopped the implementation of the Trident nuclear missile programme .
If the report given to Mr Gorbachev is true , it means that Lord Kinnock approached one of Britain 's enemies in order to seek approval regarding his party 's defence policy and , if elected , Britain 's defence policy .
If this report is true , then Lord Kinnock would be guilty of treason .
The documents now available must be investigated at the highest possible level by the British authorities and Lord Kinnock given the opportunity to answer the Soviet evidence .
( HU ) It is a sad fact that a policy justifying the collective disenfranchisement of minorities can still provide an obstacle even today to the next wave of the integration process .
I would like to thank the President for what he did in order to restore normality in Slovakia .
The language law is just one such sad , small chapter .
The Czech case was another example .
The Czech Head of State must know , even without the Treaty of Lisbon , that the Beneš Decrees came about through the enforcement of the principle of collective guilt and are not made unlawful with the enactment of the Charter of Fundamental Rights ; they are , in fact , still in conflict with more than six European documents .
We are confident that the future of the Treaty of Lisbon and the EU will be defined not by the rekindling of collective disenfranchisement from the Second World War , but by safeguarding the rights of minorities according to the customary European practice of guaranteeing autonomy in cultural life .
( SK ) 20 November marked the 20th anniversary of the UN 's adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The anniversary also marks the creation of the Intergroup on Family and the Protection of Childhood .
The challenges facing the EU - such as demography , work-life balance , care for persons reliant on assistance , social inclusion , combating poverty among families and children and the policy for intergenerational solidarity - require the expertise of family organisations dedicated to protecting the interests of children .
The Convention on the Rights of the Child states that , for the harmonious development of personality , children need to grow up in a family environment based on happiness , love and understanding .
The Intergroup on Family and the Protection of Childhood works in Parliament as a platform for the pluralistic views of Members of all political groups .
I invite all Members to support this group in their political parties . They will enable the continuation of an important and useful role of this Parliament .
( RO ) The situation of the Romanian community in Italy is a cause of ever-growing concern .
The whole of Europe is already familiar with the way in which attempts have been made to blame a whole community on account of the actions of a few offenders .
Romanians are facing ever-increasing problems on a daily basis , along with growing intimidation and fear .
Let me give you just a few examples .
There was a recent report in the press about a blatant case of discrimination .
The director of an Italian company providing telephone , cable and internet services advised his employees not to sign contracts with Romanian citizens .
In another example , a child , who was a Romanian national of Roma ethnic origin , suffered an injury , but none of the hospitals in the city of Messina wanted to admit him .
He died on the way to Catania .
These are just a few specific incidents . However , Romanians in Italy are facing similar censure almost every day .
I believe that clear notice must be given to the Italian Government at European level to halt the acts of discrimination against Romanian immigrants .

Mr President , I was going to speak on the importance of European structural funds for regions like Wales post-2013 , but I must respond to the comments made by Mr Batten earlier about a distinguished British politician and former Commissioner in the European Commission .
To accuse such a person of treason is , I believe , to say the least , unparliamentary language , and he should be ashamed of himself .
I would ask him to withdraw those remarks , and , if he will not , I think you , Mr President , should ask him to do so .
( SL ) In this House , we will soon have the opportunity to hear from the candidate for the post of High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
This will also be a kind of test for us and an indication of the influence which Europe can bring to bear on the peace process in the Middle East , as well as an answer to the question of whether the European Union can play an active role in resolving these problems at all .
We have not had much success to date and my fellow Member who spoke previously has illustrated that in greater detail .
In recent days , the vicious circle of violence in the Middle East has continued .
First , Hamas terrorists fired rockets , then Israel retaliated disproportionately , and once again it is difficult to distinguish between civilian and military casualties .
I take the view that we must not , even for a moment , relax the efforts which we have to devote to the peace process in the Middle East .
Mr President , soldiers from the United Kingdom and many other European nations are fighting and dying in Afghanistan .
We are told that the reasons are to keep our country safe by preventing the return of al-Qaeda , or to protect democracy , or to fight drugs , or to support Pakistan , or to uphold the rights of women .
But I am no longer convinced by any of these explanations .
There is no clear political strategy , and I do not know what the death of our soldiers is supposed to achieve .
Far from bringing us security , I fear our presence is increasing the dangers , allowing us to be portrayed by Islamist extremists as foreign invaders supporting a government of warlords and drug barons in a civil war .
Our actions foster the growth of radical , anti-Western Islamic beliefs .
We need a diplomatic strategy ; we must talk with the Taliban , we must promote reconciliation and seek to broaden the composition of the current government and we must be prepared to withdraw our soldiers from Afghan soil .
( FR ) Mr President , as you are aware , an agreement between the Belgian State and GDF Suez was reached in October 2009 .
It extends and consolidates the monopoly held by GDF Suez until 2025 .
This goes entirely against liberalisation policies . It also constitutes a decision that will confirm the monopoly of nuclear energy , which is going to make plans for renewable energies and related jobs considerably more challenging .
When we hear that the regulator , instead of being independent , is ultimately going to relinquish market surveillance and pricing to a follow-up committee on which GDF Suez is to sit , then I really do start to wonder .
I hope the Commission is going to act in response and put its finger on a situation in which we find both judge and judged , monitor and monitored .
I therefore hope that the Commission will respond , particularly on the eve of the Copenhagen Summit where energy issues - especially renewable energies - will , of course , be fundamental .
I hope the Commission will make sure that Belgium does not see a so-called pax electrica , whose chief aim is to strengthen the monopoly held by Electrabel GDF Suez .
Mr President , tomorrow , tens of thousands of public sector workers in Ireland take national strike action .
Low paid civil servants , nurses , teachers and local authority workers are sick of being scapegoated for a crisis in Irish and world capitalism and being forced to pay for that crisis , for which they are not responsible .
I want , from this European Parliament , to send the warmest support to those workers on strike tomorrow .
This Irish Government has no democratic mandate for its savage programme of cuts .
I urge workers in Ireland to extend the action , to bring down this undemocratic government and force a general election , and let the people decide .
The EU Council and Commission are also culpable in demanding savage cuts in Ireland .
These institutions have even less credibility this week after another cynical deal between the EPP and the Social Democrats for the Presidency , and for appointing as High Representative for Foreign Affairs a lady who was never elected to a public assembly but derived the new position by being placed in a chamber of feudal fossils , as a result of being a Labour Party British trustee .
Clearly , workers all over Europe have to stand up and fight , themselves , rather than depend on this neo-liberal majority in this Chamber .
( DE ) Mr President , one in seven Europeans belongs to an ethnic minority .
In spite of this fact , protection for autochthonous minorities in Europe is not seen as a priority .
While Brussels never tires of taking all kinds of competences away from the Member States , the Commission , stating that it does not wish to interfere in internal affairs , has declared conflicts between minorities a matter for the states concerned .
There is no unified approach in Europe .
International law provisions are applied quite differently in different states .
France , for example , does not recognise any ethnic minorities and in Slovenia , the AVNOJ decisions still infringe international law .
In Austria , on the other hand , the Slovenian minority enjoys a full range of opportunities for development .
In my view , these obvious discrepancies reflect a need for a European law on ethnic groups .
If Europe wants to protect the ethnic diversity it has developed throughout history , it is vital to draw up an internationally binding European law on ethnic groups which covers autochthonous minorities .
This would be an opportunity for the EU to prove that it pays more than just lip service to the protection of national diversity within Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the ceremonies which took place on 9 November this year in Berlin on the 20th anniversary of the demolition of the Berlin Wall commemorated the unification of Germany .
Moreover , they also showed the route taken by Central and Eastern Europe to freedom and democracy , and to the end of the division , not only of Germany , but of the whole of Europe .
Demolition of Berlin 's wall of division was the end of that road , but the process of transformation in Central and Eastern Europe began with events on the Polish coast and the formation of Solidarity under the leadership of Lech Wałęsa in August 1980 .
Let us also remember the demonstrations for freedom in Hungary in 1956 and the June protests in Poznań , the events of 1968 in Czechoslovakia and the fallen shipyard workers in Gdańsk in 1970 .
Many people were committed to the opposition in different countries , and they fought for freedom and honour .
Some of them gave their lives .
Let us revere and honour them .
Let us also remember the politicians who displayed great imagination and determination in building freedom , democracy and a market economy .
Colleagues , I interrupt the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance in order to make an announcement .
Agenda
Mr David Martin 's flight has been delayed .
I would therefore ask the House to agree that his report on changes to the Rules of Procedure , which is very important for us , should be taken as the last item this evening .
This is a change to the order of business rather than to the content of our session .
It would be great if we could agree to this change because the rapporteur should be present during the debate .
As this is formally a change to the agenda , I am obliged to request the agreement of the House , and I hope that this agreement will be forthcoming .
( Parliament accepted the proposal )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance ( continuation )
We now continue with the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( DE ) Mr President , in times of climate change and global warming , this much is obvious : we must reduce greenhouse gas emissions and we must save energy .
The EU is already trying to lead the way in this field , sometimes with more and sometimes with less success .
At times , there are also apparent attempts to throw the baby out with the bathwater , as in the case of the so-called Ecodesign Directive .
In my constituency , there is a very successful business , called Austria Email AG , which manufactures electric boilers .
This is particularly practical and useful in Austria , as the majority of our electricity comes from hydroelectric power , and is therefore very environmentally friendly .
It now appears that the Ecodesign Directive will ban these boilers in the future , and instead force people to use either gas storage heaters or gas stoves , which in my view makes no sense , as they are far less environmentally friendly than these boilers .
In addition to this , 400 jobs are currently at risk in Austria .
This is not what we are trying to achieve .
It is a negative development .
If we are to protect the environment , then we should surely take measures that are reasonable , beneficial and , above all , appropriate .
However , we should not risk jobs for the sake of a product that does not really seem expedient .
( FR ) Mr President , for us , Euronews is a remarkable window on the world , and it is a channel I am very keen on , but I often wonder about the content of its advertisements .
When I switched on the television this morning I saw an advert for Macedonia .
And what did I read ?
' A tax-haven for businesses , average wage EUR 370 , 10 % income tax ' etc .
If this is how Macedonia intends to present its application to join the European Union , and if I ask people in my region , ' Do you want Macedonia to join the EU ? ' - well I assure you it will not work .
At a time when we are discussing offshoring within Europe and the fight against social dumping , can we still allow such advertisements to be the window onto social Europe ?
I do not think so .
I also used to wonder about an advert for Iran ; at a time when public stonings took place there , we used to allow adverts for that seraphic country .
Mr President , we have all heard of the flooding in Ireland over the weekend , with considerable damage caused to many homes , to businesses , to farms , to roads and to water schemes .
The restoration costs , while much too early to estimate , could be in the region of EUR 500 million .
However , to put the appropriate measures in place to deal with this type of flooding and to ensure it will not happen again could cost billions .
It appears that the European Solidarity Fund may be too restrictive to deal with this situation .
However , I am still hopeful that an application could be considered , but , if not , I suggest that a regional application could be favourably considered , as the north , the west and the south of the country have been affected .
Many people in my European constituency , including the counties of Galway , Mayo , Clare , Leitrim and Roscommon , together with the south of Ireland , have been affected by the horrendous flooding that has taken place .
I am appealing to the Commission to assist in a pragmatic and urgent manner .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to express my thanks for giving me the opportunity to raise this important question about the floods that happened in my country .
( PT ) The recent tragedy caused by Hurricane Ida as it passed through El Salvador between 6 and 8 November included around 200 fatalities , and at least 18 missing people , 15 000 homeless , 80 damaged schools , and the destruction of agricultural crops and essential infrastructure such as streets , electricity networks , water supply , communications and health facilities .
Given that El Salvador is one of the countries most afflicted by economic and social difficulties in Central America , it is imperative that the European Union offers a massive level of support in order to tackle the social chaos caused by this natural disaster .
The El Salvadorian Government estimates that , given the country 's vulnerability to such natural disasters , more than EUR 1 billion will be necessary for the country to restore what has been damaged and to implement a plan for reconstruction and risk mitigation .
For this reason , it is seeking the release of extraordinary funds and the redirection of funds available from the European Union .
That is the appeal , Mr President .
We request that it be communicated to the European Commission and the Council .
Mr President , serious problems concerning the ' right of ownership ' continue to cause many European Union citizens who have invested in property in countries such as Spain , Bulgaria and Turkey stress , financial ruin and general heartache .
This is despite the concerted efforts of many MEPs working on behalf of their constituents and despite lengthy investigations by Parliament into the issue , which , as we know , culminated in the well-received Auken report in March 2009 .
I have received complaints from many constituents regarding the problems arising from property deals in all these countries .
Countless people have found themselves in situations whereby complex zoning laws and urbanisation policies have meant that their properties have been seized without any compensation .
I am greatly concerned that more definitive action has not been taken by the EU to attempt to address this problem , despite the overwhelming consensus that it violates the basic rights of European Union citizens .
The legality and morality of these practices is at best questionable and , at worst , unveils a corrupt approach to urban development .
( EL ) Mr President , allow me to share my fellow members ' concern about the disparity between the progress report on Turkey towards integration into the European Union and an article published recently in the Wall Street Journal Europe , which reported that the Prime Minister of Turkey , in a recent visit to Iran , confirmed - and endorsed Iran 's views - that Iran 's nuclear programme is , in his words , for peaceful and philanthropic purposes only .
This disparity is also very evident from the fact that Turkey 's overall behaviour - such as on 8-9 November in connection with the visit by the President of Sudan to Istanbul - is creating a serious issue .
This being so , I would be very grateful if my fellow members would bear these concerns in mind .
Mr President , the European Union would like to see itself as a democratic union of 27 democratic states , but we have got to look at the reality .
In Belgium only a few years ago , the state took steps to ban one of the larger political parties .
In Germany , at about the same time , there were unsuccessful attempts to ban a party on the basis of incriminating statements made by state operatives .
In Hungary , opposition parties are physically attacked by the state , their members arrested and tortured .
In the United Kingdom , a violent militia sponsored by the governing party and the Leader of the Opposition carries out violent and , in some cases , armed attacks on opponents .
There are restrictions on non-violent freedom of speech in almost all European Union countries .
Indeed , the European Union is in the forefront of trying to legislate against states of mind - various ' phobias ' , as they would put it .
( EL ) Mr President , in light of the start of negotiations on an agreement for the readmission of illegal immigrants between the European Union and Turkey , I should like to point out that we need a commitment by Turkey that it will cooperate in stamping out illegal immigration .
I would remind the House at this point that 76.5 % of all arrests of illegal immigrants on the borders of the European Union are on Greece 's borders .
I know full well that , where third countries have cooperated - examples are Italy and Libya and Spain and Mauritania - there have been tangible results .
That is why we need progress with readmission agreements ; Turkey needs to cooperate with Frontex , with the Greek authorities , and with the authorities of the European Union .
Mr President , the EU 's is the only international mission to monitor the implementation of the agreements of last August and September between Russia and Georgia .
Mrs Ashton should now make it perfectly clear to the Russian side that they should guarantee the EU mission access to the separatist Georgian territories without any further delay .
Today , the French Mistral-type helicopter carrier arrived in St Petersburg .
The plan to sell this modern warship to Russia is the equivalent of rewarding the Kremlin for its invasion of Georgia last year .
In the words of the commander of the Russian navy , this type of ship would have enabled the Russian navy , in August 2008 , to carry out its mission in 40 minutes instead of 26 hours .
In that case President Sarkozy would have had no time to prevent Mr Putin occupying the Georgian capital .
Providing the Russian navy with the newest NATO technology means taking responsibility for encouraging Kremlin hawks to implement their military exercise plans from last September .
Mr President , as we meet here in Strasbourg , half the population of the city of Cork , in my constituency of Munster , is without water in their homes - and this is 2009 !
University College Cork has had to shut down for an entire week , with many students in my Alma Mater effectively homeless .
Shop owners , householders and farmers are facing bills running into hundreds of millions of euros , after the worst flooding witnessed in living memory in Cork , Tipperary , Limerick and Galway in particular .
Following the devastating floods across central Europe in 2002 , the EU established a solidarity fund to assist Member States that had suffered as a result of natural disasters from such flooding .
Our colleagues in the north-east of Romania were the most recent recipients of such aid .
The rules state that , in certain circumstances where there are extraordinary regional disasters , this aid can be used .
I now call on President Barroso and Commissioner Samecki to look favourably on any application received from Ireland for assistance under this fund .
In particular , I call on the Irish Government to contact the Commission urgently with a view to submitting an application .
It is vital that the EU and Parliament extend their support to various communities in Ireland who are suffering horrendous damage .
( HU ) In the northern part of Hungary , several tens of thousands of people come across the border from Slovakia to work , while several thousand people have moved and now live in the northern part of Hungary , in Rajka and other villages .
Thanks to the excellent infrastructure and the Schengen Agreement , they work in Slovakia and live in Hungary .
This is an excellent example of the benefits of the European Union .
According to surveys , the Slovaks living in Hungary feel at home in their newly chosen surroundings and the local authorities are now thinking about providing Slovak-language nurseries and schools , even though they are not Hungarian citizens , because bilingualism is an important value in Hungary .
The opposite process to this is taking place in Slovakia where the Hungarian ethnic community which has been living there for a thousand years is being severely discriminated against in terms of language rights , with Hungarian being made a second-class language and subordinate to the official language .
This is shameful for the whole of the European Union !
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to draw Parliament 's attention to the rules on company transfers contained in Directive 2001 / 23 / EC .
I am saying this because Eutelia S.p.A. , an Italian company operating in the field of telecommunications and information technology , counts among its clients some very important businesses , but not just businesses : for example , it also provides services for the Bank of Italy , the Italian Chamber of Deputies and the Italian Senate .
Furthermore , it is involved with the Schengen project , so it manages some very confidential data .
In May 2009 , Eutelia all but divested itself of its IT branch , transferring it to its subsidiary , Agile , which basically has a fund of only EUR 96 000 to pay its 2 000 employees .
Subsequently , in October 2009 , 1 192 people received redundancy notices .
These people are still employed , despite having received redundancy notices .
Moreover , the ridiculous thing is that the rule that I referred to just now imposes specific requirements of entrepreneurship on those who acquire parts of undertakings ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I vehemently reject the measures being taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to deport Roma and other minorities to Kosovo .
Soon , around 2 500 people are to be deported per year .
These measures particularly affect 10 000 Roma , but also Egyptians and Ashkali .
Many of these people have lived in Germany for over a decade , having found shelter there from displacement , persecution and violence .
People are also beginning to be deported from Austria , Belgium , Hungary and France .
I oppose these deportations because the situation of minorities in Kosovo , especially the Roma , is unbearable .
The unemployment rate in this group stands at almost 100 % and in Kosovo there is no way of providing these people with decent accommodation .
Their prospects involve either life in a camp or lead-polluted Mitrovica .
Finally , I would also like to appeal to the responsibility that Germany has , as a result of its history , to the victims of the Second World War , including the Roma and Sinti who were persecuted and systematically murdered .
A certain level of responsibility that must also be taken in this case ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) I would just like to alert you to the dangers presented by a disease that is threatening coniferous trees in forests within the European Union , namely pine wood nematode , which originated in America .
It has been detected in the Sétubal region of Portugal , and has already spread to other areas of Portugal and Spain .
The only effective method of combating the disease is to cut down or burn the trees .
It is worth pointing out that forest covers 38 % of Portuguese territory and is home to 400 000 landowners .
It provides 14 % of the industrial GDP , 9 % of industrial jobs and 12 % of exports .
Ultimately , the forests of the European Union are at risk , hence this intervention , which is necessary to establish an emergency plan for preventing this disease , thus far confined to the Iberian Peninsula , from spreading throughout the European Union .
An emergency plan should also have sufficient funds behind it to get rid of this problem , which is damaging many businesses , forcing them to close , and harming many workers by robbing them of their livelihood .
The whole European Union has a responsibility to do something about this .
( SL ) First of all , I would like to protest in the strongest terms possible against what my fellow Member from Austria said previously about the protection of minorities in Slovenia .
Slovenia does have high minority protection standards and we just wish that Slovenian minorities living in our neighbouring countries had similar rights .
Let me now move to another issue .
In this age of information technology , information spreads between people very quickly .
The more alarming a piece of news is , the faster it spreads , and so the accuracy of information takes second place .
What is particularly interesting in this context are news stories which have an effect on people 's health and diet .
Over the past few weeks in Slovenia , we had a totally inaccurate piece of news being spread by e-mail about Codex Alimentarius .
What we , Members of the European Parliament , can do in cases like this is address questions to the European Commission and then wait a few weeks for an expert answer .
However , we need to be able to take immediate action , because the damage is done in a very short space of time .
For this reason , I propose that the European Commission consider establishing an online information portal where any citizen wishing to contact the Commission directly can receive an answer within three days at the most .
( RO ) The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the adoption of the Stockholm Programme will definitely have a beneficial impact on Europe 's citizens in the new area of freedom , security and justice .
As far as illegal migration and cross-border crime are concerned , the forecasts for the coming years indicate that the influx of migrants is set to rise , including at the European Union 's eastern border .
I am referring in particular to the Republic of Moldova .
In the wake of the political changes that have taken place there , this country has clearly expressed the desire to become integrated into the European Union , but is currently in a vulnerable economic position .
It also has a reduced capacity to manage issues such as migration and crime at its borders .
With a view to strengthening its own external borders and creating a security zone , the European Union must grant the Republic of Moldova considerable economic aid in order to increase its capacity to take action .
The European Union must urgently propose an Association Agreement , setting out clear timescales for this country 's future accession to the EU .
This will make integration much simpler , while the success of this cooperation will also be able to provide a model for other states neighbouring the EU .
( GA ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to say a few words about the unusual flooding that happened in Ireland at the weekend .
Colleagues have spoken about the unprecedented flooding that took place in Ireland at the weekend .
I myself visited some of those places in my own constituency - towns like Clonmel , Killarney , Bandon and , of course , Cork City , which is without water for at least another week .
University College Cork is also closed as a result of unprecedented flooding - perhaps as a result of the climate change which we speak about so often here in Parliament .
Two things need to happen .
First , the Irish Government needs to ensure that it and the local authorities implement the EU Floods Directive .
That is of paramount importance and must be done .
Second , the Irish Government should apply to the European Union for funding under the European Union solidarity fund so that emergency aid can be given to those in most need , as was done in previous times for countries like Germany , France , the Czech Republic and Austria .
Mr President , two Azerbaijani youth activists and bloggers , Emin Abdullayev and Adnan Hajizade , have been sentenced to two and a half years and two years respectively , in an unfair trial .
The charges against them were fabricated and they have been imprisoned solely for exercising their right to freedom of expression and association .
The Azerbaijani authorities must release the prisoners of conscience , Adnan Hajizade and Emin Abdullayev , immediately and unconditionally .
The Council , the Commission and the Member States of the European Union must raise the issue of democracy and human rights with the Azerbaijani Government .
It must be reminded that democratisation is one of the goals of the Eastern Partnership , and Azerbaijan is part of that initiative .
Azerbaijan has to live up to its obligations as a member of the Council of Europe and partner of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , the imperialist policy of support for Israel by the USA and NATO and the upgrading of relations and of the issues in general contained in the EU-Israel Association Agreement are strengthening the aggression and intransigence of Israel towards the Palestinian people .
According to statistics , this year has been the bloodiest for the Palestinian people .
A total of 1 443 Palestinians were murdered during the Israeli army 's ' Molten Lead ' military operation alone , 9 600 Palestinians are being illegally held without trial in Israeli prisons , the wall of shame is 450 kilometres long , with plans to extend it to 750 kilometres , and houses and infrastructure are being demolished on the West Bank and in East Jerusalem .
We express our solidarity with the Palestinian people and call for an immediate , just and viable solution to the Palestinian question : the creation of an independent Palestinian state on the 1967 territories , with its capital in East Jerusalem , which will have sovereignty over its territory and borders and will make provision for the return of refugees and the return of all Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967 .
( HU ) I would like to draw your attention to the topic which Cornelia Ernst spoke about earlier .
I am talking about the start , following the negotiation and signing of readmission agreements , of the process of resettling those who were displaced or forced to flee during the Yugoslav war .
This process has started both on a voluntary basis and under coercion , involving , in particular , the minorities living in Kosovo , primarily the Roma , who are ending up in a very difficult situation as a result of this process .
I think that it is extremely important for us to take into account the recommendations of international organisations when it comes to implementing these readmission agreements .
We know that Kosovo has nothing in terms of social and economic infrastructure to be able to look after these people .
The situation developing there is really deplorable .
I believe that the European Parliament must speak out on this .
( DE ) Mr President , last Thursday , news of the unimaginably gruesome killings which took place in Peru was made public .
According to agency reports , over a period of years , a gang had beheaded its victims and removed the fat from their bodies , selling it at EUR 10 000 per litre to European cosmetic companies .
Are these reports true ?
In any event , these were inconceivably grisly killings .
Having received these gruesome reports , it now falls to us to find out whether the reports in circulation are actually true .
The fact remains that we Europeans definitely need to get to the bottom of the matter , in order to rule out the possibility that , as alleged in the reports , European pharmaceutical or cosmetics companies are in some way linked to these unspeakably gruesome murders .
We have now finished the one-minute speeches .
There were significantly more speeches than usual - over 40 - because of the time we had available .
When possible , we will give more opportunities for speaking than is provided for in the Rules of Procedure , which allow 30 such speeches at most .
Electronic communication networks and services ( debate )
The next item is Mrs Trautmann 's report on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services , 2002 / 19 / EC on access to , and interconnection of , electronic communications networks and associated facilities , and 2002 / 20 / EC on the authorisation of electronic communications networks and services ( 03677 / 2009 - - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we are once again - this time for the last time - to discuss the telecom package and , more specifically , my report on the ' framework ' , ' access ' and ' authorisation ' directives , which represents the final cornerstone .
This is an opportunity for me to thank my colleagues , particularly my co-rapporteurs Pilar del Castillo and Malcolm Harbour ; the chair of the Conciliation Committee , Mr Vidal-Quadras ; the chair of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Herbert Reul , and all the services of the European Parliament that were involved .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for her involvement and support throughout this period , and I thank her services as well .
Finally , I also welcome the efforts of the Swedish Presidency to reach a satisfying conclusion .
Let us take a moment to remember Ulrika Barklund Larsson .
Tomorrow 's vote will give a very positive signal to those expecting a more dynamic European industrial policy .
As the second reading agreement on 99 % of the text has been maintained , I shall just summarise the aspects that we made our priority .
In particular , we wanted to maintain effective , lasting competition , but also to make that competition useful to economic and social development through complete coverage of European territory in terms of access , high speed internet for all and for all regions - including better management of radio spectrum - and full rights for consumers .
This will involve establishing a consistent , operational framework for those who will be using these directives , that is , regulators , the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications and the Commission ; guaranteeing legal certainty ; encouraging the investment needed to relaunch our economy and make the market dynamic for operators , their consumers and employees ; and , finally , developing plenty of high-quality services that are accessible to the majority and fairly priced .
It is important that we remain within the terms of the agreement and , unfortunately , recent statements made by certain Member States raise some doubt over their commitment on this matter .
I shall support the Commission 's interpretation of the result of our negotiations over Article 19 .
As a matter of interest , the wording chosen for this article is closely linked to the debate on the mechanisms of Articles 7 and 7a .
It would be disappointing if the Council , through non-binding declarations , put across the message that it somehow wanted to have its cake and eat it by denying a fair balance of powers between Member States , BEREC and the Commission , as emerged in the final compromise .
Finally , of course , the salient point that led us to conciliation : Amendment 138 .
I would just like to say that the result obtained was the maximum that Parliament could obtain with the legal basis we had : harmonisation of the internal market .
So this result must not be taken lightly , since it offers all users of electronic connections solid protection of their right to privacy , to presumption of innocence and to contradictory procedure , no matter what course of action they face and before any sanctions are adopted .
I am also delighted by the Commission 's willingness to assess the situation of net neutrality in Europe and to make the appropriate instruments available to Parliament and the Council by the end of the year , based on the result of these observations .
To conclude , I therefore ask everyone to think about the transposition of the package .
I am already aware that Parliament , to which this package means a great deal , will make sure that the transposition is undertaken with respect for past agreements .
Mr President , I will now listen carefully to my colleagues ' speeches before taking the floor again at the end of the debate .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today is the culmination of what has been a very long , and very often intense , legislative process , and the efforts shown by all sides in the negotiations have produced results which were worth waiting for .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs , the committee chairs , the President and the members of the Conciliation Committee , and all the individual Members of Parliament who have brought their commitment and expertise to bear .
With the adoption of the reform package as it now stands , the Union will have a regulatory framework that is fit to meet the challenges of a rapidly developing digital economy based on fair prices for all to get telephone and internet connections , while preparing the ground for investments in high-speed networks delivering high-quality , innovative services .
These rules , these reforms , will make the European Union a global leader in the regulation of electronic communications , not just by improving the mechanism to move towards a competitive single market , but also by putting the rights of the citizens at the heart of a regulatory policy .
The compromise reached in conciliation lays down for the first time in EU law the fundamental rights of internet users against measures that could limit their internet access .
This is a very important internet freedom provision .
It makes clear that the internet , which is becoming more and more central to our daily lives , should be subject to the same safeguards for our fundamental rights as other areas of activity .
Prior , fair procedures , with the presumption of innocence and the right to privacy , followed by the right to effective and timely judicial review : those are the rules which have been put into the new reform package .
At the same time , the reform package enshrines the vision of an open and mutual internet as an objective of regulatory policy .
The EU approach is a very pragmatic one .
It has , by the way , already been hailed on other continents as an important trendsetter .
The protection of consumers against loss of personal data and against spam has also been strengthened , particularly by requiring operators to notify consumers in case of personal data breaches and by strengthening the principle of user consent when it comes to use of cookies .
Amongst other major gains for consumers is the right to change their fixed or mobile operator in one working day while keeping their old phone number .
Thanks to Parliament , the new provisions on radio spectrum will bring lower prices and encourage the introduction of new services , thereby helping to bridge the digital divide .
Parliament will have a key role in setting the strategic direction for spectrum policy at European level through the new multiannual radio spectrum policy programme .
The reforms will also permit investment by operators in the next-generation networks .
They will strengthen the incentives to invest efficiently in new infrastructure by taking account of the investment risks , while ensuring that competition is not stifled .
At institutional level , the body of European regulators , the famous BEREC , offers the opportunity for the 27 national regulators to contribute to the functioning of the single market in a more transparent and effective manner .
The strengthened oversight of remedies by the Commission , supported by BEREC , will consolidate the single market by improving the consistency and the quality of implementation of the framework across Europe and ensure that operators have a level playing field .
Let us not forget the important agreement reached on Article 19 of the framework directive , which gives the Commission enhanced harmonisation powers covering general regulatory approaches , including in relation to remedies .
This gives the Commission a central role , in cooperation with BEREC , to ensure that the Telecoms Regulation is applied consistently in the single market in the interests of citizens and businesses .
I already presented to you my declarations at the May plenary , saying that the Commission will build on the reforms by consulting widely next year on the scope of the future universal service and a wider application of the principles relating to data breach notification .
I reaffirm these commitments today , adjusted of course only to the time that has elapsed since then .
The Commission will also do its part to ensure that the new tools are put to good use when needed .
I have indicated that the Commission will monitor the impact of market and technological developments on net freedoms and report to the European Parliament and the Council before the end of 2010 on whether additional guidance is required .
The Commission will also invoke its existing competition law powers to deal with any anti-competitive practices that may emerge .
I believe that the confidence and the legal certainty provided by these reforms will be critical in helping the e-communications sector to contribute to Europe 's economic recovery .
I would therefore commend Parliament for its support for the package and urge Members to vote in favour of its adoption .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by expressing my thanks to my fellow Members , and in this case , mainly to the rapporteur , Mrs Trautmann , because she has really done an extraordinary job .
You had to be there to know how much was achieved in this final stage , which resulted in success in the conciliation process .
I would say that at the moment , we are in an excellent position to begin to tackle a future that is , in a sense , revolutionary , or should be revolutionary .
We finally have - or we are soon going to have - a regulatory framework that lays some very good foundations for putting the development of the internet , the digital society and the digital economy at the forefront of our objectives .
This framework provides good protection for consumers , promotes their rights and also provides security for investors .
I think , however , that it is very important for us to now look decisively towards the future .
We must look decisively beyond 2010 so that we can devote all our efforts to setting a digital agenda beyond 2010 .
The key objectives of this digital agenda should include : enabling everyone , as consumers and citizens , to have all the resources needed to access and participate through the internet and , of course , developing an internal digital market that is open and competitive .
This is an absolutely essential objective if we want to put the European economy where it should be in the global world of today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I was pleased , Commissioner , to hear you say that freedom of access to the internet should be guaranteed just like other fundamental rights .
This is precisely the issue that we , Members of the European Parliament , have been fighting for : to obtain the same level of guarantee , that is , a prior procedure before an impartial judge .
We did not quite manage that but , thanks to the work of our rapporteur , it would seem that we have obtained as good a solution as we could .
It is not perfect . It is not perfect because it will pave the way for disputes that we would have rather avoided ; and if we had said things as clearly as I just have , there would not have been any disputes .
Unfortunately , we did not reach a compromise on this point .
This means that we will have to return to the subjects of freedom of internet access , net neutrality and the way in which , in an open society such as ours today , there should be a certain level of free access to knowledge and information .
This is all part of the same issue .
We have taken the first step ; we have the fundamental , vital first text , and that is the reason why I , personally , shall vote for it even if others hesitate .
Nevertheless , we will have to go much further in safeguarding freedom of access to open science , to open research and to all intellectual works while , of course , bearing in mind that property rights in the areas of literature , art and research should also be safeguarded .
In the coming years , however , we will almost certainly have to make further compromises .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are delighted that the action taken by the European Parliament has allowed internet users to enjoy guaranteed , and now explicit , protection .
It is true that if Parliament had not twice voted in favour of the famous Amendment 138 , we would not be where we are today .
It is clear that the content of the compromise text today has been obtained thanks to that .
However , as Mrs Lepage said , the compromise we reached is certainly not the be all and end all when it comes to the protection of internet users ' rights .
I think that we went as far as we could given the constitutional order within which the European Parliament operates today .
The compromise therefore paves the way for the adoption of this telecom package which , for us , represents real progress in relation to the system we inherited from the days of telecommunications monopolies - an era which , thankfully , is in the past .
Tomorrow 's vote , however , is only the beginning .
We shall , both here and in the national parliaments , be keeping an extremely close watch over the way in which the compromise adopted tomorrow is transposed into national legislation , because we know that a number of Member States of the European Union are , shall we say , somewhat heavy-handed when it comes to public freedoms - particularly where the internet is concerned - and I am not sure they will avoid the pitfall of diverging from the rule we will adopt tomorrow .
Finally , it is time for the European Union to endow itself with a true charter of internet users ' rights , defining access rights , of course ; privacy rights ; freedom of expression ; and net neutrality .
For us , a simple declaration on net neutrality is not enough .
It is also true that we should pay particular attention to the rights of authors and creators , so that the dissemination of their work on the internet is an encouragement for them .
Yet this must not lead to the expropriation of this remarkable tool to the benefit of private interests .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , as one of the three rapporteurs who worked very closely together on the whole package - and this is clearly a package - I want to give a very warm welcome to this compromise agreement and also to add my compliments to Catherine Trautmann , who has led the negotiation with great skill .
The wide-ranging nature of the final text and the safeguards it provides for consumers ' rights are a tribute to her negotiating skills .
I welcome the fact that all the political groups represented in the conciliation have endorsed the text and that we can finally unleash the benefits of this whole package with our vote tomorrow , because it has now been some months since we worked on it .
The Council had already accepted , on 26 October , my own report on universal service and users ' rights , a number of points in which Mrs Reding highlighted .
I will not repeat these , but suffice to say , this is a major advance for consumers .
I would like to make one or two remarks about some elements of my own report and particularly to highlight our negotiations with the Council - Mr President , unfortunately you have not had a chance to speak , but you were deeply involved in these - which achieved significant advances in the areas of data breach and particularly issues around the use of cookies and the rights that consumers have to refuse devices that may collect information on their computers .
Commissioner , we very much welcome the statement that you have already made on data breach , but I have to say I was somewhat surprised to receive a statement from 13 Member States that seemed to me to rather reinterpret the agreement that they had already signed off on 26 October .
You may perhaps wish to comment on that later .
I just wish to reinforce the view - and I am sure you would agree , Mr President - that what we have agreed is the position .
The Commission will now carry out that position .
If it needs clarification , it is down to the Commission to do that .
We look forward to it enforcing and moving this out as soon as possible , particularly in the area of net neutrality , your declaration on which is warmly welcomed , because that is something that we fought very strongly for in my committee .
This is an important step forward for consumers .
I very much welcome it on behalf of my group and , I hope , the whole Parliament .
Mr President , the telecoms package will be decided on tomorrow .
I would like to thank Mrs Trautmann and all of my fellow Members who have fought for a free internet .
Above all , I would like to thank all of those citizens who have demonstrated their commitment to this issue .
They have got very strongly involved , and quite rightly so , as this is ultimately about freedom of expression and our civil rights and freedoms .
It was thanks to our committed citizens that the protection of internet users against monitoring and the abuse of power is better than expected , but , in my opinion and that of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , it is not good enough .
There are three reasons why I will be voting against this package .
Firstly , the compromise - Amendment 138 - does not give citizens sufficient protection against the power of the authorities and internet service providers .
It merely refers to a review prior to exclusion - not a judicial review .
This could open the way for arbitrary measures .
The text prevents the end users ' rights being restricted by the Member States , which is a good thing , but companies can introduce restrictions provided they do so in the agreement .
The second reason is that my amendments concerning internet rights , in other words , the well-known Citizens ' Rights Amendments , were not included in the compromise .
This , in fact , opens the way for a network where it is not a foregone conclusion that all users will have access to the whole network and where not all sites have the same possibility of being viewed .
I think that we should have been very clear that it must not be permitted to lead the internet down such a blind alley .
The end result then runs the risk of being more like a collection of cable television channels rather than free communication for everyone .
The third reason is that the telecoms package falls within the regulatory framework for the internal market .
This means , of course , that in the event of a conflict , it will be the European Court of Justice that decides .
Freedom of expression should not be decided by the European Court of Justice .
It is not enough to have mediocre protection for citizens ' rights ; they must have complete protection .
At the end of voting time in the plenary session of 6 May 2009 , the European Parliament approved a draft directive setting out the terms and conditions for electronic communication .
However , the plenary also approved one amendment proposal which the Council regarded as being difficult to enforce .
A conciliation procedure therefore ran up until 29 September , attempting to harmonise the views of the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament so as to ensure that the requirements contained in Article 138 could be transposed correctly into current European legislation .
I would therefore like to applaud the efforts of the European Parliament 's negotiating team , as well as the businesslike and constructive approach taken by the representatives of the Council and the Commission , thanks to whom it was possible to reach agreement on the wording of the contentious provision in such a way that the aims and ideas contained in the original Article 138 were transposed in an acceptable way into the new telecommunications directive .
I firmly believe that , following the conciliation procedure , the new telecommunications directive is ready to be applied in European public life .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that was a hard slog , involving two rounds in the ring , so to speak , but it was well worth the effort .
The result is something of which Parliament can be proud .
I would also like to give special thanks , on behalf of my colleague Mrs Niebler - who unfortunately cannot be here today , to the rapporteurs , Mrs del Castillo Vera , Mr Harbour and Mrs Trautmann , as well as to all the other people who have helped to pave the way for a compromise .
It was a truly difficult task , sometimes involving a great deal of effort on the part of individuals and political groups , but in the end , a consensus was achieved .
The telecommunications sector is a vital sector in terms of economic development , as it provides an important stimulus for employment .
In 2007 alone , this sector had a turnover of around EUR 300 billion .
This means that the sector will have a new legal framework , which will also have a big impact on economic development in the European Union .
Europe faces significant challenges : investing in high performance broadband networks and expanding them .
The business sector is ready to take action and we also want to open doors .
An important decision has been made .
Last but not least , we want to make the radio spectrum policy more flexible , and need to make use of the digital dividends .
Here , too , an important prerequisite has been met .
And finally , we have had to invest a lot of effort , as , at the beginning , many of us were not aware of the problems and the issue of how to deal with internet freedom and how to strengthen citizens ' rights on the internet .
We have now secured the protection of our citizens to a far greater extent than we had imagined at the start of the process , as things have moved forward .
Measures taken in the EU Member States in relation to access or usage of electronic communication network services must not infringe fundamental rights in any way .
Limitations should only be introduced after a fair and independent process .
The person must have a right to a hearing and be able to challenge the decision in the courts .
This is an amendment that could not be foreseen at the beginning .
Everyone contributed to this process , and I hope that everyone will therefore be able to vote in favour of the proposals . Thank you very much .
Mr President , we in the Swedish Pirate Party support the compromise that was reached in conciliation .
It is not perfect and it is not everything we would have wanted , but we think it is a good step in the right direction .
Nobody should be shut off from the internet without at least a prior , fair and impartial procedure that includes the right to be heard and respects the principle that you are innocent until you are proven guilty .
The compromise sends a strong signal to the Member States that things like the French HADOPI law or the Mandelson method in the UK are simply not acceptable .
It is now up to activists in France and in the UK to make sure that their governments respect this .
But for us here in the European Parliament , this was only the beginning .
We need , as several speakers have said , a proper bill of rights for the internet that makes it absolutely clear that the internet is an important part of society , where our fundamental civil liberties must be respected .
This includes the right to information freedom and the right to privacy as specified in the European Convention of Fundamental Rights .
We need net neutrality and we need a policy that says ' yes ' to the fantastic possibilities that the internet and the new information technology give us all .
Europe has a unique opportunity to show leadership and set an example to the world for a free and open internet .
This is a chance we should take .
The road ahead is open .
This compromise is only a first step , but it is a step in the right direction .
So I encourage all colleagues to vote ' yes ' to it .
Mr President , the prospect of this intended measure has raised the hackles of internet users throughout the Member States .
It threatens unprecedented levels of state surveillance , state intervention and commercial exploitation and seeks to deprive internet users even of the protection of the courts .
The Council has stated that this assembly is exceeding its powers by providing that the protection of the courts be maintained .
But , whether this is true or not , how much more would those powers be exceeded by a provision which allows officials to hound and spy on internet users whilst remaining above the law ?
This House interposed Amendment 138 between governments and governed in order to protect the latter from grave miscarriages of justice , of which bureaucrats are more than capable when freed from judicial supervision .
According to reliable legal opinion , the conciliation process has vitiated the spirit and the letter of Amendment 138 .
I call upon all Members to determine that , if this House cannot provide the safeguards which should rightly accompany this measure , then it should not adopt this measure at all .
( SV ) Mr President , protection for internet users has been the focus of a large part of the telecoms debate .
Last spring , Mrs Svensson and others voted down a proposal requiring a judicial review to be carried out if someone was to be excluded .
Now we have a different solution , which protects users through very clear references to the regulatory system that is required to be in place in every Member State .
I think it is important to say that the difference here is not about whether we want to protect users , but about whether we respect the Member States ' right to decide on their own legal systems .
In this regard , it is interesting to note that one of the Swedish parliamentarians who is most against the European Union and Sweden 's membership wants to make it more supranational than is usually proposed by anyone else in this Chamber , as she wants the European Union to legislate on how the Member States ' legal systems should be organised .
That is a major step and the vast majority in Parliament has opposed it , as we support the compromise that we now have and that will provide good protection for users .
We also support this compromise because it will ensure that Europe 's consumers and internet users will always be able to choose between different suppliers and different operators .
Making it possible to change operators if a particular operator is providing a poor service gives consumers and citizens a power that they have never had before .
Mrs Svensson , things have changed since the time when it was the large monopolies that determined citizens ' rights to view , decide on and use information .
This is a tremendous change that Mrs Svensson , and possibly others too , will , unfortunately , be voting against .
However , the main issue - for which I would also like to congratulate Mrs Trautmann and the Commissioner - is that we are now also getting to grips with the question of the spectrum and ensuring that we in Europe can lead the way when it comes to utilising the digital dividend .
This will bring European citizens success and opportunities and give European industry a chance to be world leaders .
Therefore , I and the vast majority in this Chamber support the proposal that we are to vote on tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the difficult discussions that were part of the mediation process had one main , important purpose , namely establishing basic rights and liberties on the internet , above all , respect for the rule of law .
These should not be rendered ineffective by the individual interests of the large economic powers on the internet because they want to fight tooth and nail to save an outdated copyright system which is not adapted to the internet era .
We need a completely new system to protect the intellectual property rights of creative forces on the internet , a system that we need to develop together . However , in terms of protecting the rights of the citizens , we need to be consistent , and this includes monitoring implementation in the Member States .
It was , after all , the Council that was not in favour of protecting these rights and would have liked to see them fall by the wayside .
We must engage in this power struggle with respect to the protection of the rights of the citizens and we must win .
No Member State should now be allowed to worm their way out of these obligations .
( NL ) The European Parliament has rightly placed emphasis on a number of issues : guaranteeing access , net neutrality and better supervision .
The entire package , as it now stands , is exceptionally well balanced .
On the one hand , it now enables us to seize opportunities for proper competition , for growth in this sector , and also , in economic terms , to seize opportunities for jobs and economic advantages .
On the other hand , it makes particularly good provision for consumer protection .
Consumers who are suspected of committing a punishable offence may only be cut off from the internet after a ruling has been brought by the judicial authorities and a clear procedure must be followed .
We also have a provision for appeal , which means that established human rights are guaranteed , as they should be .
Last week , an important conference on internet governance took place under the aegis of the UN and it was also attended by a delegation from the European Parliament .
It turned out that everyone in the world was looking to us to see how we are regulating this field .
In many countries and throughout large parts of the world , governments seek to dictate what content can be shown on the internet and under what circumstances citizens may be cut off from the internet or , for that matter , allowed access to it .
We are setting an example here of a good legislative framework and we are striking a balance between the market and the protection of citizens .
Non-governmental civil society organisations , in particular , the whole world over , are looking at how this issue has been regulated in this package .
I had the opportunity to witness this for myself last week and I would like to point out that we are writing a small piece of telecommunications history .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Trautmann , who has done a fantastic job of setting the boundaries .
This is a pièce de résistance of the art of negotiation .
Initially , however , the Council was not prepared to go that far .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 4 November , Parliament was given the Council 's guarantee that any restrictions on internet access can only be made if certain conditions are met : prior , fair and impartial procedure ; a guarantee of the principle of presumption of innocence and the respect for privacy ; and respect for the European Convention on Human Rights .
This agreement is the first step towards better protection for citizens faced with growing attempts made by certain States and private operators to trivialise the principle of flexible response , data storage and the control of digital exchange on the internet .
That , however , is not enough .
Accepting restrictions on digital freedoms and going against net neutrality is not acceptable .
It is contrary to the Lisbon Strategy and undermines the fundamental rights and values of the Union .
As the sole directly elected European institution , in order to protect citizens ' interests , Parliament now has the moral and political duty to take up this issue and define the rights and duties of internet users so as to guarantee their digital freedom and access to knowledge .
We will vote in favour of this text , but we will make sure that we take the matter further tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by offering the Commissioner my sincere thanks .
The telecommunications legislation passed during the last five years has shown that Europe is earnestly and systematically making progress , thanks to the commitment and the know-how which enabled us to introduce adequate legislation .
At this point , I would like to thank my colleagues and , above all , the rapporteurs .
We have seen that new generation technologies are appearing , and that these new generation technologies , such as the Fourth Generation LTE Network , need to be given space on the European internal market .
In order for this to happen , we also need to make sensible use of digital dividends , and we need data roaming that corresponds to the needs of the internal market .
I still foresee a great deal of work ahead of us in this field .
The issue of internet freedom has been discussed rigorously and in great depth .
I would like to thank everyone who took part in the debate . However , we still need to take action on the issue of intellectual property , to allow us to take the necessary measures during the next legislative term .
In this respect , I also look to the national regulatory bodies , which have now been granted additional powers through BEREC .
It is their task to help their national industries and national consumers to assert their rights in the other 26 countries .
In this regard , there is a great need for the national regulators to take action , as this is a starting point for a future expansion in the field of digital communication in Europe and beyond , and for Europe to take a leading role in this field at international level .
Mr President , let me change tack and bring to your attention some real-life facts .
If you have to report major incidents , such as the breaking of your mail account , you can do it only electronically .
There is no way to speak to a real person and establish a normal dialogue .
If you have a problem you want to report to a telephone and internet provider , you get stuck in a labyrinth of recorded voices transferring you from one to another until the company is satisfied with the money they have got out of you , even if the problem you want to report has been caused by their faulty service .
Therefore , I would suggest that the new Commission look into the matter and come up with a regulation to force the providers to have a real person answering your first transfer .
It will save consumer time , health and money and still give a profit , albeit smaller , to the service provider , plus some jobs to the unemployed .
In concluding , Commissioner , I would like to draw your attention to another fact of life , namely the amount of personal data the consumer is asked to provide for a free download of software for products bought directly off the shelf .
Where does that information end up , and for what purpose ?
( DE ) Mr President , our lives , and especially the lives of young people today , revolve around the internet to a significant degree , and both the digital revolution and the use of electronic means of communication are contributing to progress in this field .
As a result , many people view having easy access to the internet , and the wealth of information available online , as a necessity .
In this respect , we also should not , and must not , forget those people who have , until now , not had access to the internet .
That is why I specifically and strongly welcome the measures that have been taken thus far , as we are now on the right path to creating greater competition and improved access to important information .
I am sure that whatever remains to be done can still be achieved in the future .
Mr President , I am very pleased with what I have heard here this evening and I would like to compliment the rapporteur and the Commissioner for the manner in which they have put their case clearly and succinctly .
People have referred to the salient points : the rights of citizens , investment , controls , transparency , consolidation of the single market , a level playing field , accountability , proper competition and consumer protection .
That is all very important .
Mr van Nistelrooij said we are writing communications history here this evening .
What needs to happen now is that this is transposed as soon as possible into national law and implemented , and the key points are three words : there will be free , fair and fast access to the internet for people and businesses , whether they are at the centre of the Union or in its outermost regions .
We have started to write history .
We must now continue to do so and implement it for the good of all citizens .
Well done !
( NL ) There are many good things in this package , but there are also a few things that I still have grave concerns about .
One of them , of course , is the ' three strikes and you are out ' provision and , to this very day , I cannot understand why it has been included in this telecommunications package at all .
It is an entirely foreign element in the package .
Nor do I understand why Europe has to provide reasons to the Member States as to why it is introducing such a provision .
They themselves already have a pretty good idea of why it has been introduced and do not need Europe to tell them .
To my mind , this is another splendid example of policy laundering .
I am disappointed that Parliament has not shown any backbone to the Council and has told the Council : this is what we have voted on and we are going to stick to our guns .
I still have to make my mind up about how I am eventually going to vote because , as I said , there is a great deal that is good about this package .
At the same time , however , I think that the telecommunications package as a whole is still something of a hotchpotch , that it falls short of the mark and that we need clarity about which areas it applies to and those which it does not apply to .
I am assuming , therefore , that this is only a first step , but I want more safeguards and more assurances that we are not going to rely on this telecommunications package to solve the problem which the ' three strikes and you are out ' policy is aimed at solving and that we will instead look to be guided by better regulations , in order to reward and protect intellectual , creative and financial efforts .
Mr President , the discussion on Article 138 and the compromise we reached shows that Members of the European Parliament are reacting to public opinion and people 's interests , and that this Parliament is defending freedom , in connection with people 's reactions .
This is a wonderful example , with internauts having performed monitoring , written to MEPs and adopted a position in defence of their rights and wishes .
It should be taken as an important case study in Parliament 's work .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that I can join all those who have said that this is a nice piece of collaboration in order to get a nice piece of legislation .
No piece of legislation is perfect ; this one is not perfect , either , and you know how much time we need in order to set up new legislation - so that by the time we arrive at an agreement , the world has already advanced so much that we should start from the beginning again .
That is exactly the reason why we said that the protection of the individual rights on net neutrality is the first step ; another step which needs to follow is how the copyright has to be adapted to the online world .
Because we cannot wait until all these rules are implemented into national law , I have , in the name of the Commission , said that the Commission will monitor the impact of market and technological developments on the net freedoms and report to the European Parliament and the Council before the end of 2010 .
We then , altogether , have to see if we need to take other , supplementary measures or if we have to push to implement the existing measures which we are going to vote on tomorrow in the action at the level of the Member States .
Two concrete answers to two concrete questions : first , the declaration on Article 19 relating to harmonisation procedures .
Exactly like Parliament , I regret that 16 Member Sates have made a declaration which calls into question the scope of the Commission 's powers , agreed between the Parliament and the Council under the amended Article 19 , in particular , the Commission 's power in relation to the regulatory obligations that might be imposed by national regulatory authorities ( NRAs ) .
So , because there were those 16 declarations , the Commission has also made a declaration pointing out that , while it may not take decisions under the article that refer to specific notifications by NRAs under Article 7a , it may take decisions in relation to general regulatory approaches relating to the imposition , maintenance , amendment or withdrawal of such obligations .
Parliament is right , an agreement has been made and we should not come back to such an agreement by the back door .
Second , the question of cookies .
Now the Commission was , like Mr Harbour , surprised that certain Member States appeared to call the agreed text on cookies into question .
Let me be very clear : we agreed with Parliament , and we believe that the final text is unambiguous .
First , there must be clear and comprehensive information to users on the basis of which second users must give their consent .
That is that and that should be applied now in the Member States .
I do not appreciate it that after everything has been agreed , some like to manoeuvre in order not to keep 100 % to the agreements pacta sunt servanda in politics .
That is the way I see things .
So I am very proud of the European institutions .
I think that they have managed to make a good piece of legislation .
They have also managed to keep this equilibrium between the interests of the operators , the economical part of the rules , and the interests of the users , the citizens ' rights , and this equilibrium I think is what Europe is about : Europe is about economy and society .
Here in this text , we have managed to bring both together .
Congratulations to all those who have contributed to make this possible .
Mr President , may I express my warmest thanks to my colleagues who have taken part in this debate and say that they have certainly made clear what a perilous and difficult job we have had to complete this telecom package .
Ultimately , it was held up by an amendment on which we have resoundingly voted several times in this Parliament , but which was not accepted by the Council .
Like others , I believe this to be a basis and not an end .
We have not succeeded on this point as we have on others .
In the Commissioner 's response , she also stressed the same thing about Article 19 .
I had hoped we would go much further in implementing a procedure of economic arbitration with regard to European regulators , but of course , we could not achieve everything at once .
We tried to be efficient , fair and balanced ; we wanted to show that , while the internet and digital society are driven by use and mobility , citizens ' rights should never be ridiculed , scorned or ignored .
This is the first time that a text of this kind includes such a reference in its first article , making it a basic principle and linking the internet with the exercise of rights and fundamental freedoms ; we believe this makes what we are doing quite distinctive when we legislate with the Council and draft texts with the Commission .
Indeed , we think that the information society should be both respectful of citizens ' rights and positive from an economic and social point of view , opening up a new cultural sphere .
That is why we anticipate that the market will enable this to happen , that users ' rights will be stated and guaranteed , but that we can also have this extended access and connectivity for all .
However , this is also why we now have a considerable job to do in the areas of copyright , net neutrality and radio spectrum .
The European Parliament will lend its support .
I would like to say what a pleasure it has been to work with my colleagues and how delighted I am that this compromise respects the vote that we so strongly expressed together .

Colleagues , you can imagine my frustration at not being able to participate in this debate , so I will simply use my institutional role at the end of it to congratulate warmly Catherine Trautmann , Pilar del Castillo Vera and Malcolm Harbour for their work ; to thank the Commission , and especially Commissioner Reding , for their excellent cooperation throughout a very difficult process ; and to state that it would have been a pleasure to have welcomed the Council to this important debate , as it might have been better able than the rest of us to explain those surprising letters that were mentioned on some legal aspects of this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Tuesday , 24 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , I would like to touch on the thorny issue of the internet compromise ( aka ' Amendment 138 ' ) .
The regulatory package we have produced provides maximum safeguards for all internet users : we have ensured that users ' privacy is respected and that the European Convention on Human Rights applies and , above all , that no one will ever have their internet access cut off without an independent body first considering and ruling on their case .
What this means in concrete terms is that intervention is only permitted in cases of gross abuse .
This legal provision applies to both the authorities and to internet providers themselves .
Nonetheless , this European law guarantees free access to the internet and confirms de facto that the internet is a service of general interest , which no consumer can have cut off for no valid reason ( just as no consumer can be denied access to gas , water or electricity ) .
The fact that this compromise has received the unanimous approval of all the parliamentary delegations is proof that it is a terrific agreement and one which has placed the rights of the consumer at the very heart of the new telecommunications package .
We have reason to be very pleased with the result achieved today on the telecommunications package since it reinforces the rights of internet users and encourages competition between telephone companies .
The new rules will guarantee greater rights for consumers , unconditional freedom of access to the internet and protection of personal data .
This is an excellent example of how our work as legislators has an impact on citizens ' daily lives .
In fact , the internet , for the first time in the world , has come to represent the exercise of a right and a fundamental freedom .
As such it will supplement , and take shape in proportion to , and in accordance with , other fundamental freedoms that already exist and which are guaranteed by the treaty : gender equality , respect for sexual orientation and religious belief , protection of the rights of the child , and freedom of expression that is consistent with the protection of human dignity .
Any measure that restricts access to the internet may now be imposed only if it is deemed to be ' appropriate , proportionate and necessary ' in a democratic society .
Today , we have indicated our agreement to complete freedom of the internet , to the promotion of an electronic civil society , to the promotion of fundamental freedoms and best practices and to the identification and isolation of all those individuals , in particular , paedophiles and sex offenders , who seek to abuse this absolute freedom .
The basic aim of the alterations to the framework directive for electronic communications networks and services is to strengthen the rights of telephone and internet users and also to increase competition between telecommunications providers .
Currently , electronic communications are regulated by rules which were approved seven years ago .
Since then , the area has progressed dramatically .
As a lawyer , I think that Parliament exceeded the authority given to it by the treaty by adding , at the last moment , a proposal for alterations which required public regulatory institutions to promote the interests of European Union citizens , prescribing that no restrictions may be imposed on the basic rights and freedoms of the end-user without a prior ruling by the Court .
I am pleased that , as a result of the discussions held by the conciliation committee , a better way has been found to secure legal correctness in the text , and also to provide protection for all users and show respect for the jurisdictions of the Member States .
The decision allows us finally to approve the changes to the framework directive for electronic communications networks and services .
I am delighted to see this lengthy , highly controversial work reach its conclusion ; it shows the importance of the telecommunications sector not only as an economic player but also as a vital element in today 's society .
Our citizens communicate across borders on a daily basis and our aim was to guarantee quality of services while ensuring that users ' fundamental rights were respected .
I want to congratulate Mrs Trautmann and the negotiating team for the compromise they have achieved , making any sanctions taken against users subject to a prior contradictory procedure .
Furthermore , the Commission was committed to guaranteeing net neutrality and to combating anti-competitive , discriminatory practices carried out by operators .
This agreement will mean consumers benefit from many positive developments which were sometimes the result of tough negotiations .
I particularly wish to highlight guaranteed access and localisation for calls made to the emergency number ( 112 ) ; improved access for the disabled ; greater information on contracts and billing ; warnings in cases of unusually high usage ; the introduction of a maximum delay when transferring a customer 's telephone number ; and information in cases of security breaches relating to personal data .
European Crime Prevention Network ( EUCPN ) - Rules on the confidentiality of Europol information - Implementing rules governing Europol 's relations with partners , including the exchange of personal data and classified information - List of third States and organisations for Europol agreements - Implementing rules for Europol analysis work files - Accreditation of forensic laboratory activities ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council Decision adopting the rules on the confidentiality of Europol information [ 11943 / 2009 - C7-0105 / 2009 - ;
by Mrs in ' t Veld , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council Decision adopting the implementing rules governing Europol 's relations with partners , including the exchange of personal data and classified information [ 11944 / 2009 - C7-0106 / 2009 - ;
by Mr Albrecht , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council Decision determining the list of third States and organisations with which Europol shall conclude agreements [ 11946 / 2009 - C7-0107 / 2009 - ;
by Mr Diaz de Mera Garcia Consuegra , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council Decision adopting the implementing rules for Europol analysis work files [ 11947 / 2009 - C7-0108 / 2009 - ;
by Mrs Alfano , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Kingdom of Belgium , the Czech Republic , the Federal Republic of Germany , the Kingdom of Spain , the French Republic , the Republic of Hungary , the Kingdom of the Netherlands , the Slovak Republic , the Republic of Finland , the Kingdom of Sweden , the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on a Council Decision setting up a European Crime Prevention Network ( EUCPN ) and repealing Decision 2001 / 427 / JHA [ 11421 / 2009 - C7-0109 / 2009 - , and
by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of Spain with a view to adopting a Council Framework Decision on Accreditation of Forensic Laboratory Activities [ 11419 / 2009 - C7-0100 / 2009 - .

rapporteur . - Mr President , I will be very brief in order to make up for Mr Nicholson and ensure that we do not run late .
The Lisbon Treaty will be in force - if I calculate correctly - seven days and five hours from now .
I must say that the rush by the Council to adopt a whole series of decisions is somewhat embarrassing in the light of this .
What I also find embarrassing is that there is an empty seat here , where I would have hoped to see the Council so that we could actually have an exchange of views .
I basically endorse the proposals made by the previous speaker .
Of course , we support the development of Europol .
We want a strong Europol .
We want a Europol that is able to operate and fight against crime , but we also want a Europol that is subject to democratic scrutiny .
I therefore endorse the proposal made by the previous speaker to ask the Council to withdraw the proposals on Europol and present a new proposal within a maximum of six months - and preferably earlier - under the Lisbon Treaty .
Finally , when it comes to the specific subject that I am rapporteur for - which is Europol and the transfer of personal data and confidential documents to third parties - I would like to hear from the Council - which is absent - on how it feels about the analysis made by the European Parliament 's Legal Service to the effect that the legal basis chosen for this particular proposal is the wrong one .
I do not know who is going to answer for the Council , but maybe it can come back on this and send somebody who can provide us with a reply .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I can agree with the previous speakers in so far as I think that it would only be sensible for the Council to present its proposals concerning Europol to the European Parliament once again , on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is right and necessary for the judicial and police cooperation in Europe to be discussed and codecided by Parliament .
Only in this way can Europol 's work enjoy sufficient legitimacy .
The European Parliament 's joint and decisive rejection of the provisions proposed by the Council , pertaining to Europol 's work , is a clear signal that amendments to the legal basis now have to be applied .
What is more , there is every reason to do so .
For far too long , the implementation of European internal and security policy has been a task reserved exclusively for the executive , carried out behind closed doors .
Not least in the context of the anti-terrorism measures taken following the attacks on 11 September 2001 , numerous rafts of security legislation were approved , whose necessity , effectiveness and suitability was , in many cases , not thoroughly assessed , or even discussed .
The political remoteness of the third pillar of the European Union has made it possible for the governments to impose highly controversial restrictions on the fundamental rights of the citizens .
This has produced a very dangerous imbalance in one area in particular .
While there is now closer cooperation between the security forces throughout the world , there is no international consensus on minimum standards in relation to fundamental rights and legal protection .
This gulf between government powers and civil rights is becoming increasingly pronounced , especially with regard to the exchange of personal data between the EU and third countries , .
European security agencies such as Europol , Eurojust and Frontex , as well as information systems such as Schengen , Eurodac or the customs and visa database , are being used to store an increasing volume of personal data , and the linking and analysis of this data , for various purposes , is progressing rapidly .
Even within Europe , it is becoming less clear who is allowed to collect , possess , analyse or pass on what data , and the conditions under which they may do so .
Thus , the issue of legal protection is frequently sidelined , in the light of the principles which govern the current system .
However , what would happen if all this data was passed on only to third countries ?
We are not merely talking about countries such as Norway or Switzerland , but also the United States , Russia , and even Morocco or China .
I wonder who would guarantee that this data was protected from abuse and arbitrary actions on the part of states to the same extent as has hitherto been the case .
This Parliament actually has the right and the duty to use the new legal basis provided by the treaty to initiate a process whereby the fundamental rights of European citizens will have to be respected , without any limitations , including in the context of international cooperation in the fight against crime and terrorism .
Common minimum standards must be put in place , specifically with regard to the protection of personal data , before we , as the European Union , sign any further agreements on the exchange of data with third countries .
This applies to the information obtained by Europol , as well as SWIFT banking data and flight passenger data , which are exchanged with the US authorities .
Clear data protection standards , a comprehensive proportionality assessment and effective legal protection for citizens are key prerequisites for any further measures .
I am pleased that we have managed to reach this level of consensus across the political spectrum regarding the legislation on Europol , and I view this as a good sign for the forthcoming discussion on the comprehensive protection of fundamental rights in Europe .
That is precisely what EU citizens now expect from us .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the Europol package is made up of four draft decisions that seek to implement the Council Decision of 6 April 2009 .
Firstly , Mr President , I wish to join with my fellow Members in asking for the Council proposal to be withdrawn .
We want a Parliament that is much more visible and a Treaty of Lisbon that makes the decisions with regard to the Europol package .
We want Parliament and the Council to be on an equal footing and in balance with each other .
In order to ensure that the reasons for my rejection of the proposal are better understood , I will say a few words about the subject of my report .
One of the main tasks entrusted to the European Police Office is the job of collecting , storing , processing , analysing and exchanging information and data .
So that it can carry out this important task , the competent authorities in the Member States need to send comprehensive , up-to-date , accurate information to Europol .
This is the only way that Europol will be able to use its capacity for analysis to the full .
The scope of application of the draft Council Decision is limited , as defined in Article 2 , to the processing of data for the purpose of analysis , in accordance with the mandate given in Article 14 ( 1 ) of the Decision .
To this end , Europol currently has 19 types of work files for the purpose of analysis .
Each work file is a separate database , each linked to a specific type of criminal activity .
Each database is therefore closely linked to the specific type of operational support that Europol can offer pursuant to the powers vested in it .
Currently , the work files are the only legal tool at European level for storing , processing and analysing information , whether it be information from the field or intelligence , including personal data .
The proposal also contains rules and general principles relating to both technical measures and rules for using them .
The need to collect and process information means that a legal instrument must be created that guarantees full respect of fundamental rights .
I would like to point out that this means full respect of the fundamental rights of European citizens .
At the same time , such an instrument must guarantee that Europol can carry out the functions assigned to it in full .
In this respect , echoing Mrs in ' t Veld , I question whether or not the legal basis it is intended to apply is correct .
In this area , Mr President , the role of the European Parliament as the House representing citizens is inalienable .
The compulsory control by the European Parliament is inalienable .
For this reason , it is essential that , in view of the immediate entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament takes part in the legislative process on an equal footing with the Council .
No grounds for urgency could carry more weight than the importance of defending civil liberties and the security of Europeans .
I therefore urge my esteemed fellow Members to join in rejecting the proposed instruments , without lessening our support for the European Police Office - which we do indeed support - until the Council allows Parliament to be part of the decision-making process .
I also propose that we ask the Commission and the Council to withdraw the proposal and put forward a fresh one that respects the competences laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , when I speak again , I will give a more convincing and clearer explanation of my position .
That is all for the moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak about the European Crime Prevention Network .
This network was set up in 2001 by Council Decision 2001 / 427 / JHA .
Its objectives were to facilitate cooperation and exchanges of information and experiences at national and European level ; to collect and analyse relevant information aimed in particular at the exchange of best practices ; to organise conferences , seminars , meetings and initiatives with the objective of facilitating the exchange of experiences and best practices ; and to provide its expertise to the Council and the Commission concerning crime prevention .
The Decision envisaged that the structure would be based on contact points designated by the Commission and the Member States ; these contact points were to include at least one representative from the national authorities , while the other designated contact points could be researchers or university academics specialising in this field .
Member States were , in any case , required to involve researchers , university academics , NGOs and civil society .
Even Europol and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction were involved in the work as expert bodies .
In 2005 , the network underwent its first internal structural reform .
This foresaw the permanent establishment of two commissions - one for the work programme and one for research - while the running of the website was transferred from the European Commission to the United Kingdom , which still keeps it updated .
In 2007 , there was another review , which acknowledged the particular need to strengthen the secretariat and highlighted the need to confront the problem of resources for the permanent commissions and the national representatives .
In March 2009 , an external evaluation was published concerning the functioning of the network .
This focused on the importance of the objectives that brought the network into being but , at the same time , regrettably highlighted the organisational failure that had impeded the achievement of the important objectives that we were speaking of earlier .
The problems thus brought to light , which have led to the virtual collapse of the network , included the lack of suitable resources , an ineffective secretariat , lack of commitment on the part of the national representatives and a very poor work programme .
The evaluation also considered the possibility of disbanding the network .
In consequence , the network appointed a working group to examine the recommendations made in March 2009 and took the view that certain amendments needed to be made to the Act that created the network .
In particular , it was suggested that there should be an external secretariat financed with funds from Community programmes .
Although some Member States had revived the idea of disbanding the network , others suggested that it should be reformed .
The Swedish Presidency of the European Council agreed with this proposal , to the extent of making it a priority in its own six-month term of office .
At this point , I must stress how embarrassed I am to see these empty seats , given that these proposals were made by the Swedish Presidency itself .
The proposal envisages that the network should be composed of a secretariat , of contact points designated by each Member State and of a board of directors .
This board of directors should be made up of national representatives appointed by Member States and would be presided over by a chairman in charge of an executive committee .
I think there is also some confusion in this respect between contact points and national representatives .
Civil society , the academic world , the world of experience and hence , of experts , are all being completely left out of the network .
This is a very serious matter .
The structural links between the network and the other Community institutions and bodies that are concerned with crime and its prevention have been completely cut off .
The Decision does not envisage any form of cooperation with the European Parliament and the requirement for knowledge of languages has been omitted , despite having been requested previously .
Speaking as rapporteur , I believe that this proposal is completely ineffective and is incapable of tackling crime prevention for several reasons .
First , it has been unable to fulfil the objectives for which it was created ; second , there has been no cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Member States , and I believe that this must be regarded as a sort of sabotage of the network itself .
Crime prevention cannot be reduced to the exchange of best practices .
Unfortunately , we have witnessed what is almost a type of tourism on the part of various officials who have visited various countries and have often not even managed to speak to one another because there were no interpreters .
The failure to involve civil society and NGOs , or to develop materials on prevention such as books for schools , makes this network completely ineffective .
To make the network function , I think we should strengthen its powers , and also incorporate the fight against crime and the prevention of organised crime .
I therefore suggest that we reject this proposal , which could have been accepted only if the Council had presented a genuinely ambitious proposal .
Unfortunately , this has not happened .

Mr President , I have listened with great interest to the speeches given by Mr Nicholson , Mrs in ' t Veld , Mr Albrecht and Mrs Alfano .
This is a debate in which problems of both procedure and substance have arisen .
Regarding the procedural matters , I fully understand Parliament 's position .
The Treaty of Lisbon is just about to enter into force .
I therefore wholly appreciate the questions that some of the Council Decisions may raise in Parliament .
It is also true that the Commission somewhat regrets this situation .
Nevertheless , I would now like to shed some light on these three dossiers for the benefit of Parliament .
As you are all aware , Europol - through a Council Decision that will replace the intergovernmental convention - is going to be subject to a new legal framework and become a European agency on 1 January 2010 .
The Council 's adoption of this decision was preceded by lengthy negotiations , and preparations for its implementation are under way .
I do understand Parliament 's concerns and I , too , am looking forward to seeing the next institutional framework in place , since it will pave the way for greater democratic control over the European Police Office .
We should learn lessons from the initial implementation of the Council 's existing decision so that we may have a solid foundation on which to build future legislation .
To that end , it will be beneficial to involve Parliament and other interested parties when drawing up future regulations on Europol , particularly with regard to the terms by which this Parliament and the national parliaments will have control over Europol 's activities .
Nonetheless , Mr President , I regret that Parliament has rejected the draft Council Decisions .
These are implementing provisions governing important aspects of Europol 's work , without which Europol cannot operate .
I now come to the matter of forensic laboratories .
Once again , I understand that Parliament wants a different basis for this framework decision on the accreditation of forensic laboratory activities .
The Commission is in favour of using accreditation because it encourages a higher quality of work from these laboratories , particularly when it comes to sensitive techniques relating to fingerprints and DNA samples .
Stricter accreditation of these laboratories will lead to increased public confidence .
Again , I am aware of the problems with the legal basis .
Like Parliament , the Commission believes that the framework decision , insofar as it refers to services under Article 50 of the founding treaty of the European Community , should have Article 50 as its legal basis .
We in the Commission have made a declaration that is contained in the minutes of the JHA council meeting of 23 October 2009 .
In that declaration , the Commission reserves the right to take measures that it deems to be appropriate in the future .
May I add that , in accordance with provisions for financial regulations , the Commission is prepared to provide financial support for the activities of Member States that allow the accreditation of scientific police laboratories .
Finally , the Commission is willing to evaluate the implementation and application of this instrument for 1 July 2018 , as laid down by Article 7 ( 4 ) ( new ) .
Regarding this accreditation , although I understand Parliament 's position , I also think that it goes mainly in the right direction and respects all the views that have been expressed in this House .
I shall now move on to the European Union Crime Prevention Network .
Naturally , we believe that crime must be prevented .
Coercive measures are not enough to reduce crime and organised crime .
Prevention is vital , be it at local or cross-border level .
Moreover , in the proposals I recently made on human trafficking and child pornography , I have anticipated preventative measures .
Mrs Alfano , you have just pointed out the weaknesses of the network .
I am aware that a recent assessment concluded that there is a very real need for European cooperation in the fight against organised crime , and I also know that public bodies , organisations and the private sector wish for a multidisciplinary approach aimed at sharing experiences , methods and instruments within Europe .
To be sure , the European Union Crime Prevention Network has encountered strategic , political and organisational problems .
The Commission is aware of these .
In the short term , we have increased financial support to the network 's secretariat .
In the Stockholm Programme , we have prioritised police cooperation and the need to be able to manage this at Community level , in conformity with the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is true that this network can fulfil a number of tasks that you have mentioned and can undertake tasks of which you have suggested some interesting examples .
We can also expect to see common projects between social and educational institutions , involving schools , continuing training and university degree courses .
We are clearly at the start of a major new crime prevention policy .
It is obvious that the role of civil society and of Parliament should be increased .
Furthermore , police cooperation now comes under codecision .
I therefore think that we can cooperate as closely as possible within the framework of the new legal basis .
This would be in the interests of all citizens affected by security issues in their daily lives .
Of course , I have some regrets about this debate , which has centred on both the procedure to follow and on the substance .
However , I do think that we can do much better from now on , after the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force and in keeping with the Stockholm Programme .
Parliament will be able to play its full role in this new strategy against organised crime and , indeed , all forms of crime .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( NL ) I should like to thank Mr Barrot , Vice-President of the Commission , for the answers he has given us and for the views he has contributed on the various topics .
Judicial cooperation in the European Union is a matter of great importance .
When we speak of a citizens ' Europe , we are , in particular , talking about judicial cooperation .
In that respect , combating crime is our number one priority , primarily because crime is increasingly crossing over borders .
Large-scale cross-border crime is often the big issue , compared to which national crime seems like little more than petty hooliganism .
On that score , the Group of the European People 's Party is strongly in favour of not just Europol but also Eurodac being put in a strong position .
I refer here to our framework for forensic laboratories .
An important element of combating organised crime is the democratic supervision of those who are combating crime .
I certainly do not want to detract from that in any way , but I would ask that you take into account the position of the victim and that you continue to do so as we debate the proposals over the coming months .
Combating crime often involves considering the rights of suspects , which is only right , because a suspect 's privacy and his / her position in criminal proceedings are very important .
However , over the course of the next five years , I would like us to pay more attention to the victim 's position .
Mr President , fundamental rights are not absolute ; they must always be exercised in context .
Or , as it says in the words of the Dutch Constitution : ' subject to every regard being paid to the law ' .
That applies equally to suspects and victims .
I can well understand that , and I agree that , for the time being , Parliament has to say : ' Hang on a minute ! ' when it comes to these four dossiers .
Let us wait until 1 December , when we will have new proposals , and then we will have to take a reality check : one that demands the real involvement of the European Parliament .

Mr President , we have a problem , because the whole House is asking the Commission to revise the legislative package on these matters , and Mr Barrot has , very charmingly as always , told us that this goes back a long way , that it has been debated a great deal and that on 1 January , it will begin to operate .
That is the reality : we have a problem .
I can tell you now , Mr Barrot , that you should tell your successor , as I realise that you cannot answer us on this matter , that when she attends the hearings in Parliament , we are going to ask her whether she intends to draw up a package of legislation on this matter , because the whole House is asking for it and it is not just a case of an over-zealous push for legislation .
It is not that Parliament is saying that it wants to be involved ; it has to be involved .
It has to be involved because it will have that legislative role in a few days ' time , and because this is not now a matter of parliamentary control , rather that we want to make further proposals .
For example , in many of the directives and decisions that come here , I see many gaps , many shortcomings and a great deal of legal insecurity .
We would like to reform these provisions here .
I think that it is good for Europol to work with them .
I understand that Europol is already working with them , and I want it to continue to do so , because I want Europol to move forward .
I also want you to respect the right of this House to say what it thinks of these provisions , because that is its legislative function and we want to carry it out .
I am therefore telling you now that when the next Commissioner appears before us , we will ask her if she is committed to drawing up legislative proposals on this matter in order for Parliament to legislate .
That is all , nothing further .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my comment will be brief .
It firstly concerns the substance and secondly the procedure , and I will repeat some of what has already been very well expressed by all the political groups .

Whilst creating an area of security , justice and freedom within the European Union is vital for us all , and certainly an example of the European democratic model that we are building , and while many of us consider Europol to be an instrument that can be adapted , we nevertheless all set great store by the fact that the pooling of resources - particularly human resources but also technical resources to fight organised crime and all kinds of trafficking - should be strictly controlled with a maximum guarantee of legal certainty , since we are striking at the very heart of our power : the rights and freedoms of European citizens .
Regarding the procedure , at the risk of sounding repetitive , I would like to assure the Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , that all the work carried out has not been in vain .
However , our citizens would misunderstand and misinterpret things entirely if , after waiting for such a long time to put into operation the institutions relating to the Treaty of Lisbon , we did not have the patience to wait a few more hours or even days in order to exercise the colegislative power that we hold so dear .
For once in Europe , it is vital that we wait a few weeks until we have a text that respects our procedural framework and , like Mrs in ' t Veld , I am sorry not to see the Council here with us because this is primarily a Council matter .
On behalf of my committee , I therefore believe we should have a new legislative proposal .
Mr President , to continue in the same vein , I would like to take the floor as coordinator for the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance on matters concerning freedom , which is precisely my point .
It would be incomprehensible if , given the chance to carry out this colegislative work with the European Parliament , we then failed to do so .
We therefore all agree on that point .
In any case , we will need to wait and see how this develops , but it would clearly be a problem if we were unable to participate as we are legitimately requesting .
I also wanted to mention another brief point concerning the report on forensic laboratories - for this is the issue I have been following - and to say as clearly as possible that , when discussing the need for coordination , we must also examine the matter of decentralisation very carefully .
Let us not forget that , in certain Member States , there is no single centre for forensic study but rather several , taking into account the distribution of territories and existing police and legal systems .
Such is the case in Spain .
It is important to be aware of this , because if we are going to coordinate successfully , we need to bear in mind that we are not only looking at coordination between Member States but also between regions with distinct circumstances that may not apply at national level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall repeat what a number of my fellow Members have already said .
Before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has been asked , under the urgency procedure , to examine four texts on Europol and the issue of protecting the confidentiality of data passed on by Europol , including to third countries .
We in this Parliament unanimously condemn the way in which we have been requested to examine these texts when they concern issues that will most certainly be a matter for codecision after the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
Many of us believe that our citizens have a right to security and that the fight against terrorism is a priority .
Everything possible must be done so that our citizens do not live in constant fear of becoming the victims of terrorist attacks .
It is therefore important to do all we can to strengthen police cooperation , but this cannot be done at any price and especially not to the detriment of the fundamental public right to privacy , free movement and free expression .
May I add that preventing crime should not mean more - and only more - coercive measures .
It is a privilege for our democracies to protect our freedom at all times and not to undermine it unless absolutely necessary .
Police cooperation should therefore take place within a specific legal framework that ensures the confidentiality of information passed on and the correct balance between information and the security aims mentioned .
The GUE / NGL Group , along with the other groups , thus calls on the Council and the Commission to withdraw these proposals .
Furthermore , I also regret that the Council is not here today .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , these reports lay down the rules for Europol gathering and exchanging information between EU Member States - and , indeed , third-party nations - of the most personal kind about EU citizens .
Significantly , they talk about the unauthorised disclosure of such information not disadvantaging , harming or prejudicing the essential interests of Europol .
There is nothing about protecting the interests of the hapless , innocent citizen who might get caught up in the nightmare of a Europol investigation .
The most personal information may be collected , including sexual preferences and bank account details .
This may even be shared with third-party countries , including those of such outstanding democratic credentials as Albania , Peru and the Russian Federation .
Europol is totally unnecessary from any objective point of view , but the EU 's subjective point of view is that it is essential to have another of those attributes of a political state : its own police force .
How many of the EU 's reluctant citizens know that Europol officers have immunity from prosecution for anything that they do or say in the course of their duties ?
For those of you here who have only just emerged from police states , this may not be very significant , but such immunity for law-enforcement officers is a concept alien to English law .
As the EU creates its own judicial system with instruments such as the European arrest warrant and trials in absentia , and now its own police force , we in Britain are seeing the destruction of our most basic and cherished liberties that have formerly protected us .
Every single rapporteur at least had the decency to say that these proposals should be rejected until the Lisbon Treaty was legally in force .
If the EU had any decency , there would be referenda on the Lisbon Treaty and none of it would ever come into force .
( DE ) Mr President , if , in the recent past , Europol 's actions have , once again , succeeded in putting an end to human trafficking rings which smuggle in illegal migrants , then that is laudable .
In the future , it would be equally laudable for Europol to be involved in tackling all kinds of serious , international crime .
Of course , cooperation between various authorities in the fight against crime is , in principle , a good thing .
However , the issue of data protection has not been resolved with regard to the plans to grant all authorities unlimited access to data .
We are being fobbed off with promises of a Data Protection Supervisor , when it is not even clear what supervisory powers they actually have .
The national data protection officials are already rapidly finding the limits to their scope of action , have barely any power to intervene and little real impact .
This will probably also be the case at EU level .
During the last decade , civil liberties and freedoms have been increasingly restricted in the name of the fight against terrorism .
If , especially now , before the Treaty of Lisbon grants the European Parliament these codecision rights , the Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs want to rapidly push through an agreement on financial transactions , then it is only because they know that massive data protection issues are associated with it and that they would not get away unscathed in the case of the SWIFT agreement .
Given that even the national law enforcement agencies are not granted this right under their respective constitutions , then why should Europol and , via the back door of the EU , the United States , in particular , be granted such unlimited rights ?
In my opinion , we should stop this attack on data protection .
( FR ) Mr President , allow me first to express my congratulations and thanks to the Vice-President of the Commission for everything he has done as the Commissioner responsible for this area .
I hope that the two Commissioners who succeed you - not one Commissioner but two - will draw inspiration from your political vision , your commitment and your work . Thank you , Mr Vice-President .
( MT ) Please allow me now to come to the point concerning the excellent opportunity I recently had to visit the office in my country responsible for Europol , relations with Europol as well as the Schengen area .
In this office , there are a number of police officers who are carrying out excellent work in this area in collaboration with police officers in other EU Member States .
I applaud their efforts and would like to add that this visit gave me the opportunity to appreciate the huge importance of the Europol agency .
I had the opportunity to appreciate it from close quarters ; its importance in combating criminality , especially since we now live in an area of liberty , of free movement within the European Union and within many European Union countries .
Obviously , the reason why we shall be voting against these proposals is not because we hold something against Europol , but indeed because we as the European Parliament want to contribute towards strengthening this office , which from next year will become an agency , so that it can truly accomplish its mission of combating criminality in a truly effective manner .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , concerning the request from the Council that we approve the proposal for exchanges of information between Europol and partners , including third countries , one can see what this would lead to : the proposal , if approved , would create the absurd situation of regulating , among other things , the exchange of information between Europol and third countries without Parliament having yet approved any such list of countries .
This proposal , in its depiction of the handling of personal data , seems to pave the way for the creation of a truly limitless database which could even be made available to third parties that have not yet been specified by Parliament .
Article 15 ( 2 ) of the Council 's proposal states that in cases of absolute necessity , even where there is no suggestion that a crime has been carried out , data may be transmitted that reveal a person 's race , ethnic origin , political stance , religious and philosophical convictions , trade union membership and so on , without it being specified what is meant by ' absolute necessity ' and , worse still , by endorsing the idea that there is such a thing as racial groups .
It would be interesting to hear the Council clarify what a racial group is and which racial groups exist .
As far as I am concerned , I believe that there is only one race - the human race .
For these reasons , but also to maintain the independence of Parliament , which must work within the necessary time limits , I believe that the Council 's proposal in its present form must be rejected by the requested deadline of 30 November .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to join Mr Busuttil in thanking the Vice-President of the Commission , Commissioner Barrot , for the work he has carried out .
He has certainly not taken on an easy legislative dossier , and has often battled against the wind and rain , but trust me , Mr Vice-President , you would have found an excellent umbrella in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which you could have used in these kinds of situations .
Nevertheless , much has been said about Europol , so I do not think I need to repeat what fellow MEPs have already said , namely that it seems surprising that , before the 30 November , that is to say before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , we are still expected to pass this through Parliament .
In that respect , it is a natural reaction for Parliament to reject these proposals .
It is also a shame that the Council cannot honour us with its presence today , so that it can also take these comments on board .
I am sure that they will be taken into account .
I wanted , above all , to comment on Mr Kirkhope 's report on forensic laboratories and standards , by saying that we often have to consider whether we should begin with the details of the matter , namely what data will be transmitted and how , and whether this data is truly comparable , especially in the case of forensic laboratories .
If DNA data is obtained in different ways and then transmitted and a match is not possible , then more harm than help is done to the person concerned .
Perhaps one should bear these thoughts in mind .
( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President Barrot , thank you for your understanding of Parliament 's clear stance in relation to procedural issues .
We are not rejecting the proposals of the Council and the Commission .
Rather , we want to take part in the decision-making process .
That is the crucial point , in terms of our vote .
It is quite clear that Europol is one of the European Union 's success stories .
Particularly in the fight against drug crime , human trafficking , the funding of terrorism and the printing of counterfeit money , Europol plays a pivotal role in terms of the exchange of information and provides a focus for existing police cooperation networks .
It is of the utmost importance that its functions are expanded further .
That is why we should also welcome the fact that the agency will have a new basis .
That is where we will need an exchange of data and internal links between the police forces in the European Union .
We need this in order to successfully combat terrorism and crime .
We also need these things - and that must be made equally clear - in order to uphold the rights of European citizens .
Here is a European attitude , and clear European values , which were also reinforced here in Parliament by a broad majority in the Decision on SWIFT codes in mid-September .
We have to demand the following from the Council and the Commission : this fundamental principle , and these guidelines , now also have to be implemented in negotiations with the United States .
We need to do this in order to ensure the security of European citizens .
( HU ) I , too , am pleased that the Council has made a commitment to the further development and reform of the European Crime Prevention Network .
In light of this , it is really a pity - as several people have already mentioned - that the representatives of the Council are no longer present during this debate .
I , too , would like to separate my comments on the process from the actual contents .
The decision that this network was necessary was made 10 years ago .
The current assessment has shown that the network has not made the most of the opportunities which might have been given .
However , it has also been made clear that we need such a network , and we need to develop it further , involve civilians and researchers , and cooperate with law enforcement agencies .
I , too , would like to say that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament regards the network 's work and further development as important .
The fact that the European Parliament is now rejecting this initiative is precisely so that this measure will have even stronger legitimacy under the Treaty of Lisbon and that we can become more actively involved in it .
( SV ) Mr President , Europe 's greatest failure today is that we have still not succeeded in putting a stop to the people-trafficking that is going on right in front of our eyes .
Women and children are sold like commodities over the counter throughout our Member States .
A conservative estimate by Europol suggests that half a million women will be bought and sold in Europe in 2009 .
This is something that we have to talk openly about and we need to come up with strategies to eradicate it .
There are institutions within the EU whose goal it is to combat people-trafficking and organised crime , but as things currently stand , these have many shortcomings .
Cooperation between the Member States , the Commission , the Council and Parliament needs to improve radically for us to have any chance of tackling serious crime once and for all .
This includes organised crime , the activities of the mafia and people trafficking , too .
In just a few days ' time , the Treaty of Lisbon will enter into full force .
I think we will then be able to breathe a little easier , because we will finally have the hope of deeper cooperation to ensure the security of our citizens throughout the Member States .
Soon , we will be able to see Europol strengthened and there will be effective cooperation between Europol and Eurojust .
Then we will finally be able to take up the fight against organised crime in Europe , including people-trafficking and mafia-like crime syndicates .
Let us , in 2009 , once and for all say that people-trafficking is unworthy of Europe in this day and age .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should discuss today 's debate , and particularly the decisions which follow the discussion , not from a formal , but rather a political perspective .
Uniform standards for laboratory work are , of course , also important for cooperation between the police and the judiciary that is based on trust .
However , there are many aspects of this matter which time does not permit us to discuss . In principle , however , the core issue is altogether different , namely how seriously the political acteurs take the Treaty of Lisbon , the rights of the Parliament and the citizens , as well as the trustworthy cooperation of the Council and the Parliament .
I would like to give three examples : the Treaty of Lisbon describes the High Representative as a strong voice for Europe , and it is a great shame that the Member States have clearly also applied different criteria in this case .
The agreement on SWIFT codes , which is controversial in many ways , could once again be subjected to careful scrutiny by the European Parliament next Monday .
Instead , it is to be quickly ticked off the list a few hours beforehand and signed with the United States .
We are facing the same situation with the topics we are dealing with here .
Shortly before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , we are being asked to quickly push through decisions , which include provisions for the future which will limit our scope for making decisions , or at least significantly restrict them .
We have to ask ourselves why this is the case , as it was certainly possible to submit new proposals on other issues .
The Council 's and the Commission 's stance lost them the chance to send a clear message to the people of Europe , a sign of commitment to implementing the treaty , a sign of a democratic Europe of the citizens .
We , the European Parliament , have only one option : we must reject these proposals , as we want a broad public debate and we want to use our strengthened rights to support the citizens now , rather than in the near or more distant future .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this evening 's very interesting debate has helped us to understand some very important points , particularly concerning the European Crime Prevention Network .
Firstly , now that we have the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's role in the framework of codecision procedure must be increasingly enhanced , and in two ways .
First , culture : organised crime and mafia organisations can be eliminated above all with information and awareness .
A great Italian judge , Giovanni Falcone , who was murdered by the Mafia , used to say that the latter was a phenomenon that had a beginning and an end .
The end must consist of a huge mobilisation in cultural terms , and it must start in Europe and in Parliament .
A second point is that organised crime must be combated more effectively , above all with the introduction of the European public prosecution service , and I think also with the inclusion of certain very serious crimes , foreseen only in certain Member States .
I am thinking , for instance , of mafia crimes .
We must understand that the mafia crisis concerns the whole of Europe , since mafia organisations have the capacity to penetrate right through institutions as well .
There is a very close relationship between mafia organisations and corruption , as recent reports have also emphasised , and fraud in the European Union , as we were recently told by the European Court of Auditors too .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur of one of the dossiers on Europol , I can only reassert what has already been said by the Members who have spoken before me .
Thanks to its role in the collection , analysis and exchange of information , Europol facilitates investigations in Member States and has thus become an important tool in the fight against crime .
We need to be more effective in tackling crime , but at the same time , we must resolutely assert the authority of this Parliament .
The Council has decided that it will , in any case , adopt the texts of the Europol package on 30 November , without waiting for Parliament to obtain the power of codecision on this matter with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December .
The aim of rejecting the proposals is not to stand in the way of Europol assuming its new role as a European body , but to have the powers of this Parliament , the European Parliament , extended , especially on important matters relating to freedom , security and justice .
Finally , I think that it is right to give Parliament greater powers of scrutiny over Europol 's activities in order to check that the handling of data held by Europol does not undermine the rights of European citizens .
( SK ) The field of forensic medicine has gained prominence in recent years , mainly due to its ever increasing importance in the fight against crime and criminality .
The high level of cooperation between countries may , in this regard , help towards greater effectiveness in the fight against crime .
Practical experience shows clearly that such cooperation is not enough in itself and that it is essential to create a common legal framework setting out standards for the activities of forensic laboratories as well as a network of such highly-qualified laboratories across the entire European Union .
The fact that there is no agreement through which common accreditation standards could be applied to the analysis of scientific evidence is a serious deficiency which must be corrected .
I hope for this reason that the Council will launch initiatives as soon as possible and produce a new document as soon as possible in which the European Parliament will also have considerable involvement .
Despite the fact that I wanted to talk more about forensic laboratories , Mr President , I would like to say in conclusion that it is definitely not my ambition to inflate the importance of the European Parliament , but I consider it absolutely unprecedented that no representative of the Council was able to find the time to come here and listen to our views .
( PL ) Mr President , speaking as a law graduate and former police officer , I would like to stress the importance of the Council framework decision , whose objective is to oblige all forensic laboratories supplying the results of genetic and fingerprint tests to observe the ISO 17025 international standard .
This extremely significant decision is intended to strengthen the credibility and reliability of the evidentiary process , and , in so doing , to increase the confidence of society in law enforcement agencies and the justice system .
( PL ) Mr President , we will probably return to this subject in six months , when we will find ourselves facing the same problems .
On the one hand , it will be important for us that the police and Europol work as effectively as possible .
On the other hand , we must always remember that we are also dealing here with matters of human rights , and very often with matters of sensitive data .
The same work will be waiting for us , and so in relation to this , I would like to call attention in particular to Article 15 of the Council Decision adopting the implementing rules governing Europol 's relations with partners , including the exchange of personal data and classified information .
For I would like to draw attention to the fact that we are talking , here , about very sensitive data , and we are saying that transmission of such data shall not be permitted unless strictly necessary .
We need to think about who is to decide what is strictly necessary , because this is an extremely significant question .
Mr President , my job has not been easy given the Council 's absence .
Even so , I would like to mention some of the reasons that have led your Commission to agree to table these texts nonetheless .
Concerning Europol first of all , it would be difficult to stop Europol from becoming an agency .
There will be other texts on Europol , and Parliament will , of course , be colegislator .
It would be very difficult to interrupt Europol 's work .
May I also clarify that the head of Europol is now a British man of great quality .
It would be a shame to somehow interrupt Europol 's work .
Regarding the other two texts , it is important to recognise that these are the result of an initiative by the Council and the Member States .
Even so , it is a step forward for Member States to have accepted the idea of laboratory accreditation in order to have reliable data .
It is a positive result and a step forward .
As for the prevention network - and this is where Parliament 's observations are most justified - it will surely be necessary in the future to strengthen it and give it other tasks .
I understand you perfectly and I thank Mr Busuttil and Mr Strasser - and the chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs was here earlier too - for having understood that I also feel strongly that Parliament should be closely involved .
Everything I have done over the past five years has been thanks to Parliament 's support .
I am therefore , as you know , truly keen for Parliament to be involved .
Moreover , I would like to add that the Commission believes we need an in-depth , case-by-case analysis in order to determine whether or not we should change the third pillar acquis .
It is important to understand that we are in a period of transition from an intergovernmental approach to a community approach , and I am delighted for Justice and Home Affairs .
I am also conscious of the fact that you are all keen to be involved in a form of police cooperation that is respectful of human rights and mindful of the European Union 's values .
Of course !
I believe that Parliament 's role will have a positive impact on all future texts that will enable us to take police cooperation further , once again in conformity with citizens ' values and rights .
Nevertheless , this is a period of transition and I entirely understand your desire to become involved in the preparation of these texts .
However , I repeat that the Commission believes that we should review the texts of the third pillar acquis in a full , case-by-case analysis .
Should existing instruments become obsolete or need supplementing or updating , then we will be able to make proposals .
My successors will make proposals that allow Parliament to improve the texts , for it will at last be colegislator .
On this point , Mr President , may I reiterate that at the end of my term of office , I will pay careful attention to all the suggestions made to me by the European Parliament .
May I stress , however , that we are well aware that a number of texts necessary for police and judicial cooperation will need to be given a new basis , thereby enabling Parliament to carry out its role as colegislator .
In the meantime , I hope you will understand why I have tried to explain our reasons for wanting Europol to become an agency on 1 January and to continue its work , and we have taken note of the progress that Member States have willingly made in terms of laboratory accreditation and the crime prevention network .
Once again , I understand Parliament 's position and rest assured that in the coming weeks I will , as far as possible , defend this great area of freedom and security that Member States will henceforth develop with Parliament 's active support .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Mr President , we have had a very good debate this evening .
I think it is the Presidency that stands indicted tonight for their absence .
They have not been here , and I think they must bear the shame for it .
I just want to make a couple of points .
I agree totally with Sophia in ' t Veld .
Of course , we want a strong Europol in the longer term , and even a better , more cooperating Europol where that is necessary .
We only have to look at the many problems we have facing our borders today - drugs , human trafficking , international crime and terrorism , to name but a few - to see the need for that .
I think it was the spokesman for the PPE who raised a point that came very close to me when he talked about the rights of the victim weighed against those of the perpetrator .
I think that this is something we have got to give very serious thought to .
Very sadly , we so often see those who carry out the crime get more sympathy and more support than the victim who was on the receiving end of what happened .
There are many areas where that can be shown to have been the case .
There is no way that can be held to be acceptable .
I believe that we must give more support to the victims , and I think that then clearly identifies who was the victim .
No way can you have those who perpetrate the crime being given equal treatment with the victim .
Anyone who believes that in today 's society we can survive without cooperating is living in cloud-cuckoo land .
That is the reality as far as I see it .
We had a very plain example where I come from - in Northern Ireland - over the last few weeks , where cooperation between the Police Service of Northern Ireland and the Garda Síochána in the south made it possible to apprehend , bring back and prevent entering the market millions upon millions of cigarettes .
Do you really think that could have happened if there had not been cooperation - not just between them , but cooperation all the way to the Far East ?
Yes , my friends , we have to have a strong Europol , yes , we have got to work towards that and , yes , we must look to cooperate where it is in the best interests of everyone .
rapporteur . - Mr President , before I make my intervention , I , too , would like to extend my gratitude to Commissioner Barrot .
I can only say that he has set the standards very high for his successor .
I will not go into the substance , because I think we should have that debate later , but I will briefly come back to the procedure , because I would like to clarify one thing .
I have heard indirectly , as it were from the empty chair over there , that there is a very good reason why the Council is in a rush , namely because we do not want to stop Europol working .
It has to become an agency by 1 January .
But if the Council were sincerely interested in the views of the European Parliament it could have been here .
It could have started the procedure much earlier than the end of July .
It could even have accepted the European Parliament 's offer to work very quickly , because the Parliament always shoulders its responsibilities , and we work very quickly if we have to .
We offered that to the Council by way of a procedure that would be in the spirit of Lisbon at the very least .
We asked for one month 's extension , but the Council was simply unwilling to give us that extension ; and the fact that the Council is absent today , and has not been interested in talking to the European Parliament , only demonstrates that they simply do not want to involve the European Parliament ; it demonstrates their insincerity .
I regret that , because , by now , it is seven days , three hours and forty minutes away : we will have to work together .
I would just like to point out here that , as has been said very well by one of our colleagues , this is not about our egos .
It is not about the European Parliament being sidelined .
It is not even about the national parliaments being sidelined .
This is about accountability to the citizen , because it concerns very important decisions .
We are talking about the transfer of personal data and confidential documents to third parties , about the data and confidential information of our citizens , the people that we represent .
Those are the ones that the Council is accountable to , more than to us .
Finally , I heard what the Commissioner said , but I would like to have a statement from the European Council promising - given that they have rushed through this whole package - that they will withdraw or review the decision as quickly as possible , within a maximum of six months , and then fully involve the European Parliament in a full codecision procedure and be accountable to the citizens .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the Commission for its work in relation to Europol , and I would like once again to state that this is not a question of hindering the process of transforming Europol into an EU agency .
However , the question of what remits are given in terms of the relationship between the State and the citizens is , of course , as fundamental as it is sensitive , and one which ought to be discussed here in Parliament .
In a democratic system , it is a decision that must be taken by parliament , and one which must be discussed in depth to give the final outcome sufficient legitimacy .
I find it quite worrying that , as Mrs in ' t Veld has already said , the Council is not even present to hear this criticism , something that I believe to be a fundamental part of any democracy .
I hope that the government will finally take on board the Parliament 's criticism regarding the work that has been carried out to date in the field of security policy .
A debate on the rights of citizens is needed at parliamentary level throughout Europe , as is a debate on the effectiveness of our security policy .
The European Parliament and national parliaments must play a more significant role in both .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the signal we have given together here , and hope that it was unmistakeably clear and that the Council will also respond to it .
Mr President , I would like to express my deep respect for the European Police Office , which I certainly support .
I hope that , as soon as possible , it will have available all the legal , human and material resources it needs to achieve its objectives and realise its full potential , under the Treaty of Lisbon .
To summarise very briefly , what is the European Police Office , the new Office ?
It has ceased to be intergovernmental and is now a Community body , with a Community budget and under the control of the European Parliament .
We should , however , consider what is least defined .
We should ask ourselves what is most uncertain .
What is most uncertain in the decision is control by the European Parliament .
We cannot therefore understand or accept , Mr President , the haste that no one can reliably justify , and which is , in short , limiting Parliament 's control role .
This is the ' A ' in this ABC , Mr President .
We cannot accept the Council washing its hands of the matter either .
Tomorrow , when we vote , we will ask the Council for a statement along the lines already referred to .
It should be a statement that says that it commits to putting forward a new package of legislation under the Treaty of Lisbon , within six months .
Finally , Mr President , it is neither reasonable nor acceptable for us to help to promote the very thing we are criticising .
For example : six reports on such important matters cannot be debated in little more than an hour and a half , in a single afternoon .
Firstly , we are talking about the crime prevention network , secondly about the forensic laboratories , and we are also talking about four reports on Europol .
This is not reasonable .
We have seen how important this debate is , but we have not been able to go into great depth because Parliament itself and its services have made it impossible for us to do so , as we are required to deal with no less than six reports at the same time .
I therefore hope , Mr President , that in future , more thought will go into holding the debates that concern us and occupy us so much .
We will put questions to the Council tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Members who have taken part in this debate .
I should , in particular , also like to thank Mr Barrot for having taken our concerns on board .
Our proposed rejections are not unjustified : they are not intended as a simple ' no ' to the Council .
On the contrary , we should like to be involved , given that the Treaty of Lisbon will come into force within a few days , and I consider that Parliament 's role as colegislator is of fundamental importance .
I had personally asked the Council formally to present a much more ambitious proposal on the European Crime Prevention Network and to do so immediately after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This proposal was not presented .
Therefore , it proved truly necessary to reject the proposal , and I believe that Parliament has the right to operate on the basis of full codecision , especially regarding such important issues as this .
I thank Mr Nicholson for what he said concerning the roles of victims and perpetrators , roles that are too often reversed .
In the few months that I have been in Parliament , I have noted that Parliament and the European Union have accorded an extraordinary degree of importance to the fight against terrorism , while sadly there is a lack of will to address not only the fight against crime , but the organised crime that is at the root of it .
It is impossible to imagine combating or preventing crime without considering the possibility of a more comprehensive operation to repress and prevent organised crime and the Mafia - as Mr De Magistris has stated , quoting the remarkable words of Judge Falcone , who was murdered by the Mafia .
This said , I should like to make a small digression as someone who unfortunately has had first-hand experience of these matters .
All too often , there is not only confusion between victim and perpetrator , but there are governments - and sadly the Italian Government has not paid much attention to this matter - which put victims of the same type of crime on a different footing from each other .
Victims of terrorism are treated in one way , and victims of the Mafia in another .
In my view , these differences and forms of discrimination cannot continue to exist , because such differences have absolutely no place in a Europe that aims to base its policy on innovation .
Please allow me also to join those who have congratulated Jacques Barrot for his responsible and excellent work .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 24 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The Treaty of Lisbon substantially changes the institutional balances that were originally outlined by the Treaty of Maastricht concerning police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters by including , though with substantial exceptions , the ordinary legislative procedure relating to the area of freedom , security and justice .
It is therefore necessary for any amendment to the measures implementing the Europol decision to be adopted within the new legislative framework envisaged by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Europol cannot be strengthened unless Parliament is able to express itself properly on regulations relating to measures that are not purely technical but political , such as the transfer of personal data .
Allow me to add a thought concerning the European Union 's increasingly outward-looking stance and the increased synergy between internal security and defence .
Even if the treaty has no immediate effect on the development of security and defence markets , it paves the way for the development of a more integrated and consistent security market , which requires legislative actions that are coordinated and therefore interinstitutional .
It would therefore be all the more inconsistent , if not indeed harmful , to adopt ' political ' amendments to the measures implementing the Europol decision that do not follow the legislative procedure envisaged by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Use of information technology for customs purposes ( debate )
The next item is the report by Alexander Alvaro , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Council Decision on the use of information technology for customs purposes ( 17483 / 2008 - C6-0037 / 2009 - .
Mr President , I would like to welcome Commissioner Kallas and my fellow Members .
Fundamentally speaking , the issue we are about to discuss is not a controversial topic at all .
The matter at hand is the adaptation of information technology in the field of customs and excise .
For many people , this is a terribly technical topic .
However , with respect to the fight against fraud and other crime , it is a very important aspect of cooperation in the field of customs and excise , and the exchange of information .
We have been able to work successfully together with the Swedish Council Presidency , and I would therefore like to thank those who have supported and accompanied us throughout the process , as this dossier is not exactly a new one .
We have demonstrated our cooperation through the fact that Parliament has taken on and voted on in committee significant amendments , which the Council had already proposed in the course of its work .
I therefore also assume that the vote on the matter this week will have a positive outcome .
The only measure on which Parliament does not agree is the extension of Europol 's powers in this field .
This view is certainly not reflected in all political groups in this House .
However , it is in the final result of the vote on the report on information technology in the field of customs and excise .
This is , to a certain extent , linked to the debate which was held here previously , when our intention was different , namely to send a signal that , having fairly recently defined a mandate for Europol , under which it was to be an agency , its powers in a number of small and specific areas are being extended or expanded .
To a large extent , it is also fitting , given the importance and role of Europol , that its remit be defined in a mandate such as the one we have decided .
It also promotes transparency , so that not only we , but in particular the citizens , for whom we make policies , know what Europol is allowed or not allowed to do .
Transparency is a fundamental part of any structure involving prosecuting and police forces in the Member States , and this must also apply at a European level .
Other than that , there is not a lot to say , and even though one tends to want to exceed one 's speaking time , I can cut mine short in this case .
I would like to thank the Council Presidency and my fellow Members for their excellent cooperation , and I am sure that we will be able to successfully vote on the report this week .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission supports in principle the text of the draft Council Decision , because it is necessary to ensure that the provisions of mutual assistance and administrative cooperation evolve as far as possible in parallel , and it is necessary to fix the provisions establishing that the general budget of the European Communities will bear the costs relating to the use of the Customs Information System by the Member States .
This legal correction should not imply any increase in the budget , and it is necessary to ensure greater complementarity with action in the context of cooperation with Europol and Eurojust by granting the same level of access for these agencies to the Customs Information System ( CIS ) , including its customs files identification database ( FIDE ) .
That being so , the Commission cannot support Parliament 's amendment aiming to grant a different level of access to CIS / FIDE for Europol and Eurojust .
In general terms , the Commission welcomes most of the amendments tabled by Parliament .
In this context , I would like to make the following comments .
The Commission shares the opinion of the rapporteur , Mr Alvaro , that it is regrettable that this proposal should be decided in such a hurried manner by the Member States prior to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
In fact , the Lisbon Treaty provides a new legal basis whereby a new regulation could replace the present CIS Convention , a regulation which would have direct effect in Member States and not require transposition into national law before becoming operational , as is currently the case for Regulation ( EC ) No 766 / 2008 on the administrative part of the CIS .
The Commission also shares the opinion of the European Parliament that , for the data protection supervision of the IT application , the solution aiming to replace the Joint Supervisory Authority ( JSA ) with the European Data Protection Supervisor ( EDPS ) is the most appropriate .
Combined supervision by JSA and EDPS would present some risks of possible duplication and overlapping of work .
In any case , a coordination mechanism , including for issuing relevant recommendations , should be put in place .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , I congratulate and thank my colleague Alexander Alvaro for his work and for the good cooperation we had during the drafting of this report .
It was a report where I agreed with the rapporteur on the main points , namely that access to the data entered into the customs information system is to be ensured only to specifically designated bodies and staff like the Member States , Europol and Eurojust .
Another point which was raised in one of my amendments and supported by the rapporteur refers to the fact that Member States , Europol and Eurojust are not granted the possibility to communicate data to non-Member States and third countries because of the absence of sufficient data protection in those countries .
In my opinion , the review of the customs information system as reflected by the report is necessary in order to adapt it better to the control services ' requirements and to allow a limited number of users to carry out analyses of the information contained in the system .
The review will also increase the effectiveness of the cooperation and control procedures of the customs administrations due to the joint , automated information system which will assist in preventing , investigating and prosecuting serious contraventions of national laws .
Madam President , I would first of all like to correct the information that is on the notice board .
I have not joined the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ; I am still with the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
At the request of the French Government , we have been presented with a text making provision for customs administrations to cooperate with Europol and Eurojust .
Once again , this is an area that will most certainly be a matter for codecision after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We therefore regret that , as with Europol , haste has overridden the desire to safeguard fundamental freedoms .
In all these texts , we deplore the fact that the crucial balance between security and respect for fundamental rights comes increasingly under threat , to the detriment of freedoms , and for overall results that sometimes fail to convince our citizens .
We are also sorry that , as regards this text seeking to establish links between files held by customs , the police and Eurojust , the position that the European Parliament is proposing we adopt is more timorous than our position on Europol , for the dangers are the same and the safeguards laid out in the texts submitted to us are even more fragile .
For example , it is outrageous that there is no clear limit on data retention periods .
At a time when , in all our countries , our fundamental freedoms are increasingly undermined by security policies , we regret that the European Parliament is not properly fulfilling its role of safeguarding fundamental rights and freedoms .
Certain improvements I proposed have been adopted in this area , particularly concerning Europol .
I am very pleased about that and I thank my fellow Members , but these are insufficient , especially in relation to the principles of proportionality and necessity , which must always prevail when rights and freedoms are at stake .
For these reasons , if other amendments giving greater protection to our citizens are not adopted , the GUE / NGL Group will abstain on this text .
( PT ) Madam President , this initiative is aimed at establishing a shared , automated system for customs-related information for customs administrations in the Member States .
Such a system would aid the prevention , investigation and elimination of transgressions of both Community laws and national laws .
I welcome the desire to facilitate the exchange of information , to improve and to consolidate cooperation between customs authorities , and the establishment of procedures for joint actions .
I am certain that rapid and efficient exchange of information will lead to a service that is fundamental to combating illegal trade .
When we talk about information systems , however , we should not forget that these contain personal data , and that issues relating to the protection of such data and personal privacy are of paramount importance .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Alvaro , that we must remain alert so as to avoid any possible violation of basic rights , especially the right to privacy , according to which information of a personal nature entered into the system must be limited to what is strictly necessary , without contravening personal privacy .
We must guarantee that this data can only be used for ends that are clearly defined and circumscribed within the framework of the applicable legislation .
Moreover , this data should only be kept for as long as necessary to fulfil the purpose for which they were recorded .
It is equally important to ensure that access to this information system is transparent and in line with the regulations applicable to similar information systems , as is the case for the Schengen Information System II or the Visa Information System .
For this reason I do not support the amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
As for the supervision of data protection , instead of trying to create ad hoc solutions , it would be preferable and advisable to retain and implement the same system of supervision as that chosen for other , similar systems , not only for the sake of consistency , but also to ensure that there are no discrepancies in the matter of data protection .
Finally , Madam President , I share the views of Commissioner Kallas and the rapporteur , Mr Alvaro , regretting the hasty manner in which the Council has tried to close this dossier before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
Madam President , as we can see from the fact that many people wish to take the floor , this is an exciting legislative dossier .
Nevertheless , I would like to briefly use this opportunity to respond to what Commissioner Kallas talked about , namely the Commission 's rejection of the proposed amendments regarding Europol .
I understand the Commission 's motives , as well as the desire to maintain consistency , very well indeed .
Just now , Mr Coelho referred to an issue , one that has also been mentioned by others , including Mrs Vergiat , which has given us much food for thought .
When we are faced with the task of achieving the highest possible standards with respect to the data pertaining to our citizens , then it is not terribly helpful - and perhaps this is something that the Commission should consider in the future , in spite of their rejection of the proposals - for us to have provisions concerning Europol 's remit , namely what data is processed , under whose authority this is done or to whom it is transferred , which are divided between numerous legislative dossiers .
There comes a point when it is no longer clear what data may be used by Europol and how it may do so , and what data may not be used .
With regard to the Europol mandate , it would make more sense if all this was established in general terms , instead of legislation always being drawn up on a case by case basis .
It would make the legislation more transparent for the citizens and would surely also benefit Europol 's work .
Other than that , I have nothing more to add .
Perhaps I may just add a brief comment regarding a point that was mentioned earlier , namely the different access rights granted to Eurojust and Europol .
In this case , of course , one must take into account the fact that a law enforcement body operates in a different way to a prosecuting body and should , therefore , have a different remit .
However , if we are to have a Justice Commissioner in the future , we may also be able to deal with this issue at European level .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Macro-financial assistance to Georgia - Macro-financial assistance to Armenia - Macro-financial assistance to Serbia - Macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on providing macro-financial assistance to Georgia - C7-0269 / 2009 -
the report by Mr Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on providing macro-financial assistance to Armenia - C7-0268 / 2009 -
the report by Mr Ransdorf , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on providing macro-financial assistance to Serbia - C7-0270 / 2009 -
and
the report by Mr Winkler , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on providing macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina - C7-0278 / 2009 -
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as this is the first time that I have spoken in front of a plenary sitting of the European Parliament , permit me to greet you all and express my pleasure , enthusiasm and sense of dedication at participating in this assembly , which represents all European citizens .
As for the task that has brought me here , I am to present before you today two reports on the allocation of macro-financial assistance to Georgia and Armenia , which are aimed at alleviating the fiscal problems and external accounts of both these Caucasian countries .
Both of these countries are our partners under the European Neighbourhood Policy , and have been severely hit by the global economic and financial crisis of the last two years .
In the case of Georgia , the impact of the crisis has been exacerbated by the direct and indirect consequences of the military conflict that occurred last year with Russia , including a large number of people who were displaced within the country .
The economy of neighbouring Armenia has also been affected by the combination of the economic recession and , in particular , the rapid deterioration of the Russian economy , due to the great dependence of the Armenian economy on trade with its large neighbour to the north .
This pushed these two countries towards a very difficult economic , financial and social situation .
The two proposals for exceptional financial assistance that we are discussing today will reduce the budgetary deficit and have an immediate positive impact on the public finance and the balance of payments of Georgia and Armenia , provided that they are implemented with immediate effect .
For this reason , our two reports fully support the need to secure this financial assistance for Georgia and Armenia .
Moreover , in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on International Trade , I proposed to my colleagues on the Committee that they approve these two proposals without amendments , under the simplified procedure , and the proposal was approved unanimously .
However , in the reports which we presented before the plenary , we registered a complaint about the delay and the short time which the Commission granted us to discuss these agreements .
In the future , we will consider such delays unacceptable , although we acknowledge the inevitability of swifter processing for these types of issues , given their exceptional nature .
Our position on this matter does not mean that my colleagues or I do not have our reservations and concerns about the proposed agreements themselves .
It is , moreover , likely that some of us , had we had the choice , would have taken the opportunity to table amendments , emphasising , for example , the importance of certain conditions and criteria relating to the assistance in order to improve the transparency of its content and implementation .
Yet this would have meant - I am on the point of concluding , Madam President - that we would not have managed to approve these agreements on the two countries .
In view of this , considering the factual circumstances and the strategic importance of these two countries within the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy , I urge all present to approve these two proposals for macro-financial assistance without amendments , as advised by the Commission .
The committee has debated this report and a simplified procedure has been proposed as this is an extremely urgent topic .
My topic is macro-financial assistance for Serbia , which I consider to be the central economy of the Balkans .
In my opinion , there are many reasons why we should provide substantial support for this country as it seeks EU membership during a difficult period characterised by huge financial instability .
There is a drop in State revenues , there are inflationary pressures and the country is , of course , confronted with a whole raft of consequences of past actions , for example , a major problem with environmental damage caused at the time of the NATO air attacks .
There is also a humanitarian problem here , as there are 750 thousand refugees in the country from other parts of the former Yugoslavia and , of course , the current financial crisis has exposed all of the structural deficiencies of the Serbian economy .
In addition , the war that took place in 1999 and the air attacks reduced the share of final production in the overall output of Serbia and that has also exacerbated the foreign trade balance .
On top of this was the poor harvest last year which further weakened Serbian state revenues .
The situation is now very grave .
I consider it necessary for us to accelerate this assistance so that it can come into operation by the start of next year , and I have therefore proposed the simplified procedure via our committee chairman .
I would like to emphasise that this is also an issue which is in the interests of Serbia 's neighbours , including some countries that are not yet members of the EU , such as Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia , but which are applying for membership .
However , there are also countries here which are EU members already and which might be threatened by instability in Serbia , such as Hungary , Romania and Bulgaria .
In the interests of the stability of this wing of the EU , and in the interests of the internal stability of Serbia , with an emphasis on strengthening the territorial integrity of the country , I propose that we do indeed accelerate the implementation of macro-financial assistance .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Madam President , I have the honour to present to Parliament the report of the Committee on International Trade on macro-financial assistance ( MFA ) to Bosnia and Herzegovina .
As with other countries to which the Commission has proposed to give MFA , the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been seriously affected by the current economic and financial crisis .
Its economy is in a serious situation and it is clear that a way out of this crisis must be found .
Therefore , Bosnia and Herzegovina has applied for EU assistance and the Commission has proposed to provide it in the form of a loan amounting to up to EUR 100 million , which is to be made available in two instalments during 2010 .
Now we have to decide whether we support this request or not .
Under the current treaty rules , we are merely consulted .
Therefore , on the one hand , one could argue : why not wait for the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force and handle a modified proposal already under the ordinary legislative procedure ?
On the other hand , despite the increasing importance of our work after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , I believe that we , as a Parliament , must show responsibility and political commitment and do our part in giving this Balkan country , early next year already , the assistance it needs now , rather than discussing it at length and being able to give the assistance only at some unknown point of time in the future .
For the above reasons , the suggestion of the Committee on International Trade is to have the proposal of MFA to Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon without amendments under the simplified procedure .
My colleagues on our committee supported this proposal unanimously and now I ask for the support of the whole House as well .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , first and foremost , I would like to note that the Commission greatly welcomes the positive and constructive attitude of Parliament on the process of adoption of the Commission proposals for macro-financial assistance for four partner countries : Armenia , Georgia , Serbia , and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Commission appreciates that the European Parliament has opted for a procedure which allows for a vote - to take place tomorrow , already - on the reports for these four countries , without amendments to the Commission 's proposals .
Parliament 's swift and decisive action will allow the Council to adopt decisions on the four operations in the next few days , and the Commission will then be in a position to start implementing the programmes .
Macro-financial assistance is , by its very nature , a short-term , crisis-response instrument and proposals for macro-financial assistance normally require rapid action .
This is clearly the case for the countries we are examining today .
Armenia , Georgia , Serbia and Bosnia are among those having suffered the most from the effects of the crisis , irrespective of the difference in their economic structures and level of development .
They are also among those that have been implementing strong adjustment programmes with the support of the International Monetary Fund and those that have requested financial support from the EU .
And the Commission is indeed of the opinion that the conditions for extending macro-financial assistance to these countries are fully met .
Let me now turn to the instrument of macro-financial assistance and to its future under the Lisbon Treaty .
The change brought by the Lisbon Treaty provides the ordinary legislative procedure for macro-financial assistance , with equal involvement of the European Parliament and the Council .
At the same time , I think we all accept that a lengthy legislative procedure involving a long iterative process between the various institutions is not adapted to the macro-financial assistance instrument or , indeed , to situations of crisis .
Therefore , the Commission considers it crucial to examine how to deal with macro-financial assistance in the future , notably within the framework of the Lisbon Treaty .
We would like to do this in close cooperation with the European Parliament in order to ensure that in the future , macro-financial assistance proposals are dealt with in a manner which , on the one hand , is rapid and allows for an effective crisis response but , on the other , meets the requirements of the Lisbon Treaty for detailed scrutiny by legislators within the joint decision-making process .
The Commission has historically been in favour of a framework regulation governing the macro-financial assistance instrument .
The Commission services have started reflections at a technical level on the shape of such a framework regulation under the Lisbon Treaty .
Such a framework regulation could potentially have significant advantages .
Until such a framework regulation is adopted , individual Commission proposals for macro-financial assistance programmes will be codecided on a case-by-case basis by the European Parliament and the Council .
The proposals - starting with the recently adopted Commission proposal for Ukraine - will be a good test of interinstitutional cooperation .
I hope that Parliament and the Council will be able to come to an agreement rapidly .
Finally , I would like to note that the Commission is happy to agree to Parliament 's suggestions on an improvement of the flow of information on macro-financial assistance programmes .
The Commission is ready to make its best efforts to provide more upstream information to Parliament for macro-financial assistance programmes .
I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs for the excellent job they have done .
I also wish to express my appreciation of these initiatives proposed by the European Commission and Council , aimed at providing macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia .
This financial support from the European Union is being offered at an extremely difficult time for both countries .
After the terrible ordeal this part of the Balkans lived through in the 1990s , shedding so much blood , the region entered a period of reconstruction which has , however , been stymied by the current economic crisis .
Both countries have suffered the full force of the recession , against the background of a budget deficit and unemployment rate that were already high .
The crisis has forced foreign investors to withdraw their investments in numerous East European countries , with Serbia being one of the countries most severely hit by the deficit triggered by the huge outflow of foreign capital .
The collapse of economic growth combined with having to meet their obligations more quickly to repay short-term debts has increased the need for external finance .
As a result , this support from the European Union is being provided at a time when the full impact of the external funding deficit is being felt , not to mention that the economic and social prospects are gloomy .
It is estimated that the peak in the unemployment rate will be recorded only in the next two to three quarters .
We are well aware that social discontent can have a harmful effect on a country 's stability , especially when it comes on top of already existing tensions and is rooted in such a sensitive issue as ethnic origin .
This is why I welcome these proposals for macro-financial assistance .
I must also stress how necessary they are , primarily as a factor in maintaining and consolidating stability in a region which has been hit hard and is in a delicate balance .
We cannot fail to take into account either the prospects for the European Union 's enlargement in the Balkans , which is another reason why it is our duty to support these states aspiring to European integration .
Before ending , I would like to emphasise the urgent nature of this financial support , given the economic situation in Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina , which is worsening at an accelerated pace .
The urgent nature of this assistance should , in my view , take precedence over considerations of a procedural nature dictated by the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore support the proposal put forward by both rapporteurs on transferring Community funds in good time , avoiding the delays caused by the need for the European Commission to modify the legal basis of the provisions .
Madam President , we are responsible , as the Member States of the European Union , for the situation in Georgia .
The authors of the resolution have done well to remind us that the economic situation in Georgia before the conflict began was very good .
The conflict in Georgia in 2008 caused a serious worsening of the economic situation in the country .
We are dealing with a country which aspires to cooperate closely with the European Union and , in the future , to also have the opportunity of developing this European perspective .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that Russian sanctions , the general situation in the Caucasus and the effects of last year 's conflict are not allowing Georgia to develop normally or to build a normal economy .
This is an additional and particular reason , and we must stress this , why Georgia should be provided with macro-financial assistance , and why Georgia 's budget should be strengthened - so that Georgia can have the opportunity for economic development in accordance with its own ambitions .
As far as is possible , and if there is such a need , that assistance to Georgia should be increased yet further , and I want to stress this clearly .
A key matter is the granting of financial assistance in 2009 .
From our point of view , procedural questions and various procedural details must not , under any circumstances , be allowed to stand in the way of Georgia receiving assistance this year .
Georgia deserves to receive our support .
This is our obligation as the European Union , especially in a situation where the Sarkozy Plan is not being carried out for Georgia , and we are not able to ensure , as an arbiter , as the European Union , that relations between Georgia and Russia are regulated in accordance with international law .
Madam President , the macro-financial assistance proposed by the Commission for Georgia , Armenia , Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia is certainly a step in the right direction .
However , the scope of this assistance falls far short of what is needed .
I am thinking especially of Georgia , which is to receive EUR 46 million .
In the context of the real problems which the country is having to face , the economic crisis and also the problems resulting from the war with Russia , which has significantly weakened the impetus of economic development in Georgia , that assistance is certainly not very great .
For we must remember that countries like Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan are not only important countries for the European Union from a political perspective , but are also strategic in terms of energy security .
For it is these countries which are going to decide , and are also already deciding , what the diversification of supply of power sources to the European Union will be like in the future .
If we do not support them financially and politically today , if we do not give them the chance to develop , then Russia will do this quickly , because these countries have extremely important and strategic significance for Russia .
Therefore , I evaluate the Commission proposal as constructive and good .
However , the level of financial support is significantly too low .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , our Neighbourhood Policy is able , to a large extent , to provide financial assistance to countries in our neighbourhood which are in trouble , so I am very happy that Members of Parliament so unanimously supported this Commission proposal .
We are doing our utmost to support our neighbourhood countries .
One Member mentioned that procedural details should not hinder us , but in fact , procedures must ensure that money is used properly .
You always have to strike a balance between achieving objectives and following procedures .
It is important to follow clear rules in providing this assistance .
As I said , we will see in the very near future the possibility of developing the framework agreement which establishes a certain frame for this kind of assistance , and within this assistance framework , we can then provide rapid assistance .
This is a major problem today : we are currently deciding on a case-by-case basis and this takes an enormous amount of time , like so many other procedures in our large European Union .
This will be the key issue .
There will be a framework agreement and then there will be a rapid decision-making mechanism about the size of the assistance .
There are always limits imposed by Member States , and this will always be so .
There is never unlimited scope to help countries while , at the same time , providing money for our own projects .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to make three final points .
Firstly , macro-financial assistance to EU neighbourhood countries is justified for two reasons : firstly , it has intrinsic political value as a way of the Union gaining prestige by assisting countries in difficulty , within the context of a policy of good neighbourliness .
Secondly , it is justified by the EU 's own interest in contributing to the financial , social and political stability of our neighbourhood countries as a condition for their development and democratic consolidation , as this is also a prerequisite for our own political stability .
My second point is that macro-financial assistance must nevertheless be carefully tied to two conditions : the assistance must be aimed at responding to exceptional and temporary financial difficulties in these countries , and not for other purposes .
Moreover , these countries must not divert the funds which we allocate to them for purposes that are incompatible with the rationale behind the EU aid , particularly for increasing military spending .
As my third and final point , I would like to emphasise the importance and necessity of a general regulatory framework for the allocation of macro-financial assistance and the implementation of the respective agreements with the countries in question , and I acknowledge and welcome Commissioner Kallas 's commitment to this issue .
I also hope that the next Commission will be ready to honour this commitment , and that we will have a general regulation on macro-financial assistance before long .
A great writer once said that Balkan States always piled more historical responsibility onto their shoulders than they were capable of carrying .
It could similarly be said of the nations in the Caucasus that they piled more history onto their shoulders than they were capable of carrying .
It is my opinion , therefore , that the EU should lift some of this historical burden from their shoulders .
It would benefit both them and us because the EU is incomplete without the Balkans , and since the Serbs have recently been joking that their only friends are God and the Greeks , in my opinion , we should show them that they also have friends in the European Parliament .
deputising for the rapporteur . - Madam President , all four countries to which the Commission has today proposed to give macro-financial assistance have been seriously affected by the current economic and financial crisis .
Their economies are in a serious situation , and it is clear that a way out from this crisis must be found .
In the case of Georgia , the proposed macro-financial assistance of EUR 46 million in the form of grant instalments is aimed at supporting Georgia 's recovery after that country experienced a severe economic downturn following the eruption of the military conflict with Russia and the global financial crisis .
The EUR 100 million for Armenia is forecast to have an immediate impact on Armenia 's balance of payments , and would in this way contribute to the alleviation of financial constraints on the implementation of the authorities ' economic programme and to financing the budget deficit .
Serbia , however badly affected by the financial and economic crisis , is rapidly returning to political stability .
As a Balkan country , it is a potential candidate country for EU membership and has signed a stabilisation and association agreement .
For this reason , it should also be helped .
Politically speaking , Bosnia and Herzegovina is a potential candidate country which has also signed a stabilisation and association agreement , and it is in the interests of the European Union to assist it .
To conclude , I restate my belief that we as the European Parliament must show responsibility and political commitment in giving these countries the macro-financial assistance they need now , rather than discussing this at length under the ordinary legislative procedure .
For the above reasons , on behalf of the PPE Group , I suggest we have the proposal for macro-financial assistance to these countries adopted now .
I ask my colleagues to support it unanimously .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I first of all wish to say that I agree with the principle of providing macro-financial assistance to Armenia .
I believe that this initiative is part of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Armenia , which is in a particularly serious economic situation due to the financial crisis , is in urgent need of these funds which could enable it to meet the commitments it has taken on as part of the stand-by agreement with the IMF .
I welcome the fact that the rapporteur has realised the urgency of this need by opting for an opinion without amendments as the solution .
However , I also agree with the objections which can be made at procedural level .
Article 308 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is aimed at measures adopted as part of the internal market , which are not directly provided for in any treaty and are not necessarily similar to those which need to be adopted to provide MFA to third countries .
I believe that the interinstitutional procedures require clarification in order to adopt MFA measures adapted to any time constraints so that , in the future , we are never in a situation again where Parliament has to make exceptions to the normal procedure .
Furthermore , I would regard it as normal for the EU Council as well to take action more promptly , without ignoring Parliament 's role in such procedures .
in writing . - I want to voice our dissatisfaction with the so-called simplified procedure for the Georgia and Armenia macro-financial aid files .
Whereas Parliament has , in the past , been quick in dealing with MFA files , the Commission and Council are slow .
Simplified procedure almost excludes Parliament .
Could you please explain to us the reasons why the Commission - which was aware that the first payment was already due before 2009 - is late ?
It has been argued in the Green Group that we have to ensure that MFA is not going to be used for military purposes and I desire that as well .
However , at the same time , the French aircraft carrier enters the harbour of St Petersburg in order to seal the biggest arms trade with Russia by an EU Member State .
It is more than evident that Russia is the main contributor to the reason why Georgia is in dire need of financial assistance .
And to ask one side of the conflict to reduce its weaponry and , with the other hand , to sell ultra-modern technology to the other side , will not only destabilise the strategic situation in the Black Sea region , but will also have serious consequences in the Baltic region .
( The sitting was suspended at 21.10 and resumed at 21.20 )

Adaptation of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the Lisbon Treaty ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on adaptation of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the Lisbon Treaty .
rapporteur . - Mr President , thank you firstly for your tolerance and for your presence .
When I first stood for the European Parliament in 1984 , I remarked to one of my then colleagues , Ken Collins , a Scottish Member , that I was wondering whether I was doing the wrong thing , because Parliament did not seem to have much teeth when it came to legislative matters .
Ken said to me that it was true that Parliament did not have a lot of teeth , but , if you asked any mother of a young baby , you would know that you can make a big impression with your gums .
This Parliament did make a big impression with its gums in terms of using the right to be consulted on legislation .
Since then , we have had the Single European Act , which took the European Parliament from being a baby to infanthood , Maastricht which took us through puberty , the Nice and the Amsterdam Treaties , which took us into adulthood , and now the Lisbon Treaty , which I believe takes this Parliament into the full rights of an adult Parliament , comparable to any other democratic institution in the European Union .
I am honoured to have the opportunity to present a report adjusting our Rules of Procedure to take into account the new powers we have as a result of the Lisbon Treaty .
I am honoured , but to be honest , I am also slightly disappointed , because this report should really be called the Corbett report .
My colleague , Richard Corbett , did all the hard work on this report before the elections .
He made it very easy for me in terms of the Lisbon aspects of the report .
Although we have had controversy over the non-Lisbon aspects of the report , Richard Corbett did an excellent job in terms of the Lisbon aspects and I really only had to pick up the baton .
The report prepares us for the new powers we get on trade policy , where we now have full assent along with the Council on all trade matters , and our new powers in terms of agriculture and fishing , where we now have codecision .
It also refines our role in the appointment of the European Commission , establishes a new relationship between the European Parliament and the national parliaments , and paves the way for new Members of this Parliament .
Most of these issues have been dealt with , as I have said , without controversy .
Let me just briefly mention where we have some disagreements between the groups , though I should say in passing that the political groups have shown excellent cooperation over this matter .
All the major shadows and coordinators have been very supportive , but there are one or two issues that we have not been able to resolve .
Firstly , who should chair our delegation to COSAC ?
Should it be the Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs or should it be a vice-president of Parliament , as is presently the situation ?
My own view is that it should be a vice-president ; the committee has decided that it should be the Chair .
In the end , the plenary will decide , but I make the point that COSAC is about more than interinstitutional relations .
It also deals with policy matters and that is why historically , we have had a vice-president chairing the delegation .
In terms of our relationship with the national parliaments , we have had some disagreement in the committee on how much detail we should go into , and how much the rules should prescribe that relationship .
I have managed to reach a compromise with Mr Brok , who has been very accommodating in this matter , which lays down some detail but which still leaves enough room for the President of Parliament to negotiate with his counterparts in the national parliaments the exact modalities of how we will cooperate with the national parliaments .
A third issue where there has been some controversy is how to deal with the principle of subsidiarity .
We have settled quite easily the role that the committees will play in this matter , and there is consensus around that .
The only point that has emerged is what happens if a committee says ' no , there is no breach of subsidiarity and the legislation should go ahead ' .
Should there be a safety valve for Members of the European Parliament to raise the matter on the floor of this House ?
I have put down an amendment , and others have put down similar amendments , suggesting that if one tenth of the Members of the European Parliament reckon there is an issue of subsidiarity , then that matter should be debated on the floor of the House .
I think that is a sensible safety valve .
The last issue that I want to mention is the issue of observers , and whether we should have observers in advance of the 18 new Members taking their seats .
My view is that we absolutely should .
However , the crucial issue - and , again , there is consensus in the committee on this - is whether these observers should be people who would otherwise have been elected to Parliament .
That is critical for our credibility .
If we allow the Member States simply to appoint anyone to take the role of observer - and we do have rumours that some Member States want to appoint national parliamentarians - I think that would be entirely unacceptable .
I conclude by saying that I am pleased that this Parliament , by its vote this week , will have in place on 1 December , from the minute the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , a set of rules allowing us to exercise our new powers immediately .
That is to the credit of the people who worked in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs before the summer , and I again repeat my thanks to Richard Corbett for all the efforts that he made in this regard .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to the delight of a great number of us , the Treaty of Lisbon will soon be coming into force .
The process has taken a long time , and it was not mainly down to this Parliament that its ratification took so long .
This is exactly why the immediate implementation of our adjusted Rules of Procedure is not down to Parliament either .
I would like to begin with the point that the rapporteur just finished on , namely that it is of paramount importance that we can actually exercise these rights as soon as possible .
In fact , Parliament has really acquired a large number of rights .
The Treaty of Lisbon significantly increases Parliament 's clout and therefore democracy , while also promoting the status of democracy in Europe .
Our job in this case is to guarantee here , during this debate and based on this legislation , that these rights can be actually exercised .
I would like to thank both the rapporteur , Mr Martin , and Mr Corbett for the work they have done on this .
The report features all the key points , such as maintaining contact with national parliaments , a stricter and significantly more clearly defined application than is the case at present of the principle of subsidiarity , as well as comitology procedures and parliaments ' new codecision rights , while issues relating to budget procedures feature in this report , which we definitely support .
At the same time , we must make sure , and I would like to draw your attention to this with regard to voting on proposed amendments , that these rights cannot be abused .
A tiny minority should not be able to abuse or impede the actual legislative process .
We must find flexible solutions .
We observed during the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon how a single person , a single state president was able to play with the whole system .
This is precisely why only those guarantees must be included which cannot be abused to the utmost degree .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) supports this report and we congratulate both rapporteurs , Mr Corbett and Mr Martin .

Mr President , I would also like to start by saying that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is very proud that two of our friends and colleagues , David Martin and Richard Corbett , have been instrumental in this important reform .
I would like to extend my congratulations to them , and I hope that it will be echoed across Parliament .
The second thing that I would like to say is that this is truly a very important act that is taking place , because I think it is of great political significance to have the new Rules of Procedure in force on 1 December , alongside the new treaty .
We are sending a message to the European political system that Parliament is preparing and adapting itself to have an instrument for the new treaty .
Obviously , there are many reforms that fit in with this idea .
As I think it is time to summarise , I want to say that we naturally agree with the whole report , but with regard to the reforms and amendments still pending , I would like to say two things that I think are appropriate .
The first is that , while there was some confusion in the Conference of Presidents as to what types of amendments should be adopted or accepted , based on whether they are as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon in the strictest sense , I would like to express our desire for it to be the President of Parliament who decides whether any of the reforms of the Rules of Procedure are not appropriate .
In this respect , I agree with it being the President who decides , and we will go along with that decision .
Finally , I would like to say that I think reform of the Rules of Procedure for such an important event as this demands unanimity .
I think it would be very good for us to be able to agree on the amendments before the vote on Wednesday , so that there can be full agreement across the entire House .
I would like to inform you that following the statements from the representatives of the political groups , I will inform you of the technical arrangements concerning voting on this report .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the ALDE Group is pleased to accept the Corbett / Martin report which sets Parliament on a good path to shoulder its great responsibilities following the entry into force of the treaty .
It is important that Parliament prepares to become a generalist parliament - that is to say , that we have to start to do everything efficiently and expediently across the policy spectrum .
A quick comment on our treatment of national parliaments : the treaty quite properly proposes that we improve the collaboration between us and national parliaments , but the treaty is quite discreet : silent upon the precise form that such collaboration should take .
We ought to prepare ourselves therefore to consult national parliaments about their approach to the treaty before we set out detailed prescriptions just on our own , within our own procedures .
The experiments carried out so far under the auspices of COSAC show a great disparity between national parliaments in their approach to the subsidiarity question .
I think it is appropriate that the European Parliament appreciates such a disparity and that we refrain from formalising the precise methods of collaboration and response to the operation of the subsidiarity mechanism at the present stage of affairs .
But , apart from that , the ALDE Group fully supports the proposals that are brought before us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Parliament moves fast , it does its homework and is capable of taking action .
It is worth pointing out this fact at this stage .
It has taken seven years for the Treaty of Lisbon to finally take effect .
In our case , it has only taken a few weeks - as Parliament had spent a long time making in-depth preparations for this event - for the new Rules of Procedure to be approved on this basis , so that once the treaty takes effect , we can immediately start working according to the new Rules of Procedure .
Rules of Procedure should be established according to a broad consensus .
That is why we have mainly limited ourselves to those amendments which are directly related to the entry into force of the new treaty .
Other proposals for amendments must be discussed in greater depth .
We will have sufficient time to do so in this House .
However , urgent matters must be addressed without delay .
In my view , it seems important that these amendments include new provisions on the simplified and the ordinary amendments to the treaty .
From my point of view , it seems important to unanimously support amendment proposals which aim to improve cooperation with national parliaments .
In other sections , we would like to go further , especially in cases such as our representation , namely the representation of the European Parliament , in COSAC , but this is something that can be discussed at a later date .
For now , I welcome the broad consensus achieved and wish to particularly thank the rapporteurs .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I wish to express my concern that we have been prevented from debating the Brok amendment on implementation of the Members ' Statute .
Elmar Brok proposed that responsibility be transferred from the Bureau , which meets in private , to the Parliament , which meets in public .
I believe that our constituents have a right to know not only what we pay ourselves , but also the details of the allowances and benefits that we receive .
I find it regrettable that you , Sir , as our President , think otherwise .
More disturbing is that , fearful of losing a vote or perhaps fearful of having a vote at all , you resort to a procedural device to prevent debate .
That is undemocratic and , at a time when everyone talks about making the EU more transparent and closer to its citizens , this move smacks of hypocrisy .
If the European Union is to increase transparency , we need to take action and not just mouth platitudes on the subject .
It is simply not acceptable to treat our constituents like mushrooms , to keep them in the dark and cover them with fertiliser .
I can assure you , Sir , that this issue will not go away , and you will have to face a vote sooner or later .
I think it is a misunderstanding .
Everything could be discussed .
Nothing is closed from this point of view .
The first example is our one-minute speeches .
I must answer you immediately because nothing is closed but we must go from decision to decision , taking into account our rules in the European Parliament , nothing else .
But you have very much opened this discussion .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , can you explain why a vote on the Brok amendment was permitted in committee and carried , and yet ruled out of order in plenary ?
If you would like to discuss it , I can discuss it with you straight after the sitting , but I do not want to disturb our discussion here in plenary .
( DE ) Mr President , democracy needs a revolution .
I am always saying that nowadays , and this time I am directing the comment at you in particular , Mr President .
What is it that you are doing here ?
You are making the lives of people who share the European ideal but who , because of their fundamental principles , do not wish to belong to a political party , quite unnecessarily difficult and are thereby shooting yourself in the foot .
To what am I referring ?
I am referring to Article 192 ( 1 ) .
The provision stipulating that the Groups may elect a coordinator has been pushed through via the back door , and unnoticed by many .
Previously , Mr President , we always had the following addendum : ' the relevant provisions shall apply mutatis mutandis to Non-attached Members ' .
This interpretation no longer stands .
I wrote a letter to you .
Two months later , you responded and merely repeated the paragraph .
Please read my letter again .
Please understand that you are currently very close to letting a Parliament which , in principle , I support , degenerate into a two-tier Parliament .
In view of your personal background , how can you do such a thing ?
Because we , as Non-attached Members , do not have the opportunity to obtain the relevant information in time and take an active part in making decisions concerning reports and similar matters .
In this respect , the Rules of Procedure must be changed .
Furthermore , I would like to know why Mr Corbett , who was voted out by right-wing radicals precisely because he does these kinds of things , is allowed to sit in Plenary today , virtually in the role of a supervisor .
This is a two-tier Parliament .
We will be forced to file a complaint , although I would very much like to avoid this course of action .
Thank you .
As you know , the matter which you have raised is still under discussion , and I would ask you not to jump to conclusions .
We do want to resolve this matter , but , as you know , the Non-attached Group did not propose a candidate , and this is why it is not involved in some work .
The group does not have a candidate who would be acceptable to all the Non-attached Members .
However , we will find a solution to this problem .
The Conference of Presidents has decided that , on Wednesday during the vote on the Martin report , those parts of the report which are not related to the Lisbon Treaty will not be voted on , because they require broader discussion .
This is because we want to be sure the vote will be held on Wednesday , and because we want to vote on those matters which are related to implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
This was decided by the Conference of Presidents , and we have to implement this decision .
Mr President , of course I understand and support your decision , but we do not want - and I think we have perhaps seen signs of this already - an unseemly wrangle on the floor of the House on Wednesday , when we come to vote on this important step forward for Parliament 's Rules .
Could I ask you tomorrow to circulate to all the appropriate people those amendments you consider not to be ' Lisbon ' - and , by analogy , those that are covered by the Lisbon Treaty - so that we can clarify that and have a very clear voting list for Wednesday , so that there is no dispute when we get to Wednesday .
I do , of course , intend to do this , and I will do so , but I also wanted to meet Mr Casini and several others , to show them the list first .
I did also want to show the list to you personally , as rapporteur , but we still have not had the opportunity , because you were not here earlier .
This is only a technical question and nothing more .
( ES ) Mr President , I had the same concern as that expressed by the rapporteur .
I think that in order for the vote to proceed properly on Wednesday , in the case of such an important report , we need to know in advance which amendments you consider to be inadmissible .
I therefore accept what you said , and we would like to have them tomorrow .
The parliamentary services were responsible for preparing the list , and I received it only two hours ago .
It is , therefore , completely new , and I will show it to you right away .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we shall of course respect your decisions , but it is my understanding that there are some reservations about certain amendments , namely that they do not directly relate to the Treaty of Lisbon .
I may be mistaken , but it seems to me that , until now , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has had general powers to make proposals concerning regulatory amendments .
It can do this if the amendments are suggested by a group of Members , or by individual Members , and also on its own initiative .
Therefore , the fact that the opportunity has been taken to make a few corrections , also with reference to other aspects , within the ambit of a wider reform of the Rules of Procedure under the Treaty of Lisbon cannot , in my view , be seen as unacceptable - all the more so since quite a few amendments would serve to reflect the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon in the Rules of Procedure , sometimes through rules that are reproduced technically and materially in them , but much more often through reference to the spirit of the treaty .
One need only think of the role of Parliament , which has been strengthened in relation to the Council , but which is also being strengthened by the Rules of Procedure where the internal relationships with institutions within Parliament itself are concerned .
We shall , of course , respect your decisions , Mr President , but I felt it was necessary to make these observations .
( HU ) Mr President , the debate currently going on also reflects the fact that the major reform currently being implemented in the history of the European Union and European Parliament is of such significance that we will presumably not be able to complete the task based on a single report .
At the same time , I congratulate Mr Martin and Mr Corbett and those who have participated in this debate .
However , there are still several issues awaiting future clarification from a legal perspective .
Let me quote just one example .
I am pleased that Parliament has clearly had its say in support of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which it unequivocally supports .
However , we are well aware that in the particular case of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , several countries have requested a derogation , not to mention that this charter , too , contains issues and unresolved problems such as the question of language rights due to be debated tomorrow evening .
So far , Europe 's commissioners have actually said that these are not part of Community law .
Therefore , we certainly have to clarify very precisely , in view of the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , precisely those aspects of Community law which the Commission and Parliament are entitled to respond to , because we can then avoid Commissioner Barrot or Leonard Orban saying in the future that important issues such as Slovakia 's language law do not come under the Community 's remit .
Mr President , I stand before you as a democrat .
I stand before you as one who has a democratic mandate - a mandate similar to that held by everyone else that has been elected to this Parliament .
I also stand before you as one who comes from a country , or region , of the United Kingdom that has known much distress because of those who would seek to destroy democratic politics .
Therefore , I come with high expectations of how democracy will be handled in this Parliament .
And yet , in my first mandate as a democratically elected Member of the European Parliament , I find that I have been excluded from coordinators ' meetings , that I do not have a voice on the Conference of Presidents .
These issues are certainly the subject of talks - and I am certainly very glad to hear that you are trying to resolve these issues .
But I would urge you , Mr President , to bring these issues to a conclusion very quickly , because it is important that the democratic mandate of this Parliament is respected .
I would also urge you , Mr President , to meet those non-attached Members who are democrats and who wish to take this issue forward .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Martin on the content of this report , as these are issues on which we have reached an agreement and which must inevitably be addressed .
However , it must also be said that , thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has become a fully democratic parliament , with equal rights .
It is also the time for Parliament to recall who the cornerstones of this Parliament are , namely the individual MEPs , parliamentary committees and political groups .
In my view , there are too many signs that decisions are made by the Conference of Presidents and the Bureau .
I have also noticed many signs pointing to a desire to prevent the committees from working directly , and on their own initiative , with the committees of the national parliaments , and instead make jumping through bureaucratic hoops part of the process .
I have noticed that the meetings of the chairmen of the committees of the national parliaments are attended by vice-chairmen , rather than the chairmen , of European Parliament committees .
With respect to the rights of MEPs , if a committee submits proposals for a decision in Plenary , it is not for the Parliamentary Services , or any other bodies , to decide whether these proposals are right or wrong .
It is something that should be decided by the MEPs themselves .
If the proposals are bad , they will not be supported by the majority .
Clearly , there is a fear that MEPs will be required to make decisions that are harmful to their careers , and should therefore be protected from themselves .
This is the only way in which I can interpret proposals that clearly aim to restrict the rights of Parliament and of individual MEPs .
I have a feeling that the Empire is striking back .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting the Martin report , the European Parliament has accomplished what was an unavoidable task , given the imminent entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It has done this with an accurate and precise text that incorporates into our Rules of Procedure the important changes introduced by a new treaty concerning the increased role of the European Parliament in terms of legislative procedure , of budgetary procedure and of the European Union 's overall institutional balance .
Of these innovations , I am pleased to mention those that relate to the procedures for revising the treaties and to Parliament 's role in submitting proposals , as well as the changes relating to the role of national parliaments which confer a special responsibility on Parliament : to be able to make this enhanced role a source of democratic legitimacy for European integration , rather than a bureaucratic obstacle .
The President made a good decision in resolving the issue of those amendments that are not directly relevant to the task assigned to this report , since there will be time later to address in a more consistent and systematic fashion the issue of whether to carry out a more comprehensive review of our Rules of Procedure .
The fact remains that , while there are elements that can be eliminated from the work carried out by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , there are other elements that can usefully be added .
I refer to the importance of the amendment that emphasises how the question of observers must be addressed , bearing in mind that these observers must be chosen from among the main candidates who were not elected in the European Parliament elections .


( PT ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs , particularly Mr Martin and Mr Corbett , and by saying that , as a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , my primary concern is with the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure .
I would like to highlight what seems to me to be the crucial item , and one that has not yet been mentioned here this evening : the item about national parliaments .
The fact that Parliament has become stronger in terms of democracy is clearly due to these Rules of Procedure and the Treaty of Lisbon , yet European democracy is also the result of the bond between national parliaments .
What this proposal on the Rules of Procedure seeks to do is to legally create these two instances of legitimate democracy , and so consolidate democracy .
On the one hand , there is the democracy that arises from the instruments of the European Parliament , its instruments of control and its legislative role , and , on the other hand , there is the democratic collaboration among national parliaments through other instruments .
That is why I am completely in favour of the proposals .
I do not agree with Mr Duff when he says that we should delay forming relationships with national parliaments until a later stage .
I think that we can proceed now , in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , and that it is very important that we do so .


I would also like to say that I support the proposal of my colleagues , Mr Szájer and Mr Brok , with regard to representation in the Conference of Community and European Affairs Committees of Parliaments of the European Union ( COSAC ) and , finally , that I am completely in agreement with the comments made by my colleague Mr Brok and other Members on the pre-eminence of Parliament and its Members in matters concerning Parliament services .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to return to the subject of the admissibility of amendments , which you referred to before .
Pursuant to Rule 157 ( 3 ) , it is up to you , but I would ask you , Mr President , to take into account the wise words of the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Casini .
I do not think it can be left in the hands of the Parliament 's services to determine which amendments relate to the Treaty of Lisbon and which do not .
Moreover , this House has the sovereign right to decide whether or not an amendment is necessary , at this time when , as everyone has said , a new phase is beginning .
Mr President , I would ask you , therefore , to use the considerable power granted to you under the Rules of Procedure in moderation , and with your usual prudence .
May you make the right decision , and may we all see it .
rapporteur . - Mr President , my thanks to all those colleagues who have spoken in this debate .
I also want to follow up on the point made by Mr Méndez de Vigo .
Mr Casini has been very wise , as he often is on these matters , in that there are amendments which have absolutely nothing to do with Lisbon , and it is very clear they have nothing to do with Lisbon .
While I could have lived with some of them being voted through this Parliament , it is perhaps fairer that we have a separate full and frank discussion on these matters before we come to vote on them .
I want to make it clear , at the same time , that nothing stops Members from bringing forward proposals , for example of the type Mr Fox talked about , which would strip the Bureau of some of its powers in terms of the implementation of the Members ' Statute .
I do not agree with that , but nothing stops Members from bringing the issue forward in the future for debate in this House .
Other amendments , such as the role of the national parliaments , might not strictly be Lisbon amendments , but Mr Casini is absolutely right that they are related to the spirit of implementing Lisbon , because our relationship with national parliaments changes as a result of the Lisbon Treaty .
I would ask you therefore in your wisdom to rule that these amendments are admissible , but that those concerning the function of the Bureau - the number of vice-chairs for committees and so on - are clearly not matters relating to Lisbon and should not be voted on this week .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 25 November 2009 .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Preparation of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparation of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change .
Mr President , honourable Members , the last time I was here in Parliament to discuss climate issues was just before I met with my colleagues at the October meeting of the Environment Council .
At that meeting , we agreed on the EU 's strong and collective mandate in preparation for the UN climate conference in Copenhagen .
We established , among other things , that by 2050 , the EU 's emissions need to be reduced by 80-95 % compared to 1990 levels .
We also determined that the EU will , in any event , reduce emissions by 20 % by 2020 , but that we will reduce them by 30 % if a sufficiently ambitious agreement is reached in Copenhagen .
In comparing this with other countries ' emissions reductions , we will place particular importance on the objective of limiting the temperature increase to two degrees - that must be the yardstick for comparing our emissions reductions with those of other countries .
Emissions from international transport must be reduced .
We have set a reduction target for aviation of 10 % and for shipping of 20 % by 2020 compared with 2005 levels .
I would also like to make it clear that the EU is also demanding that taxes on shipping and aviation be used to pay for measures in developing countries , particularly in the poorest countries and those that are hardest hit .
That must be one of the results of Copenhagen .
The destruction of the rainforest must be halved by 2020 and have ceased by 2030 .
The EU will demand that the Copenhagen Summit take a decision to stop the deforestation of rainforests , support reforestation and create sustainable forestry .
This is the only way we can reduce emissions sufficiently quickly and achieve a successful outcome in Copenhagen .
The EU has clarified and advanced its positions each step of the way and has thus been able to make demands and put pressure on other parties all the way along .
A lot of this has been achieved in cooperation with the European Parliament , with the climate and energy package forming the basis for the EU 's ambitious positions .
Now there are just two weeks left before the climate summit in Copenhagen .
We are surrounded by a lot of pessimists , who have been lining the finishing straight over the last few months .
However , in reality , what counts is the political will for leadership - and that is something that the EU has .
In order to achieve the result that we have worked for for so long , we must now mobilise all forces within the European Union .
In this regard , Parliament , in particular , will continue to have an important role .
Thus , let me first establish that the EU 's goal for an agreement has not changed .
We need to reach an ambitious and comprehensive agreement in Copenhagen .
The Earth 's climate has waited long enough .
Now it is time for an agreement .
Yesterday , we held an extraordinary meeting of the Environment Council in order to be able , with combined force , to make Copenhagen the milestone in our work on climate change that we want it to be .
In the EU 's decision ahead of the Copenhagen conference , the Heads of State or Government have determined that the EU 's goal is for the Copenhagen process to lead to a legally binding agreement for the period starting 1 January 2013 , based on the Kyoto Protocol and containing all of the essential elements .
It requires an agreement in Copenhagen which , overall , achieves large enough reductions in emissions for the target to keep the Earth 's temperature increase to below two degrees to be within reach .
An agreement with all countries that will result in each developed country undertaking to reduce its total emissions , in other words , an economy-wide target ; we need all developed countries to link their commitments to the agreement in Copenhagen , including the US .
An agreement that will result in developing countries committing to take measures to reduce emissions to below what they would have been if no measures were taken , particularly in those countries belonging to the major economies , and developed countries providing immediate financial aid for necessary measures in developing countries , particularly in the poorest countries , during 2010 , 2011 and 2012 .
An agreement that results in the creation of a system of long-term support for reduced emissions , adaptation , technical cooperation and technology transfer .
Finally , the agreement must include a review mechanism so that it can be adapted to whatever science shows to be necessary to manage the climate .
There is now talk of a ' two stage solution ' .
However , for the EU , the agreement in Copenhagen is the crucial step .
It is in Copenhagen that the decision should be taken , and that decision should include everything that is important for the climate .
The binding agreement should be transferred , according to a clear timetable , to a ratifiable text , which is more of a technicality , as the content should be provided in an ambitious agreement .
Thus , an agreement in Copenhagen will open the way for immediate measures to be taken instead of waiting until 2013 .
In fact , we could also instigate measures quicker through this kind of agreement than through what would otherwise have been the case .
It will also be crucial in us achieving the two degree target .
The EU has , in particular , been a driving force for the rapid provision of money for adaptation measures and measures to prevent the deforestation of rainforests .
Rapid action is required to enable us to change the Earth 's emissions curve to a downwards trend quickly .
What is currently on the table is not sufficient overall to achieve the two degree target .
The most ambitious offers on the negotiating table are those tabled by us in the EU , just as we have been a driving force to get other parties to raise their offers .
This has also happened .
We have seen that the fact that we have used our 30 % target as a leveraging tool has also put pressure on others parties .
It is gratifying that developed countries like Norway and Japan have increased their offers , as has Russia recently , and that developing countries like South Korea , Brazil and Indonesia have also recently presented ambitious plans .
We will continue to press forward on this .
Our 30 % shall also continue to be used as a leveraging tool .
We are now waiting in particular for the US and China .
We note that President Obama has said that an agreement should neither contain only certain elements nor merely be a political declaration .
He has also agreed that it should contain all of the key elements as well as the measures that can be initiated immediately .
An agreement in Copenhagen must cover all of the world 's emissions .
Without an offer from the US and China , only half of this is covered .
Let me say this very clearly : an agreement may entirely depend on the US and China tabling sufficiently ambitious offers .
The EU will continue to press for adequate measures to be tabled in the negotiations .
Two weeks before the final negotiations , we will continue to maintain our leadership .
I look forward to the continued cooperation with Parliament , particularly through the COP15 group that will be on site in Copenhagen .
I look forward to the dialogue .
With our joint forces , we will together work to bring about a very successful , ambitious and genuine agreement in Copenhagen .
Mr President , we are fast approaching the crucial Copenhagen Summit and there is little time left .
I totally agree with Minister Carlgren that we need to step up our efforts and cooperate closely to ensure that we do not waste this historic opportunity before us , namely to achieve in Copenhagen a global , overall , ambitious , scientifically-based agreement on climate change .
As Mr Carlgren said , we need to agree in Copenhagen on the entire content , on the entire substance of the agreement and for the legalities to be processed immediately afterwards , in the next few months , within the first six months of 2010 , so that we have a full , legally binding agreement , which the European Union has been fighting for since the outset .
I should like to thank the European Parliament for the resolution on the EU strategy for Copenhagen .
It is an ambitions resolution which confirms the importance which the European Parliament attaches to the question of climate change .
I am also counting wholeheartedly on the support of the members of Parliament in Copenhagen .
Of course , I should also like to stress the importance of our contacts with third country parliaments , with civil society and with companies , in order to make the positions of the European Union known and , in this way , convince other countries to adopt binding declarations on reductions in greenhouse gases .
I particularly endorse the call by Parliament for an agreement which reflects the 2 ° Celsius objective .
In order to achieve this objective , action is needed both by developed and developing countries .
It is a good thing that , in its resolution , Parliament has voted in favour of the solutions based on market mechanisms and supports a review of the clean development mechanism in a future agreement .
As far as this issue is concerned , as you know , the Commission takes the view that the existing tools of the carbon dioxide emissions system should be extended by introducing a sectoral credit mechanism .
As regards reducing emissions from deforestation and the degradation of forests in developing countries under the UN-REDD programme , the Commission will make every possible effort to promote strong social and environmental standards which take account of the impact on biodiversity and ecosystems .
However , we face major challenges .
In Copenhagen , we must aim high so as to achieve an agreement based on scientific findings .
In other words , we must go beyond 2 ° Celsius . We must also ensure that every country makes the necessary commitments in accordance with the principle of joint but differentiated responsibilities .
We also expect the United States , eight full years after they walked out of Kyoto , to take their share of the responsibility .
Finally , we must address a series of detailed issues , such as ensuring that emerging economies will actually make a contribution in line with their capabilities and the principle of differentiation which I referred to earlier and that the amount of funding needed is predictable and stable .
Furthermore , funding will need to be secured in Copenhagen for fast-start , so that what needs to be done immediately can be done without waiting for the 2010-2013 period .
This will allow immediate action and the necessary adaptations , especially in very sensitive areas of the planet such as poor countries .
Now is the time that the European Union is being called upon to set an example and confirm its leading role .
At the preparatory talks held in Copenhagen last week , we had a crucial exchange of views with many of our international partners .
As Mr Carlgren said , certain countries , such as Brazil and South Korea , have announced that they will be taking measures .
Similar announcements are expected by the time the summit starts from other countries , such as China and India .
This morning , there were reports in the news that the United States would be submitting its proposal for reductions and - I hope - funding .
We also had an interesting exchange of views on the question of transparency and , more specifically , the MRV or monitoring , reporting and verification systems .
It is still extremely important that we secure more commitments on specific measures and action towards an economy based on less intensive carbon dioxide emissions .
Developing countries must , as a group and depending on their capabilities , make reductions in the order of 15-30 % compared with business as usual .
As far as action by developed countries is concerned , unfortunately , progress is not satisfactory .
Spain , Australia and Norway have improved their commitments .
However , the other countries do not appear to be prepared to follow suit .
It has also now become clear that the United States will , unfortunately , not be able to adopt internal legislation by the end of the year .
Of course , this does not mean that they will not be able to set specific quantitative targets in Copenhagen .
As I said earlier , according to our information , this is precisely what will happen , but - I fear - on condition that internal legislation is passed , which is not expected by the end of the year and it will therefore be conditional .
A positive move on the part of the United States will affect the stand taken by the other countries and , by extension , will be instrumental to the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit .
It is now clear that measures by developed countries alone will not suffice .
Whatever else happens , developing countries will have to make a contribution , with the emphasis on developing an economy with low carbon dioxide emissions .
As I said earlier , developing countries will need to reduce their emissions by 15-30 % compared with business as usual .
Our fundamental objective in Copenhagen is still to achieve a legally binding agreement .
Despite the fact that negotiations have not progressed as fast as we would have wished up to now and there is little time left , we must not depart from this objective .
We also want this agreement to be a global agreement that covers all elements of the Bali action plan , incorporates progress made to date and contains quantitative factors for reductions in emissions and funding .
As far as the architecture of the agreement is concerned , it will need to cover all elements relating to adaptations , reductions in emissions and fast-start funding .
We shall also need to agree in Copenhagen on the procedures and timetable for completing negotiations , with a view to achieving a legally binding agreement as quickly as possible , within the first months of 2010 ; Chancellor Merkel mentioned the first half of 2010 .
A substantial and global agreement will give considerable political momentum to the negotiating procedure and make it possible to complete legal processing within a reasonable period of time after Copenhagen .
Within this framework , funding is a decisive factor .
Copenhagen will fail unless we manage to mobilise the investment and funding resources needed .
To close , I should like to refer once again to the decisive role played by the European Parliament in promoting the EU 's ambitious climate policy .
It has been at the forefront in the European Union and internationally and has helped to encourage our strategic international partners .
This close cooperation will continue in the run-up to Copenhagen and I must say that I am delighted that Parliament will be represented by a strong delegation .
Thank you , Commissioner , for a very interesting speech in which you spoke about the important problems we are facing before Copenhagen .
You spoke for slightly longer than we expected , so I expect we will have shorter remarks from yourself at the end of the debate .
It was so interesting that it was not possible to stop it !
The clock is ticking .
We are faced with the important challenge of ensuring that an ambitious agreement is concluded in Copenhagen with regard to climate change and , now that December is drawing nearer , we are experiencing setbacks .
President Obama is not yet able to keep his election promise .
Yet there are also hopeful signs , such as the ambitions of the new Japanese Government .
I should like to commend the efforts of the Swedish Presidency and the European Commission , particularly Commissioner Dimas .
We are your allies .
I should also like to commend your efforts to get the European leaders singing from the same song sheet , as it is more important than ever , in these crucial negotiations , that Europe speak with one voice .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I can say that we share your hope that an ambitious agreement will be reached that leads to binding reduction targets not only for the European Union , the United States and Japan , but also for countries such as China , Brazil and India .
It is important that we share the same ambitions if we are to tackle climate change effectively whilst also creating a global level playing field .
Mr President , it is crucial that agreement be reached in Copenhagen on a financial package to help fund the climate projects in developing countries .
Europe must take its fair share of this responsibility .
Yet I echo your sentiment that it is very important to get this funding off the ground quickly , as projects are ready and waiting , and can be started immediately .
This would constitute a tangible , visible outcome of the Copenhagen Summit , an encouraging sign .
At the same time , it is essential to conclude agreements to ensure that these funds make an active , effective contribution to reducing climate change , and also agreements on technology transfer and the protection of intellectual property rights .
Only together can we mobilise the knowledge and skills needed to prevent climate change and the irreparable damage to ecosystems .
The climate agreement has the potential to give an important boost to this , and also to us in Europe , to ensure that our social market economy increasingly becomes a sustainable social market economy .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in recent years , the European Parliament has been a driving force in the debate on climate protection , and we have also achieved a large percentage of the EU 's climate protection package .
The resolution that we are putting forward today has all the elements for an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen .
Yet what we are proposing is also realistic .
It is both ambitious and realistic at the same time , and we hope that the Council and the Commission will join forces with us to form a single lobbying body at the conference in order to get other partners on board .
The EU has taken on the leadership role in these issues and we want that to remain the case in Copenhagen .
We must therefore stand by our offer of a 30 % reduction in CO2 by 2020 .
The science tells us that we need to be in the upper end between 25 % and 40 % .
30 % would therefore still not be enough , we know that , and that is why we must actually offer this target , as it will drive up the ambition of other countries .
We know that global climate protection is not possible without financing .
In contrast to the Council , Parliament has given specific figures in this regard .
The global framework is around EUR 100 billion , and Europe needs to take on around a third of that .
So why do we not say that we will provide EUR 30 billion in 2020 ?
Parliament has committed itself to this and I hope that the Council and the Commission will be equally specific in two weeks time .
Mrs Wortmann-Kool has already mentioned the kick-start .
We need EUR 5 to 7 billion straight away .
When I look at how much money we made available for the banking crisis , we are really talking about peanuts to overcome the climate crisis - and there will be no second chance at this .
Once the climate has been broken , it will be broken forever and we will not be able to fix it .
This really has to deserve a major effort from us all , therefore .
I also note that some countries are moving , but others are not .
It must not be the case that the two greatest climate polluters , China and the United States , play a giant game of ping-pong where each accuses the other whilst dragging its own feet .
That is irresponsible and I hope that the US , in particular , will also show leadership in Copenhagen , with specific information on reductions in its own climate-change gases and also a share of the financing .
Without these two countries and without India , there will be no agreement .
We emphasise forestry policy once again - deforestation is a major factor - as well as aviation and maritime transport .
If railways are included in the emissions trading and have to pay , I can no longer see why aviation and maritime transport should have such special privileges .
At long last , Parliament will be represented in the EU pavilion for the first time .
That is a new beginning , and I hope we are able to take part in the briefing between the Council and the Commission since , under the Treaty of Lisbon , we have joint legislative power on the Copenhagen agreement .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , on 26 September 2009 , 44 citizens ' panels were organised in 38 countries representing the various stages of development .
91 % of citizens worldwide believed that there was an urgent need to reach an agreement in Copenhagen , including 93 % of Europeans .
89 % believed that we needed to go beyond the 25 % target for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in industrialised countries , and 92 % of Europeans follow this line of thinking .
We , the MEPs representing the peoples of Europe , have a duty to use our influence to respond to the request of our fellow citizens , but above all to shoulder the responsibility that we have , so that we can meet the IPCC 's target of a 25-40 % reduction by 2020 .
To achieve this , the target of a 30 % reduction must be upheld , as Mr Leinen just said , and obviously with the necessary financial resources , estimated at EUR 100 billion for 2020 .
To this end , a tax on financial transactions will probably have to be introduced , as will green technology transfers to the South .
Europe 's leadership on this crucial issue for the future must result in an agreement being reached , but not an agreement at any price , in other words , not one that falls short of its objectives , that has no financial resources , controls or constraints .
It would be better to have nothing at all than to have a vague commitment that puts this issue on the back-burner , making people believe that it has been dealt with .
Our responsibility is not only that of being jointly responsible for the climate debt , but of doing everything possible to convince people of the only sensible solution and of being a tireless defender of the fair and effective collective effort .
In this regard , upholding the 30 % target means giving all of the countries that have already proposed lower and upper limits for their emissions the means to aim for the upper limits and not to stay at the lower ones .
Everyone will answer to the international public and to future generations for the position they adopt in Copenhagen .
The position of we Europeans must be clear , unambiguous and extremely robust .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Minister , the meeting at Copenhagen will be the most important conference in mankind 's history .
It concerns the future of the entire human race .
The importance of the meeting is highlighted by the fact that , as it approaches , the publicity game has even been enough to blacken the reputations of climate researchers .
There is , however , no time to lose : global emissions have to be reduced within the next 10 years .
The ministers and prime ministers that convene at Copenhagen must take their responsibility seriously and make decisions to ensure that the temperature of the earth will not rise by more than two degrees .
The decision must embrace all the main questions , it must be binding , and it must include a binding timetable for the drafting of an eventual international agreement .
I am pleased that Minister Carlgren also spoke of a binding decision and a binding international agreement .
The agreement needs to contain long-term emission targets , though it is even more important to agree on emission limits for the year 2020 .
The cuts in emissions in the industrialised countries should be closer to 40 % , rather than the 25 % threshold .
EU leadership is now crucially important , as before .
The best way we can demonstrate leadership is by committing now to a 30 % cut in emissions for 2020 and by making a clear offer of financing to the developing countries .
As the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety said , the EU 's share of funding should be around EUR 30 billion a year up to 2020 .
Moreover , as Minister Carlgren has said , the recession has made it cheaper to reduce emissions .
We need to take advantage of this opportunity and raise our sights .
I want to remind those who are keen to question the whole notion of climate protection that the planet will not wait .
You cannot say to the planet : ' Could you please give us another year or two ; there 's a recession on ' , or ' The climate sceptics made us hesitate ' .
Climate change is progressing according to the laws of physics and chemistry , and we will take responsibility for our decisions and , furthermore , for not doing anything at all .
( Applause )
Minister and President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with most of the previous speakers that the Copenhagen Summit is probably the most important summit of the entire year for the European Union and also for the whole world .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for being among the politicians emphasising the importance of the European Parliament to the forthcoming summit and to climate policy and climate change in themselves .
I would also like to thank him for emphasising the importance of funding .
You know , in the Czech lands we often say - and in Czech it sounds rather ironical - that money always comes first and in this case it is doubly true .
I would also like to stress that if the EU cannot come forward as one body with a strong and clear mandate and cannot reach a clear agreement on funding , it will weaken our position in the world enormously .
Several previous speakers here have emphasised that as the EU , we have a leading role in this area and that we should retain this leading role .
I would like to say again that I would be very happy to see someone even more ambitious at the summit , someone who was further ahead than us , who had better legislation , and who would be willing to put more funding into the issue .
It would not bother me in the slightest if we lost our number one position because I believe that it is time for the common burden to assume a genuinely global scale .
I share the belief that without a global agreement , all of our efforts will come to nothing .
There is no point here in constantly reiterating the importance of states such as the US , India or China .
I am afraid that President Obama is not able to fulfil all of his pre-election promises and that is regrettable .
I would also like briefly to mention an issue I often talk about , namely deforestation and water management in the world , which we always tend to undervalue .
In all of our declarations , we call for agreements with states such as Brazil , India and others on halting the felling of the rain forests .
I say , however , that it is not enough simply to agree and to make declarations .
We discovered in the past that the relevant governments often do not have or do not exercise control over these activities and therefore , I would like to state here that it is not enough to agree ; we must devise control mechanisms , we must have an overview of real policies and I agree that we must not enter into a treaty at any price .
Mr President , I completely agree that we must push to find a legally binding agreement in Copenhagen .
The agreement must be strong enough to combat the challenge of climate change and , at the same time , it must be balanced and fair with regard to developing countries .
Industrialised countries must promise a reduction of at least 40 % in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 and a reduction of between 80 % and 95 % by 2050 compared to 1990 levels .
By 2020 , the EU must commit EUR 30 billion a year as climate funding for developing countries , on top of foreign development aid .
Unfortunately , there are people in Europe who are very interested in using other countries ' reluctance to take the necessary steps as an excuse for the EU not to fulfil its obligations .
This type of approach is extremely short-sighted .
Irrespective of the results of the Copenhagen talks , the EU must carry on and lay down and implement effective targets for the reduction of emissions , develop new clean technologies and commit itself to climate justice , so that developing countries will not be saddled with reaping what the developed world sowed .
Mr President , Council and Commission , it is one month today until Christmas Eve .
I have one big Christmas wish , and that is that when the climate conference is over and all the participants have stopped acting like administrators and technicians who talk only of details and quotas , we can then finally have a political debate about what can realistically and practically be done to improve conditions for our planet and its inhabitants .
If we open our eyes , we will see all too clearly that the US , Russia , China and many other countries around the globe do not really have climate change on the agenda . Instead , they are simply making fine-sounding declarations of intent and empty promises .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the still ongoing economic and structural crisis has shown how the international community can quickly make large sums available in order to take the sting out of an acute situation , even if the way it actually does that is sometimes questionable .
The crisis also shows that the most varied of States are able to cooperate when there are larger , superordinate objectives at stake .
Like the structural crisis , the dramatic effects of climate change are largely man-made .
However , it must be the objective - and I am talking about an objective for humanity - to run our Earth and its resources sustainably and sensibly .
We must maintain the diversity of the biosphere for future generations .
If we succeed in creating a framework at European level that promotes science , innovation and modern , environmentally friendly technologies - green technologies - and renewable energy sources , we Europeans can achieve two objectives .
First of all , we will all be making a positive contribution to reducing climate-damaging CO2 emissions , enabling us to bring an end to our major dependence on fossil fuels .
If , secondly , we increase our support for science and environmentally friendly technologies , it will mean that Europe will remain a centre for innovation in the long term .
Only in that way will we create new jobs in Europe in the long term .
Mr President , I must say that I really appreciate the broad support that the EU 's approach has received from almost everyone in Parliament .
That means , has meant and will mean a great deal for the EU 's strength in Copenhagen and also in the very important climate work that we will have to do afterwards .
I would also like to say to Mr Dimas that I appreciate very much what he said today .
The Commission has played a vital role as the backbone of the EU 's climate policy and Mr Dimas in particular has played a decisive role in the Commission taking the position that it has done .
There have been times when not all Member States have supported this as strongly as they do today and , in the crucial situations , the Commissioner has always stood very firm .
I appreciate that very much and I wanted to make that point here in Parliament .
I would like to say to Mr Leinen , as leader of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , but also as chairman of the committee , that I very much look forward to cooperation with Parliament in Copenhagen , too .
I am certain that Parliament can play a very important part there , too , in reaching out to representatives of other countries .
I would like to say to everyone here in the debate who has mentioned the issue of financing - Mr Leinen , Mrs Hassi , Mrs de Brún and others - that of course the specific figures are important , too .
That is why the EU has been the group of developed countries that has so far presented both the most ambitious and the most detailed figures .
Let me also say , with regard to rapid measures - measures to stop the deforestation of rainforests and measures to take money from aviation and shipping , which damage the climate , to put towards important measures in the poorest EU countries in particular - that they need to produce results right now .
Someone asked about the practical side .
The EU has shown the way here .
We have , in fact , already got half way towards our 2020 target of 20 % .
We have achieved a third of what we need to do to attain the 30 % target .
That is why , in the final sprint , we are pressing for other parties to raise their offers , while also saying ' look at us , we have shown a practical way to actually reduce emissions ' .
Some people are saying ' go 10 % further .
I would very much like to do that , but it requires a global agreement .
Otherwise , this extra 10 % from the EU would be eaten up by only two years of emissions increases in China , and we will still not have saved the climate .
That is why the global agreement is so important and why Parliament 's role is so vital , as this is an important political basis on which to build further .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , after what you said , I did not expect you to give me the floor , but I will take this opportunity to say two words about the main argument that was put forward for the 30 % target .
Of course I agree with Mr Ouzký that we need a global agreement , meaning all the countries of the world participating in a comprehensive agreement and all sectors of the economy to participate in the reductions .
And , of course , this must be science-based .
In order to have such a global agreement , in order to persuade other countries to come forward , we have to keep pressing by our example , an example which has its moral importance .
The moral leadership of Europe is important , but it also acts as an example by showing that green business is very important for our competitiveness .
In yesterday 's Financial Times , there were reports about how European businesses - including very important corporations in the European Union - are gaining from going green and actually foresee , by 2020 , that their green business will surpass all the other business .
So we have these two ways of pressing other countries to come forward with ambitious commitments and agree in a legally binding agreement .
For the 30 % reduction , I have to add the following .
First of all , it is in accordance with what science is telling us to do , so it will be sincere on our part to go along with what science is telling us .
Secondly , it is cheaper today , much cheaper than when we were discussing our climate and energy package : it is cheaper by about 30-40 % now to achieve this target .
Thirdly , it is not just going to give us what Andreas Carlgren said previously , a lever to persuade the others , but also and most important , will be the pressure by example ; public opinion around the world will appreciate what the European Union is doing .
It will also , as I heard a lady colleague here say , be very important for our technologies .
Of course , because it will provide a better price for carbon , which is very low today , and in this way it will be an important incentive for eco-innovation and for development and deployment of new technologies .
Another aspect which is very important is that the European Union is in a privileged position because we already have the legislation you voted which provides the European Union and the Member States with the means and measures to achieve the higher target by just upgrading certain of the caps we have in our legislation .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to start by commenting on what Commissioner Dimas said .
Of course we need a binding agreement , for the entire issue of climate protection , but in Europe , too , for our European industry .
It is not only green industry that we have , of course .
We also have industry in other sectors , and we must also think about the competitiveness of that industry beyond Europe .
Industry needs certainty of planning , and in that regard Europe has very much surged ahead .
That was the right approach to take and it had my express support at the time .
Now , however , we need to ensure , in Copenhagen , that the positive result of the last year is also carried on up to the Copenhagen level .
We need to nail our colours to the mast of a global carbon budget .
That has already been said , but we need now to really drive the message home to other States and continents .
Once we have done that - and it will not be easy - then the emissions trading scheme must be developed further .
If this remains a purely European story , time will start to run out .
I can therefore only beg the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council to push forward with exporting this message in a really committed way .
We have identified a second problem - and it has already been mentioned today - namely , the issue of deforestation .
In Borneo , Mr Leinen , an area twice the size of the Saarland is cleared by burning each year .
That is a disaster .
8 % of the whole world 's CO2 emissions are released in so doing , and we can savage our industry as much as we want , it cannot deliver that .
Nor do I want it to deliver it .
We therefore need to develop a completely different focus .
I am absolutely astonished about the financing - it is a numbers race .
For me , it is important that the well from which we draw our money is not treated as bottomless , and I am not certain that that is the case .
Please , Commissioner , can you give me some reassurance on that front ?
The developing countries must be included , with adapted figures and targets .
That is my appeal .
Europe was serious , and that seriousness - including on the part of the Commission and the Council , I want to make that clear - is our strength , and it is a strength we should continue to work on .
( DA ) Mr President , a couple of months back , I was in Greenland .
I visited a small town there called Ilulissat , and just north of Ilulissat is a glacier .
This glacier is now melting and it is moving at two metres an hour - two metres an hour !
You can see it with the naked eye .
You can hear it , because when a huge chunk of ice falls off , it sounds like a clap of thunder .
The meltwater coming from this glacier each day is equal to the annual consumption of a whole city the size of New York .
Per day !
That is an indicator of the urgency of what we are dealing with .
And that is before the effects of climate change really hit us .
That is why I feel bound to say to Mrs Rosbach and others who have said today ' we have to be level-headed ' , ' we have to look at what is politically possible ' , ' we have to look at the compromises that can be reached ' : there are some things on which you cannot compromise .
There are some objectives that we cannot compromise on and one of these is the 2 ° C goal that the EU is supporting .
That is why , Minister Carlgren and Commissioner Dimas , I am very , very pleased at the signals that you are sending today .
We cannot compromise on 2 ° C. This means that all the developed countries of the world must make reductions of between 25 % and 40 % .
It also means that massive pressure must be put on the US to bring that country to support this goal .
I would like to see some indication in your comments of the level of reduction that the US must deliver from a purely practical point of view .
I think that is something that is lacking in the public debate .
What we in the EU are focusing on - apart from the fact that we must have a reduction target that is ambitious enough - is a financing plan .
The rich countries of the world must help to pay for the transfer of growth to the poorest countries of the world , so that we are not demanding that they stay in poverty but rather that they continue their growth .
This growth must be green growth , however , based on a technology shift , and it must be sustainable .
For the time being , I regret to say that although the EU has shown leadership in a number of areas , where financing is concerned we are still not in a position to put the figures that will be required on the table .
I know that this is not the fault of these two gentlemen .
Unfortunately , it has not been possible to get the support of the Heads of Government in Europe .
I very much hope , however , that we can get this support before Copenhagen ; it is a matter of urgency .
Finally , I would like to say that it is extremely important that we in Europe take the lead in arguing that this does not mean that living standards must fall - in either the rich world or the poor world .
It will not lead to our industries becoming uncompetitive .
On the contrary , our demands will make them more innovative , which will make them more competitive in the world .
If you read the newspapers or watch television or follow the global media at all , you will see that pessimism is the order of the day .
There are many people who have already decided that Copenhagen will be a fiasco .
That is why it is more important than ever for Europe to take the lead , for the EU to be in the driving seat .
I would therefore like to wish you the best of luck with the negotiations in Copenhagen .
Mr President , if you look out of the window today , you will see a rather miserable Strasbourg day , which is nothing out of the ordinary .
Even the floods which are devastating parts of my region in Cockermouth and Workington , where we have had the highest rainfall on record , are nothing special ; they cannot be specifically attributed to climate change , although they are in line with the science .
It is hard to take the political decisions necessary when there is doubt about whether climate change is taking place .
We have to take a step back ; we have to recognise that during the course of one lifetime , the human population has quadrupled and our use of fossil fuels , our energy consumption , has grown enormously .
Perhaps , as our atmosphere retains the same depth , we also must wonder whether climate change should not be taking place faster than it is .
I think it is important to recognise that climate change is not a religion .
It is not a faith .
We have to take on board the arguments of the sceptics and we have to challenge them .
We have to ensure that our science is put to the fore .
I just wish some of the sceptics would not take such delight in putting forward proposals to delay action , proposals which might end up costing the lives of millions .
There has been a downplaying of the ambitions for Copenhagen , but if you had heard Minister Carlgren at the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety yesterday , you would have heard no such downplaying .
The ambitions could not have been reinforced more strongly .
We have 65 Heads of Government attending .
We need the leaders of the United States and China to be there too , but we have an opportunity here to take some major political decisions .
I welcome the fact that the European Union has given such leadership .
We are delighted with this .
The question is : is it enough ?
The situation is fluid .
We have four weeks and negotiations have a momentum of their own .
Are we giving you enough room for manoeuvre ?
The Commissioner has suggested that we need to move from 20 % to 30 % .
Now , is this a shift in our negotiating position ?
Are we strengthening this ?
Are we saying that we are prepared to make this gesture even before we get a final agreement ?
Before this debate finishes , can we hear more from the Council and the Commission about what room there is for upping our game ?
( NL ) We have two weeks left until the start of the conference in Copenhagen : a crucial opportunity to reach an ambitious climate agreement .
The European Union rightly states that it is essential to conclude an agreement in Copenhagen ; our climate will brook no delay .
The science is clear .
In order to meet the two degree target that the European Union has been saying for years it wants to meet , rich countries must reduce their emissions by 40 % .
Therefore , the European Union must tighten up its own targets if it wants to meet this two degree objective .
This is essential for our climate .
Yet the European Union also holds the key to bringing the United States on board .
Until the EU states clearly how much money it intends to make available to developing countries , the United States will have something to hide behind .
Therefore , let us now present a clear offer of EUR 30 billion for developing countries , and then the onus will be on the United States to come forward with its own reduction target .
Copenhagen can succeed , Copenhagen must succeed , and the European Union still holds the key to its success .
( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , Copenhagen has failed even before the conference has begun .
A deal may be struck , but there will be no legally binding agreement .
President Obama is not going to get an emissions trading scheme through the Senate ; his priority is health care rather than cap and trade .
This means that Europe is faced with a choice : should we continue to go it alone or not ?
Should we , or should we not , continue to operate a compulsory emissions trading scheme on our own ?
We need to give this some careful thought .
The price of going it alone would be very high : it would cost European industry hundreds of billions of euros in the period up to 2020 , resulting in the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe .
I should like to give an example .
After Houston , Antwerp has the highest concentration of chemical companies in the world , providing work for 64 000 people directly and 100 000 indirectly .
Antwerp 's chemical industry would not survive if Europe were to go it alone , and perhaps it takes a Dutchman to stand up for the economic interests of that city .
By 2020 , its chemical industry would have gone , a victim of excessive production costs .
Emissions trading also has many disadvantages .
It is highly volatile ; the price has plummeted from EUR 30 to EUR 8 .
What should we do , then ?
We should ensure sound development of environmental technologies , make environmental investments tax deductible , promote research , and develop environmentally friendly production technologies .
This House needs a reality check .
Sometimes I have the impression of being in a religious community rather than a parliament .
It is technological innovation that will be our saviour , not trade in hot air .
( NL ) I should like to give a rough list of actions that emit CO2 , from someone I bumped into on the street yesterday .
She is alive ( remember that one ! )
She took a shower .
She drove her car to work .
She bought a bunch of greenhouse flowers , wrapped in plastic .
She had her laptop on the whole day .
She cooked a huge , delicious steak and turned the heating up a little .
After such a nice day of luxury , how can we insist that an indigenous woman driven from her country as a result of deforestation for the sake of our luxury must reduce her CO2 emissions , when all her list contained was : ' I was alive ' ?
Industrialised countries are responsible for high CO2 emissions , so they must pay for this and support developing countries .
We cannot leave it at a pathetic pittance .
We must leave behind the urge to move only if somebody else does .
The United States and China must be called to account forcefully on this matter .
Ambition is one thing , but taking responsibility is what really matters .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us draw a merciful veil over the unbelievable sum of EUR 30 billion per year until 2020 that the EU would be committing itself to paying out to the emerging countries , basically without any security .
To us Italians , that is reminiscent of the notorious Italian Cassa del Mezzogiorno .
Our amendments are concerned with three points .
Firstly , we are calling for legally binding and equally ambitious commitments , not just for the other industrialised countries , but also for the emerging economies and , in particular , China , India and Brazil .
Secondly , we are asking that any European allocations from which those countries benefit be made conditional on the use of ' made in the European Union ' technology , so that our businesses can be at least partially repaid for the further onerous emissions reduction commitments that the EU is imposing on them , to be borne entirely at their own cost .
Thirdly , we call for action to ensure that the invention of innovative financial mechanisms - such as ETS-based derivatives or debt-for-nature swaps - does not in fact conceal fresh financial speculation similar to the very serious crisis from which we have not yet emerged .
For this reason , if our amendments are rejected , our delegation - the Northern League delegation - will vote against this resolution .

Mr President , everyone agrees that climate change is the biggest challenge facing humanity : that is the constant claim of the political elite , and it is a lie .
Everyone does not agree .
Thousands of scientists dispute the very existence of man-made global warming , citing natural cyclical changes that saw vineyards in Roman northern England and a Swedish army march over the frozen Baltic to Copenhagen in 1658 .
As an army of global-warming zealots marches to Copenhagen , the truth is that their Orwellian consensus is based not on scientific agreement , but on bullying , censorship and fraudulent statistics .
In the words of leading climatologist Professor Lindzen , ' Future generations will wonder in bemused amazement that the early 21st century 's developed world went into hysterical panic over a globally averaged temperature increase of a few tenths of a degree and , on the basis of gross exaggerations of highly uncertain computer projections [ ... ] , contemplated a rollback of the industrial age ' .
In fact , there will be no bemused amazement , for the reason for this hysteria is clear .
It is designed to provide the excuse for a political project of the globalists to replace national democracy with new world order global governance .
It has nothing to do with science and everything to do with the globalist common purpose to tax and control us , while making billions for corporations in the green industrial complex .
The anti-Western intellectual cranks of the Left suffered a collective breakdown when Communism collapsed .
Climate change is their new theology , a secular religious hysteria complete with Pope - Al Gore - carbon-credit indulgences and the persecution of heretics .
But the heretics will have a voice in Copenhagen and the truth will out .
Climate change is being used to impose an anti-human utopia as deadly as anything conceived by Stalin or Mao .
( DE ) Mr President , Albert Einstein once said , ' Make things as simple as possible , but not simpler ' .
We must be careful to avoid falling into that trap .
We are fooling ourselves that certain weather phenomena - such as the flooding in Ireland - are directly linked to climate change .
We also say that the global rise in temperatures that has indisputably occurred across the different continents is directly linked to the anthropologically generated slight rise in the CO2 content of the Earth 's atmosphere .
There are scientists who doubt these causalities and we should keep that in the back of our minds as we now go to Copenhagen .
We should approach the conference with optimism but also realism .
Europe , remember , is only responsible for 10 % of the CO2 emissions .
There is no room for doubt there .
At the same time , we know that the United States , China and the APEC countries , which together are responsible for two thirds of the world 's CO2 emissions , take a very critical stance on this issue .
It is now less about holding a numbers race and wanting to have 20 % or 30 % cuts and more about trying to bring about a global agreement , not solely a European one , and we must attempt to obtain binding targets for everyone which can then be monitored and , above all , complied with .
It is just as important that we take our citizens and also businesses with us .
It is to no one 's benefit if Europe is threatened with ' carbon leakage ' and businesses move elsewhere , when businesses here in Europe produce twice as energy-efficiently as those in other parts of the world .
It is likewise to no one 's benefit for various countries around the world to clear rainforests - 12 500 km2 of rainforest was cleared in Brazil last year .
Mr Florenz mentioned Borneo .
It is therefore much more important to curb this deforestation than to take part in such a numbers race .
I therefore ask the negotiators to head to Copenhagen with realism , but also great optimism , in mind .
( SV ) Mr President , I am pleased to see the Swedish minister 's commitment .
However , he is still very much alone .
World leaders , the European Council and even the Prime Minister heading the Swedish Presidency seem to be prioritising short-term political gains on the domestic front instead of long-term environmental benefits on a global scale .
That is unacceptable .
We need , among other things , clear information on the financing of the climate work in the developing countries .
To promise to pay a reasonable proportion , as you have done up to now , is not acceptable .
These are just words , there are no commitments and therefore I am going to keep asking .
Can Mr Carlgren promise to give us clear information before Copenhagen ?
Secondly , while we are on the subject of financing , it is intended that a large proportion of the money will come from trade in emissions allowances .
At the same time , we risk undermining the system by opening the way for a large proportion of the emissions reductions to be made in the developing countries through clean development mechanism ( CDM ) projects .
On top of this , it is also being discussed whether rich countries should be allowed to carry over unused emissions allowances from previous years .
What do Mr Carlgren and the Presidency intend to do to ensure that the emissions trading system functions properly ?
Can we expect this game of cat and mouse that is currently going on between the countries involved in the Copenhagen Summit to stop ?
( NL ) I should like to thank Mr Carlgren and Commissioner Dimas for both the substance and , in particular , the tone of their speeches .

It is a positive tone , a tone that conveys a belief that an international agreement can really be reached ; that is , an agreement containing internationally binding standards .
Mr President , a minimum of 60 Heads of State or Government will be travelling to Copenhagen .
Let their journeys not be in vain .
Let them become aware of their great responsibility .
Let them surpass themselves and look beyond economic interests in the short term .
Let them take a big step towards tomorrow 's economy , an economy involving minimum use of raw materials .
Copenhagen will not succeed unless Europe plays a strong leading role , as we all know .
Mr Carlgren , Commissioner Dimas , let the big players stop holding each other to ransom .
There is no more time for the game of ' Who can sit still the longest ? '
Let us stir them into action and drag them along to the internationally binding agreement we all want so badly .
( FR ) Mr President , as we know - according to a number of scientific studies and also Yvo de Boer - emerging countries are today making at least as much effort as Europe with a view to 2020 .
We also know that , in the negotiations , there is already a right of scrutiny regarding emerging economies , and that this is exercised more and more through the emissions inventory , through the report on the measures taken .
The World Resources Institute has published statistics showing that China stands at around 70 tonnes per capita , a cumulative figure since 1950 , whereas the United States stands at 810 tonnes and the EU-27 stands at 413 tonnes .
We therefore kindly ask you to have the good sense , first and foremost , to use the European Parliament resolution as a negotiating mandate .
This would be the best thing we could do for the sake of both the climate and our emergence from the crisis in Europe .
Next , I call on the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to have the intelligence and the credibility to withdraw its amendment that says that emerging countries must do the same thing , must make the same commitments as rich countries .
That is not acceptable , that is not serious .
( PL ) Mr President , in the case of Kyoto , we gave developing countries concessions and exclusions which caused the loss of a significant part of our competitiveness .
Meanwhile , in 2005 , developing countries exceeded Europe 's level of CO2 emissions .
Today , Parliament not only wants to burden the economy with still more drastic climate regulations .
The proposed resolution places a burden on our national budgets of EUR 30 billion a year for the next 10 years , which will be used to help developing countries .
In the case of Poland , the proposed method of calculating the contribution could mean a cost of even EUR 40 billion over 10 years until 2020 .
The doubtful effects of the Kyoto Protocol , the privileged position of developing countries and the rising costs of this policy make us opposed to this resolution .
We are responsible not only for the climate but also for the prosperity of our citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , in many parts of the world the consequences of climate change are visible .
The most recent calculations assume a global temperature rise of up to 4 ° C by 2060 , and up to 10 ° C in the Arctic .
It is primarily Europe 's soot emissions that are responsible for the significantly faster melting of the ice in the Arctic - they are borne there by the wind .
The rich industrial States of the EU are now obliged to support the poorer countries financially so that immediate measures can be taken to counter the consequences of climate change .
USD 100 billion will be needed every year from 2010 to 2050 .
Of that amount , it is fair to say that USD 30 billion is not too much for the European Union .
The transfer of technology must also not be linked to patents , or else some of the money will simply be flowing straight back to the corporations in the industrialised countries .
The EU has an obligation to take a lead at the climate change conference in Copenhagen .
Mr President , I have just heard a Socialist colleague over there talking about Greenland and the ice melting in Greenland .
The question I would like to ask on this subject is : why is Greenland called Greenland ?
Is it perhaps because Greenland was once green when the world was hotter ?
It seems that the British people are onto this , because a recent opinion poll in The Times newspaper clearly shows that the British people no longer believe in so-called man-made global warming .
The British people are very astute and they are clear that politicians have hijacked the environmentalist agenda .
It is being cynically used to raise taxes , to exert control , and now it is being used by the European Union to justify its own existence .
This week , we have also had the spectacle of one of the leading climate-research centres in the UK , which advises the government , being caught altering data and stifling debate .
It is an absolute disgrace .
I look forward to Copenhagen , when the political class is sitting around the table awkwardly failing to mention the giant elephant in the room , which is that the globe has not actually warmed for the past 10 years .
( ES ) Mr President , I would firstly like to recognise the effort made , and also the enthusiasm shown by both the Commission and the Council and , of course , Parliament over such a long period throughout this programme to combat climate change .
I would like to say that there are a series of certainties that should map out our route for us .
The first one is this : we need everyone to take part , especially all the countries that are major polluters .
The second near-certainty is this : based on all the information we have , it appears that it will be very difficult for a legally binding agreement to be reached in Copenhagen , in the same way as the agreements on the percentage of emissions are , of course , binding .
This reality should not , however , cause us to give up , because pessimism results from failing to acknowledge reality .
On the contrary , optimism is based on acknowledging reality .
What should we do in Copenhagen , essentially ?
Of course , we should not forget the possibility of reaching that general agreement .
As we are aware of the situation and the possibilities that exist , however , I think we should concentrate on sectoral agreements that are really valid , with viable objectives .
I have in mind an agreement on deforestation , an agreement on aid for emerging countries and developing countries , but most importantly , an agreement on technology transfer .
I also think it would be an extremely good idea to have agreements to promote programmes so that the industrial sectors that consume the most energy worldwide can reach agreements on emissions , whichever country they are in .
This would also make our economies more competitive .
To conclude , I would like to stress that optimism is based on realism and effectiveness is based on setting viable objectives .
This should be our guide at all times .
Mr President , once again the House has been treated to two speeches by the BNP and UKIP , and once again the two parties are united in their belief in conspiracy theories , showing there is very little difference between them .
But I want to congratulate the minister first of all this morning for remaining ambitious about Copenhagen and sticking to the idea of a legally binding agreement .
This morning , the BBC is reporting that the White House is saying that it will come to Copenhagen with targets for cutting US emissions .
Those of us who have met US Members of Congress know that there is a serious move afoot and thus a very serious prospect of legislation in the United States , so I think there is still real hope for a deal in Copenhagen .
But Copenhagen will just be the beginning , because when we come back from Copenhagen , we in Europe will have to continue our work to cut our emissions .
We have got to keep investing in energy efficiency , in renewables and in low-carbon technology .
I am very pleased that last week we agreed as a European Union that there will be investment in technologies like carbon capture and storage , and that one of those plants will come to my constituency in Yorkshire , at Hatfield .
Commissioner Dimas , I want to thank you .
I do not know whether this will be the last opportunity on the floor of the House to thank you for the work you have done as Commissioner over the last few years , but the Commission has really done a very good job in putting Europe in the lead , and your work has to be commended to this House .
We will see you in Copenhagen .
We might see you here in January , but I just wanted to put that on the record .
Finally , I hope that this House will vote for a good resolution on climate change , and I hope we will reject the amendments put down by Members of the House on the opposite side who seem to want to water down our commitments .
They want to reduce our targets and they want to offset more of our emissions .
If we are serious about climate change , if we want a good deal , we have to vote those amendments down .
Mr President , I welcome the positive and determined stance being taken by the Swedish Presidency , and particularly the Minister 's determination that the agreement in Copenhagen should be upgradable and include monitoring mechanisms so that it can be adjusted in the light of new scientific research .
The EU climate package passed in December 2008 was important in showing the seriousness of our commitment to climate change , and what has been agreed in recent months under the Swedish Presidency has also been important - particularly the recast Energy Performance of Buildings Directive , which will slash the carbon footprint of both new and renovated buildings .
However , there is one glaring gap in Europe 's plans , and that is investment .
It is a startling fact that the US , despite not having passed legislation , has committed more than USD 100 billion to clean-energy spending and China has pledged USD 200 billion in its economic stimulus plan , whereas the EU commitment is little more than USD 50 billion .
We should bear that in mind and not be too self-congratulatory in the run-up to Copenhagen .
( DE ) Madam President , I have a specific question for Commissioner Dimas .
If my information is correct , it is as follows .
If we , in the European Union , implement the targets that we have set ourselves - 20 % renewable energy sources by 2020 and a 20 % increase in energy efficiency by 2020 - then the EU 's energy models show that this alone will achieve a CO2 reduction of 18 to 21 % , based on the continued use of coal and gas-fired power stations .
On that basis , I do not understand why we are spending so much time discussing reaching a 30 % target since , by implementing efficiency measures , renewable energy sources and also the emissions trading scheme and a little bit of carbon offsetting , we can easily achieve 30 or 35 % .
I would be very grateful , Mr Dimas , if you , as a staunch conservative , could finally clear up this mess of Messrs Seeber and Florenz and others , who are once again bowing down before the old industries .


( PL ) Madam President , I would like to appeal for a sense of proportion .
Despite what we have heard here , these are not the most important negotiations in the history of mankind , and in fact , the future of mankind does not depend on these negotiations as some of our fellow Members are saying .
The decisions on specific limits in the climate package were not made in a precise and detailed way .
One can only express regret that it has already been settled that , in fact , the effects of this package , the financial effects , will principally concern the poor countries , the new countries of the EU .
The decision to make financing in this matter dependent , not on income per resident , but on the pollution limit , is a decision which hits the economies of the new countries of the EU , including my country , Poland .
( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a consistent approach to the problem of climate change , which goes beyond simply setting emission reduction targets , requires a realistic explanation of the means by which they can be achieved .
We believe that it is significant and revealing that the majority of the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety have rejected the inclusion of amendments in the draft resolution on Copenhagen which advocate - and I quote - the diversification of the instruments used to achieve emission reduction targets , avoiding being dependent on market-based instruments , and the need to carry out an evaluation of the effectiveness of these market-based instruments , along with their social and environmental effects .
The importance that the European Union attaches to market solutions is indicative of a fundamentally political and ideological choice .
The purpose of this is to construct a scheme to create billions , fantasy financial assets at the service of a system that appears to have learnt nothing from the crisis in which it is currently embroiled .
The experience of implementing the European Union Emission Trading Scheme has completely discredited the value of regulation through the market and clearly demonstrated the ineffectiveness and perversity of its instruments .
( FI ) Madam President , we should be protecting employees , small entrepreneurs and industry .
Environmental action is only possible in a healthy economy .
Only if the economy is healthy can we invest in the environment .
Things will not go well with the present target percentages .
The current trade in percentages , although I say so myself as a Catholic , is the modern-day equivalent of selling indulgences , and that is not a good thing .
We must introduce a system of specific emissions , as with cars , allowing us to measure what has happened and drawing the appropriate conclusions .
Why is the left not standing up for the workers , not just in Finland but in Europe generally ?
Support for the left is melting away faster than the icebergs .
There are other options : duties can be imposed on products that exceed specific emissions .
If we establish a system where environmental dumping originating in the developing and less industrialised countries is not possible , we can protect jobs and superior products , and we will be able to continue to do this in the future too .
( SL ) I am an optimist and I agree with Swedish Minister Carlgren who said that we must succeed .
Let me also add that , in order to succeed , we must also act seriously and pursue our objectives in a way that is clear and transparent .
The first point I would like to make is that cutting greenhouse gas emissions is both a European and a global objective .
Let us not assume the right to stand in judgment over technologies , offering support to some , while condemning others .
When it comes to technologies , we must remain impartial .
We must have our doors wide open to using low-carbon technologies and to developing new ones .
We must not allow our efforts to combat climate change to create a rivalry between individual low-carbon technologies .
If we want to be successful , we must seriously consider using all the technologies available .
Secondly , at the COP15 , we , representatives of the European Union , have to send a clear message : that there needs to be more money for third countries to meet their commitments , and that sustainable development requires package solutions .
However , how do we explain to our taxpayers that we have undertaken to finance the sustainable development of third countries without requiring from them any commitment whatsoever that would reassure us that they are using these funds for their intended purpose .
We need commitments and we need supervision .
Thirdly , at one of our debates in November , I alerted this House to the fact that we must send a message to President Obama to the effect that we wanted him to attend the COP15 .
This morning , I heard the news that Mr Obama has confirmed his attendance in Copenhagen and that he would push for binding targets to be adopted for greenhouse gas emissions .
To me , this seems to be proof that our decision to persist with political pressure was the right one .
In conclusion , I wish to send out a clear message .
We have to act and we have to do so immediately .
We want a legally binding agreement and we want other countries to behave responsibly .
( NL ) I should like to discuss the transport aspect .
I believe that , along with the energy issue , transport is actually the toughest of the climate-change challenges .
It is tough because it necessitates a reconsideration of the logistical organisation of our trading system and of the way we move and travel around .
Of course , we shall have to take a combination of measures if we are to meet the targets .
These include continuing to invest in research and development , imposing stricter technical standards , laying down and disseminating the best standards , implementing the internalisation of external costs so as to foster efficiency in the system and establish a level playing field between the various modes of transport , and also , of course , setting enforceable , ambitious targets at global level .
This is particularly important in the case of the aviation sector and maritime transport , where there is still a great deal of progress to be made in the field of sustainability .
In this regard , I must say that the targets drawn up by the Council - a 10 % reduction by 2020 for aviation and a 20 % reduction for maritime transport - actually lack sufficient ambition .
I think that we can go even further in this regard .
On the other hand , I note that the resolution refers to the matter of selling half of the emission allowances by auction .
That is inconsistent with what we ourselves proposed two years ago , when we had 15 % , and so I would focus on an ambitious agreement .
Let us aim for this .
( FR ) Madam President , we fully understand the situation , the tone has been set , I believe , and Minister Carlgren has even criticised the prevailing pessimism .
The countdown has really begun to save the Copenhagen Summit and to ensure that the main polluting countries of the planet sign an ambitious agreement and make a commitment to future generations .
An agreement is a good thing .
Achieving success , of course , is even better .
We know that this success necessarily hinges on the support of the industrialised countries - primarily of China and the United States - for what will be the future Copenhagen Protocol , and on the equally necessary support of the developing countries .
In this regard , Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has done its job by proposing EUR 30 billion of annual direct aid until 2020 to help those countries in their transition to a lower carbon economy .
This leads me to mention what I consider to be a flaw in our resolution , namely the lack of consideration given to the impact of climate change on people 's health .
It has a crucial impact if we listen to the appeals and the warnings of the WHO .
I therefore call on all of you to endorse the two amendments on this subject that I have inserted in our resolution .
Madam President , there is a new film on climate change called The Age of Stupid .
It is set in 2055 and focuses on a lone survivor of climate catastrophe .
I am haunted by some words from that film , where the actor , looking back to 2009 - looking back to now - says ' Why , knowing what they knew then , didn 't they act when there was still time ? '
In other words , why have we failed to galvanise sufficient political will ?
Partly it is because we do not talk enough about the benefits of shifting to a post-carbon world - the millions of jobs in green energy , the better-insulated homes , the improved public transport .
That is the message the EU must champion .
Yet even the most ambitious target the EU is currently proposing - a 30 % cut by 2020 - will give us only a 50 / 50 chance of avoiding the worst of climate change .
If you were told that a plane that you were about to get on had a 50 / 50 chance of crashing , you probably would not get on .
And yet the stakes we are playing for in Copenhagen are a lot higher than that .
So my message to you is : please , be more ambitious .
Do not let the epitaph for Copenhagen be that this was the Age of Stupid .
( PL ) Madam President , once again in a matter which is very important for the European Union , we are constantly hearing the magic word ' success ' .
The Presidency wants to achieve success , and it wants this above all else .
Meanwhile , the press in Europe is full of information saying that the Copenhagen Summit will not be a success .
Let us consider why it will not be a success .
It is because governments have a feeling that , if everything was said clearly , and if the citizens of EU Member States knew the consequences , if they knew the reasons why we want to make such important decisions , the uncertainty of those reasons and the uncertainty of the consequences of our actions , they would be opposed to it all .
I want to say just one thing , and it is the most important thing - the European Union is responsible , the EU Member States are responsible for what happens in the world , but they are responsible first and foremost for their own nations , states and citizens , the people who set their hope on what we do , the people who also hope that things will develop well for them in the future .
We must take this into account .
When we want to take responsibility for matters on a global scale , and I am not going into details here , then that responsibility must affect everyone equally , some in terms of reduction , others in terms of protection of the environment , and yet others in terms of something else - this is what we need today .
Madam President , in my English constituency this week , it was discovered that scientists from the University of East Anglia were allegedly manipulating data to try and prove man-made global warming .
What a giveaway that was !
It is clear now that the scientific consensus on man-made global warming is fast eroding : 30 000 sceptical scientists in the Manhattan Declaration ; 600 scientists in a US Senate report ; even German scientists this year writing to Chancellor Angela Merkel .
Meanwhile , the author of the key UN report on this , Sir Nicholas Stern , urges us to become vegetarian to stop cows farting .
Maybe it is not just certain cows that have gone mad .
I am on the Committee on International Trade .
I am deeply concerned with the WTO talks starting this week .
I worry about a drift towards green tariffs justified on the basis of such spurious claims .
These new tariffs are just barriers to trade , they punish the poor and have no justification whatsoever .
This is just enviro-imperialism .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the climate debates , we have seen a variety of views here in Parliament on the causes and impact of climate change .
I do not wish to pursue this , but a number of my fellow Members who have made reference to this are right : there are an increasing number of new voices in the scientific community , and I would want us to debate these new voices with each other in a fair way .
My second point is that Parliament has adopted a clear position for the Copenhagen Summit .
There is a clear remit for what is to be achieved .
There is also a remit for everyone here in Parliament to look after the wellbeing of the people of the European Union , and to do so in every respect .
In these debates , we must ensure that we do not view one project as the only political project that is significant for us .
I therefore wish , sometimes , that , in our aims for Copenhagen , we would take care to refrain from indulging in conjuring or a numbers race - as another Member said - but instead look at what we can tangibly and effectively achieve .
What can we shrewdly achieve ?
What are the consequences , including for European industry ?
We need to also take that into account .
It is not the only criterion , but it must be a criterion , and for that reason I would like to see us try to reach agreements that are really as tangible as possible .
That also requires being fair and the participation of the other industrialised nations so that this is not just a European project .
Another Member also pointed out that our contribution is 10 % .
The rest of the world , the emerging economies , the developing countries , must pay their share .
If we do not obtain any precise stipulations in this regard in Copenhagen , I would rather that we obtain a political consensus and assign mandates in order to reach specific agreements in the following months .
We should not take refuge in whatever formal compromise can be scrambled to in Copenhagen and kid ourselves that that would be a result that could lead automatically to 30 % cuts .
Realism and negotiating on specifics , then , are what is needed - then we will probably make progress .
( ES ) Madam President , combating climate change also requires a radical change in the production and consumption of energy .
We need a new model that balances these three needs : security , sustainability and competitiveness .
With this objective in mind , we are working on a common response .
2007 was a decisive year , because we set out our precise objectives .
A decision was taken to prevent the temperature from rising to a point of no return , but it was taken in the knowledge that failure to act would create other costs for the global economy , while investing in efficiency and renewable energy sources could be profitable .
In order to convince citizens and the market of our strong desire to achieve these objectives , we needed a sound , stable legislative framework to provide legal certainty for investment , which is the reason for the six legislative initiatives of the green package .
The Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has made a significant contribution .
I would like to highlight the agreement regarding the renewables directive and the recent agreements regarding two very important directives : the Directive on the energy performance of buildings and the Energy Labelling Directive .
These are measures that involve changes , but they are also a genuine , decisive stimulus for economic growth through job creation .
They represent savings of EUR 50 billion on imports of oil and gas , a million more jobs in the renewables sector and the same number in energy efficiency by 2020 .
The eco-industry now represents more than three million jobs , and environmental technologies are a growing part of a sector with a turnover of more than EUR 200 billion per year .
We have done a great deal in Europe .
It is not enough .
We need action on a global scale .
The socialists in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy therefore want the international negotiations to get back on the path of understanding , so that a genuine global agreement can be reached in Copenhagen .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , European climate policy should leave its reverie behind and take note of the international realities .
First of all , Kyoto was a failure .
It was very symbolic , but delivered no reductions in emissions .
Secondly , on the eve of Copenhagen , it is clear that important states in the world are not prepared to accept binding targets for reductions .
Thirdly , politics must take note of a debate emerging in science .
The same scientists who signed the conclusions of the IPCC panel two years ago today talk of natural influences on the climate - something that the IPCC categorically ruled out two years ago .
We should already know how sure we can be of what influences climate change when we make political decisions .
I therefore call for a change of strategy .
First of all , we need to adapt to inevitable changes to the climate , while we should also move beyond all the ideological discussions about CO2 and look for international allies in order to accelerate research into new energy sources and clean technologies .
( EL ) Madam President , we are at a crucial turning point for the planet .
The scientific community , via the IPCC , is calling on the European Union and the Member States to commit to a 40 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 compared with 1990 values .
Current commitments by the European Union are just 50 % of what IPCC reports are calling for as the absolute minimum commitment .
The IPCC is to climate change what the International Monetary Fund is to the economy .
My question is : would the Commission ever be able to deviate by 50 % from objectives recommended by the International Monetary Fund as absolute minima ?
Moreover , the European Union is insisting on an increase in the target for reducing emissions to 30 % in 2020 , provided that other developed countries commit to comparable reductions in emissions .
Given the current situation , which , what type and what size of commitments and by precisely which countries are needed in order to activate the above offer , precisely what climate policies will be revised in such an eventuality and exactly what preparations have been made for this ?
( PL ) Debates , discussions and negotiations on an international climate agreement in Copenhagen have been going on without a break for months .
In the clamour of information , where some countries are bidding and competing with each other in declaring ever more ambitious goals , others are announcing grand expectations , and yet others have an entirely passive attitude , and it is easy to lose sight of the main purpose of what is , quite simply , a historical agreement .
For we are talking about combating climate change - change which could lead to a true ecological disaster .
We are talking about the common future of the planet - the future of all of us .
This is why educational work is also so important .
I have the impression that the opinions of European citizens are increasingly diverging from those of the political elite .
There is a danger , here , that proposals which are put forward in the Copenhagen forum may be treated simply as a kind of divine intervention or a fabrication of the political elite .
We need to work at educating the citizens , and the European Commission should be responsible for this .
Combating climate change must not be treated as a whim of wealthy countries which want to force their point of view on others .
I think that in this matter , the Commission and the Representations must maintain a permanent policy of information and education .
Also needed is a strong policy supporting the search for effective technologies to capture the carbon dioxide produced from coal used as an energy source .
This technology should be given the same political status as other renewable energy sources .
This should be a priority in the work of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , which we established recently in Budapest .
The last thing - the costs of establishing a special fund to support the fight against climate change , should be spread equally across the Member States depending on the level of their wealth .
( PT ) Madam President , only a few days before Copenhagen , it appears more difficult than ever to come up with a legally binding agreement .
We will have what someone has already called a two-way agreement , but this does not mean that we can afford to be complacent .
The European Union must continue to lead the negotiations and apply pressure to the other parties .
Copenhagen should give rise to more than a mere declaration of intent .
At the very least , Copenhagen should result in binding political commitments and a schedule that will allow the adoption of a post-Kyoto agreement in June 2010 in Bonn .
The US , Japan , the BRIC countries and many others must take on commitments which are comparable to those of the European Union , since the sole efforts of the EU cannot come close to achieving the objective of limiting the temperature increase to 2 ° C.
Funding for the adaptation of developing countries must not be allowed to jeopardise the Millennium Development Goals , particularly in African countries , which are most affected by climate change .
Copenhagen should also help to change the global energy paradigm by supporting renewable energy and energy conservation .
This is the way of the future , not only for combating climate change , but also for creating jobs .
( BG ) Two years ago , Europe took the initiative to lead the battle against climate change .
There is a legislative framework in place at European level and the initiatives for developing the relevant technological platform need to be promoted , which will facilitate the transformation towards a low-carbon economy .
European leaders have great ambitions for the negotiations in Copenhagen .
Even though the conditions for a definitive agreement are not yet in place , it is important that the foundations are laid for a global consensus on a successful agreement .
Following my inclusion in the parliamentary delegation which travelled to Washington in connection with the negotiations in Copenhagen , I learnt that the economic effectiveness of the measures envisaged to combat climate change needs to be discussed .
As soon as all the participants in the negotiations are convinced that the measures for combating climate change will have a beneficial economic effect and that their economies will not be vulnerable , a global strategy will be reached .
( FR ) Madam President , everyone is hoping and praying today for an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen , but it has to be said that the ambitions of the Copenhagen Summit have , in fact , been watered down over the last few weeks , due in particular to the reservations of the United States and China .
In order to prevent the planet 's temperature from rising by more than 2 degrees at the end of the century , all of the countries really must be willing to accept the same obligations , the same binding obligations .
However , we are seeing something of a figures race , a finance race , in our debates .
What I am asking for is for Europe not to be naive but to be a realistic and firm negotiator with those of its partners that have not made significant efforts to reduce their emissions .
It would be unacceptable for the efforts of the most ambitious countries to be compromised by carbon leakage resulting quite simply from the non-existent or insufficient action of some .
Europe must not be naive with regard to China and India .
True , Brazil and Korea have already decided to commit themselves , but while Europe wants to set an example , it cannot do so at any cost , and especially not at the cost of its deindustrialisation .
The negotiations must act as an opportunity to boost the development of new technologies , to enable significant funds to be invested in research and development .
Indeed , there is a risk of European knowledge being lost forever to countries benefiting from technology transfer .
Therefore , in Copenhagen , it is imperative that we create the conditions for a lasting exchange among countries , on the basis of mutual interests , while protecting the investments made in research and development by European companies .
Success will consist in promoting the dissemination of technologies in developing countries , in return for the recognition of intellectual property rights and the opening up of their markets to these technologies .
We have , after all , an incredible opportunity in Europe , which is , at the same time as combating climate change , to launch a genuine technological programme for encouraging innovation and , hence , for creating new jobs .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , allow me to address a few major points relating to our resolution , but also to the debate that we are going to have in the next few weeks in Copenhagen .
Firstly , in relation to the first point : combating the increase in temperature .
Earlier I heard a number of my fellow Members understate the extent of this global warming .
It must be remembered , however , that many hundreds of millions of human beings in the world are going to become what one might call climate change casualties as a result of this increase .
Copenhagen must halt this temperature increase .
Secondly , we must equip ourselves with a binding agreement that states that greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced by 30 % by 2020 , and by 80 % by 2050 .
We must also ensure that we guarantee some kind of clarity in terms of financing .
In our resolution , it is proposed that the poorest countries be granted EUR 300 billion for the next 20 years .
We need to go further than that .
EUR 500 billion has also been quoted as a figure and , in this case too , we , the European Union , must set an example .
Also , we must introduce a universal carbon tax with this possibility of a tax on financial transactions .
To conclude , I am very surprised by the doublespeak of my fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) regarding what I have heard said in my country , France , by the President of the Republic , and again this morning , by Minister Borloo .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for all the noble objectives for the Copenhagen conference - when it comes to climate protection , we must not forget , of course , that our Europe , its companies and businesses , are in competition every day with the major economic and trading locations of North America and South-East Asia .
This relates just as much to industrial production and energy generation , but also , to a special extent , to transport .
Many transport firms are also global players .
If they are to be competitive , all those involved in this area must have the same opportunities .
What that means is that climate protection does cost money .
We , in Europe , really are the pioneers when it comes to cutting greenhouse gases in the transport sector .
I would simply remind you all on this point that we , in this House , together agreed that we were going to undertake to include aviation , in particular , but also maritime transport , in emissions trading .
Rail transport has been mentioned .
Rail transport , via the environmental levy on energy generation , has certainly been included in CO2 reduction measures , while road transport is included via various potential forms of road charging .
We also have to fulfil European Union technical requirements in relation to catalytic converters through the tightened-up Euro standards Euro 4 and Euro 5 .
If we want to achieve something in maritime transport and aviation , however , it is necessary to re-intensify our negotiations with the 20 Annex I states .
What has taken place in aviation with ICAO has so far failed to produce any results .
We must push on with our activities in this regard .
It will be very important that this is discussed at the Copenhagen conference and the same applies to maritime transport which , of course , is also - when you look at the specific energy consumption per tonne and kilometre - very environmentally friendly .
In so doing , it is necessary , however , for us to also reach agreement with the IMO on joint concepts .

( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and its Chairman , Mr Leinen , on the work that they have done in order for us to have a resolution such as this , which we must emphatically adopt .
We cannot content ourselves with saying that sectoral agreements are enough , because talking about what could be called a remnant agreement is admitting partial failure .
We need to adopt this resolution , which has three noble aspirations .
The first is more obvious : avoiding climate change , with tangible proposals to reduce emissions and a commitment to funding , which aspires to a binding agreement , not a remnant agreement .
There are also two underlying aspirations : the first is to start working towards a common energy policy sooner rather than later , just as , in the past , we equipped ourselves with a common agricultural policy because we needed it .
There is also , of course , the aspiration to regain the citizens ' confidence in politics and politicians , which is somewhat lacking in Europe .
Success at the summit will , therefore , amount to success regarding the three aspirations .
Consequently , I urge the President-in-Office of the Council to maintain his optimism and to apply pressure and negotiate as much as he can to draw the others towards this success .
I do not know whether the leaders of this multipolar world want to be judged by history for not being capable of achieving a binding agreement , but I do not think that I , as an MEP , along with all the representatives of the people , should be judged by History for not being capable of taking forward in Copenhagen the binding commitment we have with humanity to prevent climate change .
( FR ) Madam President , firstly I should like to commend the Swedish Presidency 's efforts to reach an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen , despite the very strong wind of pessimism prevailing over these forthcoming negotiations .
Personally speaking , I do not believe that it is realistic to admit at this stage that the Copenhagen Summit is destined to fail or that it will not result in a conclusive agreement to be ratified by all the parties .
Let us not give in too quickly to pessimism .
I urge us , at this stage , not to level down our ambitions in terms of either targets or deadlines .
We must continue to believe in a comprehensive , ambitious and binding global political agreement , paving the way for the conclusion of a legal treaty as soon as possible .
It really is too soon to mention the deadline of the COP16 in December 2010 .
We must now turn our rhetoric into genuine political will .
We need to clarify our commitment in financial terms and in terms of aid granted to developing countries , in particular , through technology transfer .
At this stage , a full , collective commitment by the European Union is essential .
Moreover I note , on paper , the recent but exemplary boost given to the negotiations by Brazil , South Korea , Indonesia and Norway , in particular , which have quantified their ambitions to reduce their pollutant emissions .
While one can understand the flexibility requested by the United States , which is only just beginning to take the climate issue into account , we shall nonetheless have to obtain binding and ambitious quantified commitments in the short , medium and long term from major polluters such as the United States and China .
Without those commitments , we are heading for a climatic , political and moral disaster .


( IT ) Madam President , Mr Carlgren , Mr Dimas , ladies and gentlemen , this morning I would like to talk about an 84-year-old missionary , Father Ettore Turrini , who has spent 59 years in the north-west of the Amazon .
He has always fought to protect the indigenous people and their forest from anyone seeking to destroy them in the name of short-term interests .
In travelling round the forest , Father Ettore has had seven air accidents , but he has carried on and has obtained tens of thousands of signatures through his activities , which he will submit to President Lula , to many ministers and to the Italian President , Mr Napolitano .
He has been indefatigable .
We met last Sunday and I told him that I fully shared his position , but that perhaps the world is coming to its senses and reaching the conclusion that these forests are essential as the world 's lung , for the local climate and also for carbon capture and storage .
I told him that in Copenhagen , we will also find resources to compensate those countries that keep the forests intact .
I told him that we are setting up monitoring instruments - GPS and INSPIRE - to measure how governments behave and that by 2030 , we will put a stop to deforestation .
In Copenhagen , we will be able to do all this and I will participate in the summit on behalf of Father Turrini as well .
( FR ) Madam President , we are all aware - and we have all said as much - of the importance of the Copenhagen negotiations but , while we all hope for an agreement , we cannot accept one at any price .
If the conditions for an ambitious agreement are not met , I sincerely hope that the European Union is capable of saying ' No ' and refuses to sign a cut-price agreement .
The European populations that we represent in this House expect an agreement , an agreement that will enable all of the climatic disturbances that we observe around us every day to be combated effectively .
Europeans will not be satisfied with publicity stunts , with non-quantified declarations of intent , with non-binding targets that can be disregarded once the media spotlight is off them .
The States will have to commit themselves in Copenhagen !
The European Union , as the only continent that has seen its CO2 emissions fall since 1990 , and as the only continent that has made precise , binding and ambitious commitments for the future , cannot assume the burden of the task on its own .
That is why , if other industrialised and emerging countries do not wish to assume their share of the responsibility , they will have to accept the full consequences of this in the form of the introduction of a tax at our borders to protect our industry from the competition of those who decide not to be part of a global agreement .
We Europeans ask for a little more each day from our manufacturers .
As evidence of this , I would cite the climate change package that was signed under the French Presidency .
I would also cite the national initiatives that , like the carbon tax , to which Mr Pargneaux paid tribute just now - and I am glad that he did so - encourage the introduction of environmental taxation .
A sector such as the transport sector , which is one of the biggest emitters of CO2 - even if some modes of transport , such as aeroplanes , emit fewer greenhouse gases - is contributing more and more to the fight against climate change .
However , this is a sector that has suffered greatly from the after-effects of the crisis .
If , as I hope , maritime and air transport are included in the Copenhagen negotiations , let us make sure that what is demanded of European industries is demanded of the industries of the other industrialised countries too .
In Copenhagen , the eyes of the international public will be glued on its ruling class .
We say to it today : ' Do not disappoint us ' .
( SV ) Madam President , Mr Carlgren warned us that we are surrounded by a lot of pessimists .
That is true and I am pleased that Mr Carlgren is not one of them .
However , the Swedish Prime Minister , who is presiding over the Council , and the Danish Prime Minister , who is hosting the Copenhagen Summit , are , unfortunately , among these pessimists .
Both of these conservative leaders have , for short-term party-political reasons , played down expectations ahead of Copenhagen , thereby making it more difficult to attain a good agreement .
This is embarrassing and utterly irresponsible , as there will never be a better opportunity , as Mr Carlgren also said .
It is in Copenhagen that three things in particular need to be clearly specified and turned into legally binding commitments :
1 .
The amount by which each developed country intends to limit its emissions by 2020 .
According to scientific estimates , the reductions should be close to 40 % , something that is not only achievable , but that will also result in us strengthening our competitiveness and creating more green jobs .
2 .
What developing countries must do to limit their emissions , and this applies to China and India in particular .
3 .
How much short-term financing is to be provided to the developing countries by the rich nations and in what form .
This financing must be in addition to the resources that the rich nations have already promised for fighting poverty .
In this regard , it is important that the Swedish Presidency is also prepared to change its view and to fight to prevent those hardest hit by climate change from also being affected even more by hunger .

( FI ) Madam President , last week some information was leaked : the Commission had begun an initiative , on the quiet and in collaboration with some Member States , to move towards a 30 % cut in emissions right away .
The argument is that the price of carbon dioxide could be kept reasonable - which is to say at a level that would promote measures to reduce emissions - if the cut were 30 % .
The big electricity producers , who have been lobbying hard , are delighted with the plan , which would increase the profits of listed energy companies and would , at the same time , make European industry vulnerable to carbon leakage .
I would , however , like to remind the Commission that , under the Emissions Trading Directive , the EU 's target of 20 % for cuts in emissions will only change to 30 % if other industrialised countries make ' comparable reduction efforts ' , and if the advanced developing countries have some obligations .
Achieving a political agreement at Copenhagen will still not be enough .
Nevertheless , a legally binding agreement will not be enough either before all the countries ratify it .
Only after ratification will the EU be able to say whether the condition it imposed regarding comparable reduction efforts has been implemented .
Changing political consensus into a binding agreement is no mean feat , technically speaking .
A legal agreement on global climate policy would be precisely worded and deal with hundreds of issues , with headings such as Quantitative Targets for Emission Cuts in the Industrialised Countries for 2020 and Beyond , Specific Emission Targets for the Developing Countries for 2020 and Beyond , Financial Aid for the Developing Countries from the Industrialised Countries , Technology Development and Transfer , and Sinks and their Accounting Rules .
There are dozens of single issues in connection with all these areas , which the countries will need to reach mutual agreement on .
The main consideration , however , is that it will only be through a synchronous cut in emissions that we can guarantee an overall reduction , instead of simply moving them about from one place to another , doing more to increase total emissions .
That is why the environmentally responsible policy is making reductions in the EU conditional on the efforts of others .
Otherwise , Mr Verheugen 's ominous forecast that we will only be exporting pollution and importing unemployment might come true .
( Applause )
( PT ) Madam President , Mr Carlgren , Commissioner , it is crucial that Copenhagen results in a binding political agreement .
This agreement must contain operational elements that can be implemented immediately and a schedule which will allow the drawing up of a legally binding agreement during the course of 2010 .
The agreement must involve all countries that signed the Convention , and it is vital that any commitments , whether in terms of reducing emissions or in terms of funding , are clearly set out .
While , on the one hand , industrialised countries should lead the way in reducing greenhouse gas emissions , economically more advanced developing countries also have a role to play , contributing in accordance with their responsibilities and respective abilities .
Comparable efforts should be required of industrialised countries and emerging countries with more advanced economies .
Only then will it be possible to reduce distortions in international competitiveness .
The new agreement should facilitate the creation of low-carbon plans on a national level , supported by legislation .
For their part , commitments undertaken in national plans should be made known to the international community , thus guaranteeing greater transparency over all processes .
These plans should be obligatory for all the countries involved , with the exception of the least developed .
Yet if this strategy is to lead to a real third industrial revolution , one based on low carbon , we need to adopt a holistic approach which will cover all the sectors responsible for emissions .
It is also crucial that we define the structure of the funding so that this will prove sustainable in the medium and long term .
The funding must come from the private sector , the carbon market and the public sector of industrialised countries , but also from economically more advanced developing countries .
As for the allocation of the funding , priority must be given to training and adaptation , with particular focus on the least developed countries .
To sum up , I would like to acknowledge the excellent work carried out by Commissioner Dimas in heading this dossier .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a few weeks , I will have the honour of forming part of the official delegation that this Parliament is to send to Copenhagen to the United Nations conference on climate change .
Following the fundamental stages of Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and Kyoto in 1997 , on 7 December work will start at a new global climate conference that could prove to be historic in scope .
Madam President , I said ' could ' because in the final days of the APEC Summit , the United States and China seemed to have decided to change the scope of the Copenhagen meeting .
However , there is still time before the summit , and it is in the interests of all those involved to arrive there with specific objectives and programmes , so that the great expectations of making further progress in combating climate change are not disappointed .
The polluter pays principle must apply to all .
Europe has always taken a leading role and the climate-energy package in the previous legislature is a clear example of this .
We have already said it on many occasions : the United States , China , India , Russia and Brazil must also assume their responsibilities , as countries that are major polluters .
If this does not happen , we will have imposed needless costs on our European businesses and , above all , without contributions by these countries , Copenhagen too risks being a lost opportunity .
To conclude , the fight against climate change is also a necessary prerequisite in achieving - or perhaps I should say in bringing closer - the Millennium Development Goals .
We must combat desertification , climate upheaval and violent natural phenomena if we wish to halve extreme poverty , combat epidemics and ensure that everyone has access to water , which is an essential requirement .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Copenhagen Summit is an historic opportunity to change the fate of the planet .
We must reach decisions that are even more binding than those taken in Kyoto .
Therefore , we must call on our leaders to create an international organisation like the WTO , which will be in charge of regulating climate change and environmental issues ; to create a climate change adjustment fund - in addition , of course , to official development assistance ; and to introduce a carbon tax for sea and air travel , which must also be introduced for financial transactions .
We can clearly see the urgent need for international regulation of the environment , just like that of the financial markets and of the internet .
We have an opportunity to take this historic step with the environment .
Let us do so by reflecting our greatest human inspirations , otherwise we will seem like decision-makers who have no grasp of the reality of matters .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , with the Copenhagen Summit less than two weeks away , concerns are growing as to the success of the negotiations on climate change .
Some , moreover , are already saying that the summit will be a failure .
Major international powers are still reluctant to demonstrate the full ambition that the climate change emergency requires of us .
By adopting , tomorrow , the motion for a resolution on the European Union 's strategy before the Copenhagen Summit , we MEPs must show that we are , firstly , totally determined , and that the summit must culminate in an agreement - one which is precise , certainly , but which is , above all , binding .
Moreover , it must not be possible to undermine or call into question the binding nature of this agreement that will be reached .
One cannot put off taking decisions forever , otherwise it will be too late , hence the need to create an international environmental organisation , which today seems not only necessary but urgent too , since its role , under the auspices of the UN , will be to oversee the application of the commitments made in Copenhagen .
Starting in Copenhagen , we must be able to expect more lucidity and more responsibility from the major powers of this world .
( HU ) The EU 's Member States in Central Europe wholeheartedly support the European Union 's climate policy objectives .
The simple reason is that without their contribution , the European Union could not achieve its climate policy objectives .
In fact , between 1990 and 2005 , these Member States restrained their industrial production to an exceptional extent .
This is why the new Member States feel that it is very important that they play a reasonable role in this regard in the future as well .
As a result of this , they have taken on extremely heavy economic and social responsibilities .
In the global emission reduction agreement , consideration must be given to the new Member States ' economic clout and GNA .
It is also very important that these Member States do not lose the tools for implementing their green investments and developing renewable energy sources .
( RO ) The European Commission and Member States financed a study published recently , which criticises the European Union 's climate policies for being limited to reducing industrial greenhouse gas emissions without attaching importance to the natural capacity for capturing carbon dioxide .
On the other hand , this study indicates that the intensive method of farming developed by the European Union bears a great deal of responsibility for climate change .
In actual fact , this study is an indictment of European agriculture .
In my view , if we want to talk about agriculture in this context , we should mention some other things as well .
For example , European agriculture has an outstanding record when it comes to its contribution to cutting greenhouse gas emissions , with a 20 % reduction in the 1990-2006 period .
Bearing in mind that the general average for this period was a mere 6 % , I believe that it is wrong for us to put agriculture in the dock two weeks before the Copenhagen conference .
( FR ) Madam President , I have heard a great deal said about industry in this debate , and I would not like Copenhagen to make the mistake of forgetting about agriculture .
Following on from the comments made by my fellow Member , Mr Niculescu , I would obviously like to confirm them by saying that agriculture should not be regarded as a constraint , but as a potential tool for combating global warming in the future .
This activity cannot be sidelined , it cannot even be ignored since - I should probably remind you - it occupies most of Europe 's territory and it has huge potential where the fight against global warming is concerned .
Agriculture must therefore be central to the debate in Copenhagen , and I hope that the members of the Council and of the Commission will not forget this and will be our spokesmen in Copenhagen , in December .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the protection of indigenous peoples plays a vital role in the fight against climate change .
When it comes to the environment , poverty and health , they are the first to suffer from climate change .
Above and beyond deforestation and the mining industry , they suffer from the false solutions proposed by industrialised countries .
Biofuels are not a clean alternative .
They damage the land of indigenous peoples , with the result that they have to relocate .
Similarly , when we promote clean technologies , the multinationals appropriate ancestral technologies so as to resell them at a high price to the same populations that invented them .
I regret the fact that no reference has been made to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in the resolution submitted today .
We should have also referred to biopiracy and the autonomous property right of indigenous peoples as being fundamental tools for combating climate change .
I will bring up these issues when we discuss future resolutions .
The forest issue is not just about carbon , but about people 's lives .
Lastly , to conclude , I should like to thank Mrs Dati for her determination , and if I have understood her correctly ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) The European Union has ample moral grounds for taking decisive action in order to achieve a reduction in emissions from the United States and China .
This is based on the fact that the European Union and its 27 Member States have fulfilled the commitments made in the Kyoto Protocol .
The former socialist countries made a significant contribution to this too , at great sacrifice .
The collapse of their heavy industry resulted in a significant reduction in carbon dioxide emissions , but we paid a social price for this .
It is therefore reasonable , when making international commitments and providing finances , to take this fact , that is , economic development , into account .
On the other hand , it must be possible - which would be reasonable - for quotas that have not been used up to be transferred to subsequent periods , if they could be used for environmental protection purposes .
( PL ) Madam President , the resolution on the EU strategy for the Copenhagen conference on climate change is a very important and ambitious document , but without a global agreement , the summit will end in failure .
We know that the United States is trying to establish details and the ultimate level of limits on emissions with international negotiators , but there are many indications that they will not manage to reach a final decision before the summit .
It is also being said that even if limits are negotiated , they may not be accepted by the US Congress .
The leading role of the European Union is very important , but I have the impression that it is only the EU which is being ambitious .
The question , therefore , arises as to what would happen if the US did not support a 30 % threshold , if it were established .
What mechanisms are we going to use to ensure that all parties meet the commitments they undertake ?
Will we not ultimately be left as a lone warrior , who will make an enormous effort at huge cost , but will not have any effect on climate change or limiting carbon dioxide emissions ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are preparing for the Copenhagen conference with a resolution showing our awareness that in order to tackle policies to combat climate change , it is necessary for all the geographical areas of the world to be involved .
Also , it is the responsibility of the industrialised countries to establish with developing countries not only targets to be reached , but also the resources to be used to reach them .
On this aspect , good work has been done in Parliament .
The resolution sets out specific instruments and it is important that we have quantified the actions .
The figure of EUR 30 billion proposed by us between now and 2020 can be viewed as an important figure , although it is a minimum , for supporting the initiatives of developing countries .
Yesterday Mr De Boer , the United Nations negotiator , asked for USD 10 billion between now and 2012 .
After the choices made by the United States and China , it falls to Europe to take on new responsibilities and lead the fight against climate change .
( GA ) Madam President , we had a very good debate this morning and there was much to be learned from all of the speakers .
There are just three points I want to make .
Firstly , if a binding agreement is not reached in Copenhagen , then this Parliament and the European Union should use its influence to name , shame and tame those countries responsible , so that sanctions can be imposed on them to bring them into line .
Secondly , there is a need for an educational programme for citizens , as many of them have the willingness to reduce their carbon footprint but may not have the know-how or the economic means .
Thirdly , funding has been mentioned time and time again here this morning .
The point about funding is simple .
It is not a question of ' can we afford to do it ? ' but ' can we afford not to do it ? '
Time is moving on and there will be no second chance .
This is the time it must be done .
Madam President , while our expectations of Copenhagen at this stage are being lowered , it is also true that our ambitions cannot be lowered .
As other colleagues have said , if we could accentuate the positives , both for economies and for citizens , in the climate change debate , there might be more traction - because there are positive sides to this debate .
While it may be that no binding agreement comes out of Copenhagen , I think there is no doubt that there is a momentum for change , and we have to make sure that this momentum is not lost .
On the issue of land use - agriculture and land use change - this is a key area of concern .
Obviously , agriculture is not only part of the problem but also a big part of the solution .
We have to link this debate with our concerns about global food security : the answer is to develop sustainable production systems which manage the climate and also provide us with food security .
This is a key part of our concern .
( DE ) Madam President , climate protection and sustainable development are subjects that - we are supposed to believe - affect us all .
Yet there can be no satisfactory progress without close collaboration , in particular , amongst the global players .
While the United States and China refuse to lay down common , binding greenhouse gas reduction targets , all that can be adopted in Copenhagen - as the UN 's chief climate official tellingly observed - are morally binding resolutions , in other words , toothless ones .
Let me say something about nuclear power .
Nuclear power is definitely not the solution to the problem .
The benefits are minimal , the costs enormous and the risks very high .
I therefore support a resolution that has been drawn up by the anti-nuclear power delegate of my home region of Upper Austria , which calls on the EU to introduce a levy on nuclear power .
This idea makes sense , because it would mean that trade in emissions certificates would not be weighted in favour of nuclear power .
( PL ) Madam President , in a few days , world leaders , including representatives of the European Parliament , will meet in Copenhagen to discuss the question of climate change .
Without doubt , a matter of great importance is the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , but equally important is the protection of European industry .
We must not allow a situation in which European companies go to the wall and industry is transferred to third countries which do not limit their CO2 emissions .
We should also remember to protect our technology and intellectual property , and so during the Copenhagen Summit , the European Union must play a leading role , but it must not set unrealistic goals for itself or for others .
The goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 30 % by the year 2020 in comparison with 1990 , without the support of the largest polluters , such as the USA , India and China , seems difficult to achieve .
This is also the case with the provisions in the draft resolution which aim to achieve an 80 % reduction in greenhouse gases by 2050 .
A 20 % reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases by 2020 will allow ( ... )
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Madam President , the debate here has been very interesting , and it seems that the European Parliament is very committed to support for the climate conference in Copenhagen .
The importance of agriculture has also been emphasised as a solution to the problem .
I myself would also like to stress how important forest policy and forests are , as forests are carbon sinks which absorb carbon dioxide .
It would appear that the United States of America is to bring good news along to Copenhagen , which is a very significant move .
Now we also need to start talking seriously about how the bill for preventing climate change is to be paid .
Here , the matter of income distribution is extremely important , because we cannot make the poor people in Europe pay the bill either .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to encourage the head of negotiations for Copenhagen to fight for a successful outcome .
The ambitious targets are good and , ultimately , the efforts that we are making today will also represent a contribution to tomorrow with a view to the consequences and the future damage in the form of migration , damage to coastal areas or also , perhaps , in the form of stable regions becoming more unstable as a result of climate change .
We should also set an example .
Yet if other States and , in particular , the really major States , do not pull in the same direction , we should only do so on a proportional basis .
With that in mind , I would point out that our businesses are , in the main , already suffering from quite a high burden .
There is one more point I would like to make , and that is that we are also fighting for the overall credibility of the EU , to provide an argument for the new generation that there is a need for the EU .
Madam President , I would genuinely like to thank Parliament for a long and intensive debate and also for the strong and broad commitment that has become apparent during the debate .
It has been said that the optimism that we are showing must be rooted in realism .
However , I would go further than that and say that it is , in fact , rooted in real experiences .
The EU has succeeded in reducing emissions .
We have reduced them by half of what we need to achieve , whatever happens , by 2020 and by a third if we aim for what we all hope will be the outcome of the Copenhagen agreement , which is to say , a 30 % reduction in emissions on the EU 's part .
This is due , in particular , to the fact that we have created common rules established by an internationally binding agreement - the Kyoto Protocol .
That is why we have been so strongly committed to ensuring that the Copenhagen process leads to this legally binding agreement .
It will not happen straight away in Copenhagen .
We will need to agree on all of the content of the agreement .
Then we will have the technical part , which includes transferring this to a legally binding text .
As far as the EU is concerned , we want this to happen within months of the Copenhagen conference .
I would also like to say that the financial crisis throughout the world certainly had nothing to do with too much being spent on saving the climate .
On the contrary , large green investments are also part of the economic changes , in other words , the move towards a ' greener ' economy , which will also lead countries , both rich and poor , out of the economic crisis .
The carbon dioxide markets in fact provide a way of creating sufficient room for investment .
They ensure that the polluter has to pay , that we set a ceiling on emissions and that the money that the polluter pays for emissions can also be transferred to developing countries to make green investments there .
That is sometimes called into question .
Some people wonder why we should invest in the clean development mechanism ( CDM ) , but that is nevertheless precisely what it is all about , namely that the polluter must pay for green investments in developing countries .
I think that is a good thing and it is important , but we must also reform these rules so that the environmental effects are even greater and clearer and so that we can be even more certain that this also reaches those who are poorest .
An agreement will also be needed in order to avoid carbon leakage .
The concern that there has been must therefore be transformed into even greater commitment to making the agreement a reality .
Finally , I think that it should be said loud and clear that if an agreement in Copenhagen is not sufficient to allow the EU to go up to 30 % , in other words , if we get such a watered-down result that the EU , for reasons of propriety , quite simply cannot go up to 30 % , then it will have been a failure .
Therefore , it should also be said loud and clear that there is something worse than no agreement and that is a poor agreement .
That is why the EU has set the bar so high .
That is why we are working so hard right now with regard to the content .
It is also because , when we talk about the two degree target , we are conscious of the fact that it is the highest level we need to achieve .
We know that we are , in fact , already seeing unacceptable results today .
Talk to the government of the Maldives , for example , that recently held its cabinet meeting under water to show the consequences that will be very nearly unavoidable in some parts of the world .
It would be cynical , then , not to take very forceful action .
The world has waited long enough .
It is time that we reached the necessary agreement in Copenhagen for the sake of the planet .
That is also why Parliament 's commitment and that of the whole of the EU is so important .
Madam President , this was a very interesting debate with some exceptional and constructive interventions .
Numerous views on various issues have been heard .
Very possibly certain people do not agree .
For example , I cannot understand why anyone would be opposed to clean , green , non-polluting industries based on new technologies which perform well .
And yet , I have heard even that today .
I cannot understand why anyone would prefer polluting , old-technology industries which , if they make a profit , do so because they do not pay the cost of pollution ; however , such profits will be short-term because these industries will not be competitive .
However , in a democracy and in a democratic parliament , all sorts of views are heard .
I should also like to comment on the World Environmental Organisation .
This organisation , on which I know that France , in particular , has made a great deal of effort , was in fact one of our ambitions and I hope that it will become a reality in coming years .
Without doubt , an organisation such as this is needed , so that there is an environmental organisation at international level which will promote environmental issues in the same way as economic or social issues and which will also provide better coordination of international environmental agreements .
This can be done relatively easily by upgrading the existing UN environmental programme and efforts are indeed being made in this direction .
I should also like to talk about the Kyoto Protocol , which was referred to several times .
I am happy about the performance of the European Union , because the 15 countries which have the collective objective of reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 8 % in the period 2008-2012 will achieve their target , but the EU of the 27 , with the 10 new countries which have a target and Cyprus and Malta which do not have , will also achieve the target .
Thus , the European Union has the moral argument that we keep our word and this has , without doubt , been achieved with the measures we have taken either at national level or at European level , which include the carbon dioxide emissions trading scheme .
I must stress , as Mr Carlgren said , that the European Union will achieve an even bigger reduction than we originally undertook to achieve on the basis of our forecasts , alongside economic growth .
I shall quote just one statistic : between 1990 and 2007 , the period for which we have statistics , economic growth was 44 % and the reduction in carbon dioxide emissions was 5 % for the 15 countries and 9 % for the 27 .
Of course , the forecasts are that , by 2012 , we shall have well exceeded the target , which will make it easier to achieve the target of a 30 % reduction by 2020 .
It should be noted that , in 2008 , we also had a significant reduction of 1.6 % in greenhouse gases in the European Union , alongside continuing economic growth , and it was only in the last part of 2008 that we were hit by the economic crisis , which also had an impact on the issue of greenhouse gases .
There are only a few days left and I beseech you to extend your efforts and bilateral contacts .
Following consultations by ECOFIN , the Environment Council and the European Council , we now have clear instructions to promote specific proposals for sources of financing , for operational structures and for the criteria which must be used in order to determine serious contributions by everyone .
Let us try , in the time we have left , to make use of these means in the most effective way possible .
There is broad consensus on the need for efforts to be made on a global scale in order to achieve the 2 ° Celsius target .
There is a general conviction that the basic foundations of a climate agreement for the period after 2012 will and must be laid in Copenhagen .
These foundations are mainly ambitious commitments to reduce emissions on the part of developed countries , including the United States , adequate measures by developed countries to reduce their increase in emissions and financial assistance to developing countries to moderate their emissions and adapt to climate change .
We are fast approaching the finishing line .
Let us make the best possible use of Copenhagen and crystallise the main commitments of all the countries in what will be an historic agreement .
What we shall need to achieve in Copenhagen is a substantial agreement on all elements of the Bali action plan .
All these elements need to be agreed in Copenhagen on a binding basis and immediately afterwards , in the next three to six months at the latest , the legalities will need to be processed , so that we have the binding agreement the European Union has been seeking and which will safeguard the target of limiting the greenhouse effect to 2 ° Celsius .
I consider it goes without saying that the members of the European Parliament will assist in efforts made over these days , especially at the crucial meetings in Copenhagen , and I should like to thank you for that and , once again , for all the efforts you have made .
I would remind the Members once again that the Blue Card system created by the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform does not apply to the Commission and the Council , but only to debates amongst Members of this House .
A motion for a resolution to close this debate has been tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
The debate is now closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
No one can ignore the extreme urgency of achieving an international post-Kyoto agreement to substantially reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
We must make sure that the earth does not heat up by more than two degrees .
If we are to achieve this , global emissions must be reduced by at least 30 % over the next 10 years .
The future of humanity hangs in the balance , and time is running out .
This is our one chance to alleviate the effects of climate change , which are already making themselves felt , and which may come to be the most severe problem of the 21st century .
As we who live on islands are those who contribute least to these changes , we are seriously concerned by this issue .
The European Union must continue to play a leading role and to speak with one voice on environmental issues .
It will have to use all its political clout to ensure that a firm agreement is reached by the major global powers at the forthcoming summit in Copenhagen .
Taking decisive steps and changing the global model of energy use - as Portugal and the Azores have already done - is vitally important , along with investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency .
in writing . - Over the last number of days , Ireland has been struck by severe flooding causing devastation for ordinary families , for small businesses and for farmers across the island .
Flooding from the River Barrow , the second longest river in Ireland , has meant much of Carlow has been under water for over four days !
The deluge in neighbouring Kilkenny is the worst in 60 years !
While flooding has always been a fact of life in Ireland , its increasing frequency and severity is another real reminder of the effects of climate change caused by the reckless abuse of our environment .
No matter what happens at the UN climate conference in less than two weeks in Copenhagen , extreme weather conditions , like the flooding in Ireland , will become more frequent .
We must build up our resilience to the effects of climate change .
Madam President , I call on the Irish Government to immediately apply for natural disaster aid relief under the European Solidarity Fund .
The Irish people only recently displayed their commitment to the EU by voting strongly for the Lisbon Treaty .
The EU needs to show its commitment to the Irish people , including the people of Carlow and Kilkenny , by fast-tracking these relief funds .
A political agreement in Copenhagen is crucial , but it needs to be global .
Putting European industry is a situation which is greatly disproportional to that of other developed economies would be a mistake for the economy and of little use in ecological terms .
European efforts should be directed towards seeking an agreement that places an obligation on all parties .
Europe must also find effective and reasonable solutions to the issue of funding .
This precludes the idea of a tax on international financial transactions ( Tobin tax ) to fund adaptation to climate change in developing countries .
That kind of support , necessary though it is , must not be given at the expense of the economy , trade and wealth creation .
The cost that such a tax would have for society in general ( increasing the tax burden , with consequences for all taxpayers and consumers ) and its impact on the financial market ( decreasing the necessary liquidity and flow of credit to businesses and households ) cannot be ignored .
In addition , the implementation of a global tax would lead to technical problems and complex administration .
In a crisis , the way out cannot involve yet more , new taxes which would be difficult to collect .
We need to forget this idea of a new tax .
The EU should continue to lead by example in combating climate change .
It is worth noting that the EU has surpassed the goals drawn up in Kyoto .
I believe that the Copenhagen agreement to reduce global carbon emissions should be binding .
In view of this , I have presented an amendment to Parliament 's resolution on this matter , requesting an international set of sanctions to be set out in the final text .
I believe that the agreement must be global , ambitious and with a clear timeline .
If we are not ambitious , we will end up with a useless instrument that will be even less effective than the Kyoto Protocol , which already provides for international sanctions .
We hope that there will be effective regulation and that the agreement will include a review clause so that it can be easily updated .
We must also send a clear signal to emerging industries in Asia .
China and India cannot be exempted of all responsibility when they produce a large percentage of global emissions while our industries are going to great lengths to reduce their emissions .
The US has a great responsibility for ensuring the success of this summit .
I hope that the President of the United States , Barack Obama , will show that he deserved the Nobel Peace Prize , because combating climate change will contribute to peace and happiness for all nations !
The climate is changing .
This has happened many times in the past .
There are over 6 billion of us , and what was once an extreme phenomenon and went unnoticed is , today , evident .
What is more - elaborately built infrastructures , of power generation and supply for example , often fail , and the effects of this include blackouts and breakdowns of IT networks .
There is also the problem of the desertification of vast areas of the Earth .
This is causing a humanitarian and economic catastrophe .
The first signs of this are the unrest in Somalia and predictions of future conflicts over water .
The wave of migration is growing .
Will these problems be resolved by restrictive limitations on CO2 emissions ?
No .
Firstly , no one has proved that it is CO2 emissions which are the cause of climate change .
Secondly , the effects of these limitations of CO2 emissions can be expected only at the end of the century .
Thirdly , restrictions in the area of CO2 emissions will only weaken humanity economically , and so will make the catastrophe worse .
As for emissions trading , it is an anti-social proposal , and its costs will be borne by ordinary people .
The profits , however , will be swept up by the financial world , including the world of speculation .
Therefore , for humanitarian and social reasons , the most important matter is not to combat the highly unlikely causes of climate change , but to combat the results of climate change .
It is not a matter of adapting to climate change , but of proactive action .
For example , in my country , security of water supply is already an important matter .
Global warming currently poses two major problems to humankind : on the one hand , the need to cut greenhouse gas emissions dramatically and , on the other hand , the need to adapt to the effects of climate change .
Bearing in mind that we are dealing with a global phenomenon and that the EU is responsible for only 10 % of the emissions produced by greenhouse gases worldwide , it is important that we reach a mandatory , global legal agreement in Copenhagen in two weeks ' time .
I welcome President Obama 's attendance in Copenhagen with a mandate including clear targets for reducing emissions , which the US is going to commit to .
In order to adapt to the effects of climate change , we need a funding mechanism , providing exact figures for the sums which need to be invested in green technologies which create new jobs , something which is so necessary during this crisis period .
The aim of the international climate change conference which begins in Copenhagen on 7 December is to establish a post-Kyoto agreement which will make the countries of the world reduce polluting emissions .
The EU has unilaterally committed to cut polluting emission levels by 20 % compared to 2005 levels , as well as to ensure that 20 % of the energy consumed comes from renewable sources .
However , these efforts must be coordinated with the efforts of all developed or developing countries .
Energy consumption and polluting emissions can be reduced quickly and cheaply by boosting energy efficiency on a global scale .
This is why the EU and Member States must increase energy efficiency , particularly in the buildings and transport sectors .
For the EU to be able to cut the polluting emissions produced by energy-intensive industries in line with the commitments made , the financial resources need to be provided for modernising European companies .
This is the only way we are going to maintain production and , by extension , jobs in the European Union .
During the EU 's budgetary review , we must ensure that sufficient financial resources are available for adopting measures to protect against climate change and adapt to its effects .
The development of an eco-efficient global economy will generate new investments , create new jobs and raise living standards .
1 .
Electronic communication networks and services (
2 .
Statistics on pesticides (
Just by way of explanation , this is the third in a triad of reports on the use of pesticides .
Earlier this year , in the last Parliament , we adopted a Regulation concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market .
At that time , we also adopted a Directive on sustainable use of pesticides , and the present Regulation concerning statistics on pesticides is the third component .
This proposal had to be dealt with by the Conciliation Committee , as something went wrong in the last Parliament .
A great many people were not there and , at second reading , too few people were present for us to obtain sufficient votes to conclude that second reading .
In this connection , I wanted to take the floor to thank the Swedish Presidency and , in particular , the Czech Presidency , as they could have totally ruined the second reading : they could have refused to go to conciliation .
Thanks to their good relations with Parliament , and also thanks to the chairmen of the political groups , who joined me in writing a letter to the Presidency immediately after the elections , it has proved possible to save this report and , via the conciliation procedure , to ensure that we can today vote on the text in the form agreed at second reading .
I should like to thank everyone involved .
3 .
Community financial aid in the field of trans-European networks ( codification ) (
4 .
Rules on the confidentiality of Europol information (
5 .
Implementing rules governing Europol 's relations with partners , including the exchange of personal data and classified information (
6 .
List of third States and organisations for Europol agreements (
7. on the draft Council Decision adopting the implementing rules for Europol analysis work files (
8 .
European Crime Prevention Network ( EUCPN ) (
9 .
Accreditation of forensic laboratory activities (
10 .
Macro-financial assistance to Georgia (
11 .
Macro-financial assistance to Armenia (
12 .
Macro-financial assistance to Serbia (
13 .
Macro-financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina (
14 .
Common system of value added tax (
15 .
Amendment of Annexes II and III to the OSPAR Convention (
16 .
EC-Denmark Agreement on the service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters (
17 .
EC-Denmark Agreement on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (
18 .
Recovery plan for Greenland halibut (
19 .
Accession of the European Community to the Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail ( COTIF ) (
20 .
Protocol on the Law Applicable to Maintenance Obligations (
21 .
Request for defence of the immunities and privileges of Tobias Pflüger (
22 .
Adaptation to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny - Part Five (
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that we shall not withdraw the proposal .
23 .
Use of information technology for customs purposes (
Mr President , I would like to ask you , from the side of the PPE Group , to vote separately on Amendment 27 .
It is about granting Eurojust and Europol full access to the database .
I would like to ask all colleagues not to vote in favour .
Voting time
Τhe next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) As one of the shadow rapporteurs for the telecommunications package , I would like to say , following the successful vote , that I am delighted that this important amendment to internal market regulations in the field of electronic communications in particular will bring another fair process in respect of disconnections from the internet .
I am gratified that the Council has finally agreed to our proposals .
Our guarantees will ensure that disconnections from the internet will apply to real criminals such as terrorists or distributors of child pornography and not to ordinary users .
( FI ) Mr President , in my opinion , this legislation is necessary , as we move towards a single market in electronic communications .
It has already been decided under the Treaty of Lisbon that this is the direction to take .
I am nevertheless very concerned about the importance of ensuring the basic rights of users of the internet and free access to it .
One worry is its illegal use and its abuse , and , as we know , one of the biggest issues and problems at the moment is piracy .
Piracy is increasing greatly all the time , and one of the main areas in which it operates is the internet .
I hope that in future , we can invest in ensuring that those who produce creative work are properly remunerated for it and that piracy does not endanger their livelihood , as is common at present on the internet when files are downloaded illegally .
This is the right step and direction to take , though in future we should pay special attention to the rights of creative artists and prevent piracy .
Mr President , see how stealthily , how silkily , by how many small steps , how insidiously and invidiously we have moved towards the establishment of a pan-European federal police force .
When Europol was first established in the early 1990s , it was presented as a clearing house - as a regional branch of Interpol , if you like .
Since then , bit by bit , it has been given executive and policing powers .
First these were portrayed as being narrowly restricted to the field of cross-border counter-terrorist activities .
That , of course , is how the FBI got started , and bit by bit it eventually extended its remit and agglomerated powers until it had become a federal pan-continental police force .
A similar process is now at work with Europol , which has gradually extended its remit to cover a whole series of crimes that are national in nature - but with the rather fascinating oversight that its personnel still have diplomatic immunity ; in other words , they cannot be held to account for abuse of police powers .
When did we ever vote for this ?
When did we ever agree to set up a pan-European system of criminal justice with its own arrest warrant , its own police force , its own prosecuting magistracy and its own pan-European public prosecutor ?
I think we ought to have the courtesy to ask our people , our voters , whether they approve .
Mr President , the best thing we could do for the Balkan and Caucasian republics is to admit them unconditionally into a customs union , to open our markets to their products .
Those are countries ideally placed to price themselves into the market .
They have educated and industrious workforces but they have relatively cheap costs and therefore competitive exports .
Instead of doing that , we are freezing out their produce in a number of key areas , and then to salve our consciences , we are giving them government to government financial assistance .
In doing so , we of course make them dependencies ; we make them satrapies .
It is not only the Russians who think of these countries as their ' near abroad ' .
This is a phrase that also seems to apply sometimes in Brussels .
We drag their politicians and their decision makers into a system of the massive redistribution of wealth and we thereby Europeanise them in advance because they are learning what we in this House know all too well , which is that the primary function of the European Union these days is to act as a massive device to take money away from taxpayers and give it to the people lucky enough to be working inside the system .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that we need an advanced information system for the civilian administration linking the customs and police authorities of the Member States .
We owe it to the citizens of the Union to combat more effectively imports of counterfeit and also hazardous products into our market from third countries .
In contrast to most Members , I believe that the Commission 's proposal will ensure greater protection for personal data and , at the same time , a more effective fight against organised crime .
I therefore did not vote for the 90 draft amendments of the committee or for the report as a whole .
I would , of course , like to call on the Commission to negotiate a similar early warning system to RAPEX China with other states as well , such as India , Vietnam , Russia or Turkey , so that hazardous or counterfeit products can be seized before entering European countries .
I note that since 2006 , it has been possible to conclude international agreements with third countries concerning the cooperation of supervisory bodies in the field of consumer protection and I am very disappointed that the Commission has so far failed to make use of this option .
Written explanations of vote
I am pleased that the European Parliament has approved the Telecoms Reform Package , thus consolidating the rights of consumers and contributing to greater access to information and freedom of expression .
In order to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda , we need to provide sufficient incentives for investment in new high-speed networks , so as to support innovation in content-based internet services and to enhance the EU 's competitiveness at international level .
Promoting sustainable investment in the development of such networks is absolutely crucial , as this will both ensure competitiveness and increase consumer choice .
In order to guarantee investment in new technologies in less developed regions , regulations relating to electronic communications should be streamlined with other policies such as State aid policy , cohesion policy or the objectives of a broader industrial policy .
I support the Telecoms Reform Package because I think that the internet is an essential tool for education , the exercise of freedom of expression and access to information .
This initiative definitively establishes the idea that internet access and usage fall within the fundamental rights of European citizens .
I would like to thank Mrs Bastos , who was the only Portuguese MEP involved in this process .
I advocate freedom on the internet , without this meaning a lack of any regulation whatsoever .
As in the real world , the virtual world of the internet is the setting for illicit and illegal activities , including downloading video and music files , inciting terrorism and child pornography .
Despite the opposition of many national governments , Parliament has ensured that all users can benefit from the rights and guarantees enshrined in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ( ECHR ) .
This means that any restriction of rights or fundamental freedoms of internet users , such as cutting off access , must respect the ECHR and the general principle of the law , and must , first and foremost , have been authorised by a court order , so as to uphold the procedural safeguards , presumption of innocence and the right to privacy , without prejudice to specific mechanisms in cases which are deemed urgent in the interests of state security .
Prior court approval : that is what we wanted to obtain .
With this compromise , we have at least guaranteed the best legal protection possible at this stage .
The EU 's message is now clear : access to the internet is a fundamental right , and precise and binding procedures will have to be followed to ensure that internet users can actually be sentenced for copyright infringement .
It is now up to the national judges and to the European Court of Justice judges to enforce the right of all internet users to enjoy a ' prior , fair and impartial procedure ' .
The lack of clarity of many provisions will require close monitoring during the process of transposing and applying this important legislation .
With the Treaty of Lisbon now ratified , the European Parliament will be able , as colegislator , to continue to defend the neutrality of the internet .
Today 's vote is just one stage in a long process .
We will have to continue to defend internet users ' rights and , in particular , to define them better .
We will also have to urgently take up the crucial issue of internet copyright .
I voted in favour of Mrs Trautmann 's report as I believe that the current agreement goes far beyond what was possible in the earlier stages of the process , particularly with regard to consumer rights .
I believe that the introduction of measures to safeguard rights and guarantees on freedom of expression and information given to users with landline or mobile telephones and internet users is absolutely essential .
It is important to streamline the internal telecoms market by encouraging competition between companies while , at the same time , consolidating the autonomy of national regulatory bodies from their respective governments .
It was equally important to ensure more modern management of the radio spectrum by devising techniques which allow the easier provision of these services in rural areas .
I welcome the compromise reached between Parliament and the Council on introducing into the framework directive adequate protection for users in cases of restriction of access to services and applications through electronic communication networks .
I think that the rule of law dictates that no one 's access to information and use of electronic communication networks can be made subject to conditions without this being done in strict accordance with the principle of the presumption of innocence , and restriction of access must be preceded by prior fair and impartial proceedings which safeguard the right to be heard and the right to effective judicial protection .
Furthermore , I believe that it is especially important to support the independence mechanisms of national regulatory authorities , so that these can regulate the market effectively , promoting fair competition between operators , as well as cooperation mechanisms between the various European regulatory bodies , so that we can bring about a more transparent and more competitive market , which will represent a step up for users in the quality of services offered .
At the end of October , the Council adopted the majority of the texts negotiated with Parliament on the so-called Telecoms Package , with a few exceptions , which were included in the Trautmann report .
This text continued to be negotiated in the Conciliation Committee , where the text which we are now to vote upon was accepted .
It is true that the agreed text contains some of the proposals tabled by our group , defending the rights of users .
However , it does not go far enough , as it allows exceptions to the procedural safeguards in urgent cases , although these must be substantiated and in accordance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Yet the principal problem with the text is its scope , as it refers only to the restrictions that may be imposed by Member States , and not the restrictions imposed by private companies .
Indeed , the European Union seems to be more interested in creating an internal telecoms market solely to serve the interests of the economic groups which dominate the sector than in defending the rights and fundamental freedoms of the end users .
We have no choice but to disagree with such an attitude .
I abstained from the vote on this final version of the telecoms package because it is unsatisfactory .
It is , however , better than nothing .
It does not protect internet users from the abuses of freedom-destroying laws such as the first version of the Hadopi Law in France , or from the wrath of administrative authorities duly authorised to carry out such abuses .
Nevertheless , it does give internet users legal means of defending themselves .
It is , unfortunately , alarming that it has come to this : that we should have to rely on the European Union , which could not care less about what the citizens think and of which the vast majority of acts are essentially aimed at satisfying the interests of lobbies of all kinds , to provide Europeans with a minimum level of freedom of information and of expression .
Although the telecoms sector is going through an unprecedented period of development , it was crucial to support the report by my colleague , Mrs Trautmann , as it will mean that consumers are offered better services at fairer prices .
I welcome the fact that this text will increase users ' rights to universal services , via clearer contracts , a more accessible emergency telephone number , a hotline for missing children , greater consideration of the rights of disabled people , and a guarantee of number portability .
It will also make it possible to protect privacy better and to combat illegal practices on the internet by improving the security and the integrity of electronic communication networks .
Lastly , it is gratifying to have obtained a legally sound solution offering European citizens procedural safeguards such as observance of the inter partes principle , the presumption of innocence and the right to be heard , and which obliges the Member States to comply with those safeguards before taking any measures aimed at restricting internet access .
Adoption of the Trautmann report means that the provisions of the Telecoms Package will shortly enter into force .
This is good news for consumers , whose rights are strengthened by this legislation .
The possibility of moving a telephone number to another network in one day , the increase in transparency of tariffs and the strengthening of personal data protection are some of the many positive results of the package .
What is more , the European Parliament has taken account of the fears of European citizens concerning internet users being cut off from the internet .
The European Parliament upheld the view that access to the internet is the right of every citizen .
In relation to this , disconnecting a citizen from the internet will be possible only in justified cases , while respecting the principles of innocence and the right to privacy , and following a fair and impartial trial .
This solution will certainly please the supporters of open access to the internet .
I have to say that the proposed compromise between the Council and Parliament offers no adequate legal safeguards for users .
Although the text maintains that the Member States cannot impose restrictions on internet end-users , it does pave the way for consumers to be restricted by access providers without any prior decision by a judicial body .
This state of affairs undermines people 's rights .
Our group 's amendments aimed at upholding citizens ' rights have not been adopted .
Lastly , the package is subject to the ' law ' of the internal market .
It is therefore the European Court of Justice that will decide on ' conflicts of interest ' .
Freedom of expression will therefore , in all likelihood , be subject to the law of the internal market , as too many recent examples show .
Thanks to strong pressure from users and citizens , user safeguards have been gained , but they remain inadequate in the opinion of the left .
We cannot accept dishonest compromises where the citizens ' freedom of expression is concerned .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the compromise package on telecommunications .
Whilst , as is the nature of compromises , the package is not perfect , I believe that it is a step in the right direction and will bring about an improvement in consumers ' rights .
An affirmative vote may be justified simply by the fact that the new European legislation on the telecoms sector supports the rights of landline and mobile telephone and internet users , and boosts competition .
The most pertinent of these new rules is the reinforcement of consumer rights , guarantees of internet access and the protection of personal data , given that the EU is increasingly an area of rights and freedoms .
I voted against the framework directive on electronic communications networks and services because I think that it represents an attack on freedom of expression and the civil rights of citizens .
By adopting this directive , the European Union is allowing internet services to be cut off without the need for a judicial order .
As a defender of civil rights , I am bound to be opposed to this decision .
It gives powers to private companies to introduce restrictions on the use of the internet , and is one more example of the liberalisation of the European telecommunications market .
Also , the fact that non-judicial bodies ( the nature and composition of which has not been specified ) can decide to cut off internet services due to alleged illegal practices ( which have not been determined either ) is a breach of the principle that citizens are innocent until proven guilty , and opens the door to operators being the ones who restrict users ' rights , establish content filters and make some pages faster to the detriment of others , which would mean a de facto end to the neutrality of the Web .
I voted in favour of this package because of its unquestionable usefulness .
However , I appreciate that it is unclear as to what a fair and impartial procedure will mean in practice in terms of the possible situations for restricting internet access .
I believe that it would have been preferable to make a prior judicial ruling compulsory .
I voted in favour of a report that is the culmination of all the work done around the ' telecommunications package ' , two directives and a regulation that represent a fundamental step forward in the development of the information society and the protection of users ' rights .
This new legislation also provides clear rules and the necessary legal certainty to encourage new investment , which , in turn , will make it possible to offer new services and develop new economic activities .
These provisions will therefore have a major economic impact .
The text that was finally adopted also guarantees greater respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of consumers to access the Web , by providing legal certainty in Amendment 138 .
The compromise reached refers to the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , while Amendment 138 opted for the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
The latter option has a clear disadvantage : the United Kingdom , Poland and now the Czech Republic have introduced a derogation protocol that prevents the Court of Justice of the European Union and the respective national courts from acting in the event of a breach , while all the Member States are signatories to the Convention and there is no interference with national legal structures .
The centre left and centre right political forces in the European Parliament voted in favour of the legislative ' package ' on telecommunications and the internet on the basis of the criteria of competition and security , in other words , to secure the profits of the monopolies and restrict workers ' freedoms and rights .
The same political forces , while referring with demagogic bombast to users ' rights and free access to the internet in the face of the highhandedness of monopoly business groups , supported the Commission 's reactionary proposals , thereby helping to promote the interests of capital .
The decision by the European Parliament promotes capitalist restructurings that will enable companies to grow to gigantic proportions and develop the ' green economy ' , so that they will reign supreme at European and global level , thereby multiplying their profits to the detriment of the workers and users of their services .
The monopolies are being given legal rights to monitor and restrict users ' access to the internet .
At the same time , their profits are being secured thanks to the harmonisation of the radio spectrum and the ' operating divide ' between landline and internet services and the necessary infrastructure .
We voted against the motion for a resolution by the Council and the European Parliament and we stand by the workers and users of electronic communications who continue to claim their rights and freedoms against the reactionary policy of the EU and the parties of capital .
in writing . - In this case , the proposal aims at creating a framework that will provide for the harmonisation of rules relating to the collection and dissemination of statistics when it comes to the use as well as the selling of pesticides .
There are a number of important definitions and clarifications that have been made and , therefore , I have decided to vote in favour of this report .
I welcome the agreement reached on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning statistics on pesticides which will allow for the creation of a legal framework and the establishment of harmonised rules for the collection and dissemination of statistics on the sale and use of pesticides , with a view to the sustainable use of the latter .
I welcome the fact that the regulation concerning statistics on plant protection products will complete the legislative package of European plant protection policy , which can then enter into force .
In order to minimise the risks to people and the environment involved in the use of plant protection products , we need harmonised risk indicators based on comparable and reliable data from all the Member States .
That is exactly what will now be possible .
However , the collection of this data must not lead to more bureaucracy and thus to greater burdens for our farmers and administrations .
Where possible , the existing data should be used and there should be no new data collection .
It will be our responsibility to ensure , when monitoring the implementation of the regulation , that bureaucratic expenditure is kept to an absolute minimum .
On another note , I would have preferred the term ' plant protection products ' , as originally used in the regulation , to have been retained .
In German , the term ' pesticides ' has completely negative connotations and generally refers to the improper use of plant protection products .
Unfortunately , the regulation will now contribute to this misinterpretation .
I very warmly welcome the fact that the regulation concerning statistics on plant protection products will ensure that there is now a common legal framework for the collection and distribution of data on the marketing and use of pesticides .
It is beyond doubt that minimising risks to human health and environmental protection take priority .
Harmonised risk indicators and reliable data from all the Member States will now make that possible .
That said , I would like to emphatically point out that any additional administrative expenditure on the collection of data must not be a cost borne by our farmers .
By refraining from re-collecting data that has already been taken , we can exploit synergies that will lead to a reduction in bureaucracy and additional burdens .
Pesticides , especially pesticides used in agriculture , have an important impact on the health of humans and the environment and there should therefore be significant further reductions in their use .
Lengthy experience with the collection of data on the sale and use of pesticides has shown the need for harmonised methods of collecting statistical data , not only at the national level but also at the Community level .
This regulation creates , in conformity with the principle of subsidiarity and proportionality , a common framework for the systematic creation of Community statistics on the marketing and use of pesticides .
I therefore consider the joint text of the regulation of the European Parliament and the Council concerning statistics on pesticides , which has been approved by the Conciliation Committee , as an appropriate measure which , in the final analysis , will contribute to the sustainable use of pesticides and a huge overall reduction in the risks to health and the environment , as well as adequate protection for crops .
I want to emphasise that pesticides must be used in a more viable manner , which also entails a significant overall reduction in the risks involved .
Pesticides must also be used in a manner compatible with the need to protect the harvests .
However , pesticides can only be used without close monitoring of both their quantity and quality if a reliable database is available .
The availability and use of harmonised , comparable Community statistics on pesticide sales play an important role in the drafting and monitoring of legislation and Community policies in the context of the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
Such statistics are necessary for evaluating the European Union 's sustainable development policies and for calculating the significant indicators concerning the risks to health and the environment associated with the use of pesticides .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament on the joint proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council concerning statistics on pesticides , which was approved by the Conciliation Committee , because in my view , it will bring significant benefits .
It harmonises and , in particular , simplifies legislation in the area of statistics on pesticides .
It harmonises statistical surveys and thereby enables greater comparability of data , offering the possibility of better and broader use of the administrative resource of collected data , which will reduce costs and the administrative burden on farmers and other entities in the agricultural sector .
The draft will also provide greater protection for confidential data .
Moreover , this standard will , in the final analysis , lead to greater awareness of pesticides and their impact on public health which I personally consider to be a key issue .
I voted in favour of the legislative resolution on the codification of the 1995 regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down general rules for the granting of Community financial aid in the field of trans-European networks .
I am sorry that , in view of the development and the complexity of the texts , the Commission has not revised its position dating from 1 April 1987 consisting of instructing its staff that all legislative acts should be codified after no more than 10 amendments , stressing that this is a minimum requirement and that departments should endeavour to codify at even shorter intervals the texts for which they are responsible .
In this particular case , we are consolidating the regulations from 1999 , two regulations from 2004 and one regulation from 2005 .
I consider that the policy of consolidating Community law should be one of the European Commission 's priorities and that the current situation is unsatisfactory , particularly in relation to the Member States , the citizens and , more generally , all users of the law : magistrates , lawyers , advisers , authorities , and so on .
I voted in favour of the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down general rules for the granting of Community financial aid in the field of trans-European networks .
These networks are very important to the development of Europe 's traffic infrastructure .
The new regulation will clearly regulate the conditions and procedures for granting Community financial aid , which will provide the corresponding legal certainty , in particular , for the States and regions that plan such projects .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report requesting the Council withdraw its proposal .
We voted against the rejection of this series of reports by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , not because of the content of the regulatory proposals concerned , which relate to Europol and other criminal police activities , but for the sake of form .
Indeed , the only reason why the majority of this House wants to refer these reports back to committee is so that it can wait for the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force .
With this treaty , these matters will fall under the ordinary legislative procedure , which means equality between Parliament and the Council in legislative terms , exclusive right of initiative for the European Commission and , worse still , jurisdiction for the European Court of Justice .
This is unacceptable as far as we are concerned .
In the borderless world that you have created , and of which criminals , illegal migrants and traffickers take full advantage , police cooperation is vital .
However , it is crucial that it remains within the scope of intergovernmental cooperation .
As the third pillar , this is an extremely pertinent matter for the security of the European area , so I agree that this issue should be assessed under the Treaty of Lisbon , given its future bearing on cooperation policy .
In principle , close cooperation between the various authorities to fight crime is a desirable thing .
However , there is a complete lack of any regulation of data protection in the planned unrestricted access for all authorities and it is not even clear what rights of investigation the proposed data protection officer will actually have .
The SWIFT agreement , too , has major data protection concerns associated with it .
The European Parliament must be given the chance to curb this data protection rights fiasco on behalf of the citizens of Europe .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
I support the opinion of the rapporteur and agree that legislation on EUROPOL should be considered by common accord together with the European Parliament and the Council .
Especially important attention should be paid to personal data protection .
Indeed , it is not sufficiently clear whether there are strong protection safeguards for the transfer of personal data to third parties .
Does this not infringe citizens ' rights to privacy and can people have faith in the protection of their data ?
This matter should be thoroughly investigated .
Therefore , the Council should submit a new proposal following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report requesting the Council withdraw its proposal .
Without forgetting the importance of the European Police Office ( Europol ) and notwithstanding the general support which it should have , as the third pillar , this is an extremely pertinent matter for the security of the European area .
Hence , I agree that this issue should be assessed under the Treaty of Lisbon , given its bearing on cooperation policy .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report requesting the Council withdraw its proposal .
The Albrecht report brings up for debate the list of third States and organisations with which Europol is intending to conclude agreements .
The list of third States also includes the Republic of Moldova , for example , while the list of organisations with which Europol is intending to conclude agreements should also include the Regional Centre for Combating Cross-border Crime , with its headquarters in Bucharest , which is in negotiations with Europol aimed at concluding a cooperation agreement .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has decided to vote against this report as a group during this plenary session so that it can review the dossier after the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force .
It is precisely because this is such an important topic that we have decided to devote a huge amount of attention to it and we will debate it starting from next year on a codecision basis with the Council .
Within the framework of Europol , we have been presented with four initiatives which aim to introduce new rules on information confidentiality , implementing matters relating to the regulation of Europol 's relationships with its partners , including the exchange of personal data and classified information , determining the list of third countries and organisations with which agreements may be made , and implementing rules for the analysis work files .
Given that the Treaty of Lisbon will enter into force in a matter of days , and new prerogatives relating to police cooperation are to be conferred on Parliament , the four rapporteurs have sought the rejection of the proposals on legal grounds .
I therefore support their stance of not commenting on the substance of these proposals , rejecting them and asking the Commission and the Council to make a declaration in plenary pledging to present a new decision within a period of six months from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In practical terms , it is worth recalling that in relation to the current incentives , being a mere matter of consulting Parliament , the Council will be able to establish a position before the end of the year , since the four steps for implementation will enter into force from 1 January 2010 .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report requesting the Commission withdraw its proposal .
Without forgetting the importance of the European Police Office ( Europol ) and notwithstanding the general support which it should have , as the third pillar , this is an extremely pertinent matter for the security of the European area .
Hence , I agree that this issue should be assessed under the Treaty of Lisbon , given its future bearing on cooperation policy .
I therefore believe any decision on this sensitive matter is premature as long as the treaty is not yet in force , as it deals with the security of the European area .
Crime is continually on the increase in the European Union .
We are facing a host of organised crime networks , as well as computer crime , which is becoming ever more widespread .
As a result , the European crime prevention policy must be consolidated and strengthened , while Member States need to cooperate better and more closely , based on a powerful common strategy in this area .
The progress made by the crime prevention network over the last few years has been rather limited .
In fact , its potential is far from having been achieved as yet .
Widening the network 's responsibilities , establishing a clear , simple , effective administrative structure , as well as ensuring the involvement of civil society , universities and NGOs , are the conditions which are key to the successful operation of such a network .
Parliament is going to acquire proper law-making power and will be able , along with the Council , to make decisions on measures , in accordance with the codecision procedure , aimed at encouraging and supporting the actions of Member States in the area of crime prevention .
I therefore support the rapporteur 's proposal to reject the initiative and debate this important dossier after the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force .
in writing . - The report in question asks that the modifications to the current system of the European Crime Prevention Network be rejected .
I believe and agree with the rapporteur that there are a number of areas that require improvement even with regard to the proposal .
Nevertheless , the interim measures are adequate in order to effect important alterations as soon as possible .
It is for these reasons that I have decided to vote against this report .
The European Crime Prevention Network was created in 2001 , yet up until now , it has still not produced particularly good results , due to numerous organisational failures which have prevented it from effectively reaching its full potential , having already been subject to internal review on two occasions .
The present initiative attempts to revoke that decision made in 2001 , proposing the restructuring of the network , which I see as being somewhat limited and clearly inadequate as a solution to the current problems .
In view of this , we need to embark upon a reform of the network that is more serious and more ambitious in terms of its organisation .
The Swedish Presidency 's insistence that Parliament make a decision before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force is , therefore , unacceptable , not only because it is a weak initiative , but also because it asks Parliament to renounce the institutional prerogatives related to crime prevention conferred upon it by the Treaty of Lisbon a matter of days before the new treaty enters into force .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
I am therefore voting in favour of this report , and ask that the Council does not formally adopt the initiative prior to the imminent entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The European Crime Prevention Network ( EUCPN ) was created in 2001 due to a need to establish measures and exchange activities to prevent criminality , as well as strengthening the network of national authorities responsible for preventing crime .
Seven years later , following an external assessment of the EUCPN , the conclusion was that there was much room for improvement in the way the institution works .
The development of different aspects of crime prevention is extremely important at EU level , as is supporting the prevention of , and fight against , instances of national and local crime .
In view of the sensitive nature of the matters touched upon in this report , I agree with the decision to seek a new proposal from the Council under the codecision procedure , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon .
As an MEP who has always paid particular attention to issues relating to crime prevention , security and police cooperation , I acknowledge the fundamental importance of Europol in creating a secure European area and preventing crime throughout Europe , along with the need for it to be reinforced at various levels , including those under discussion here .
However , the principal question being debated here today is whether Parliament , less than a week before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , should renounce its new institutional prerogatives relating to crime prevention and police cooperation and thus do away with the possibility of playing a part in the decision-making process for all these issues under the codecision procedure .
I do not believe that this is the right course .
This Parliament must fully assume its new powers in these matters .
In view of this , I am voting in favour of this report , and request that the Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of Spain withdraw their initiative .
in writing . - In line with the recommendation of the Committee on Civil Liberties , I voted against the draft decision .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon imminent , decisions in this area should be taken under the new legislative procedures .
I am voting against the adoption of the EUROPOL package .
I voted in favour of rejecting the entire package as I think it is scandalous that the Commission and the Council should still be attempting to push the package through before the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
in writing . - Georgia has been subjected to an incredible downturn , especially following the 2008 conflict with Russia .
Due to Georgia 's strategic importance , among other reasons , the Commission has proposed providing macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
Although I agree that the Parliament requires more information on the matter , I have decided to support the rapporteur 's recommendation and thus vote in favour of the report .
We have always advocated the need for the EU to give solidarity aid to countries that need it , and argued that this aid should be directed towards projects which are of real interest to the people of the country .
Yet the ' aid ' given by the EU seems to have had little to do with solidarity .
The interests of big money , whether economic or financial , and the major powers always supersede the interests of solidarity .
This is also the case for the aid to Georgia , upon which we have just voted .
Financial assistance is predominantly aimed at funding the recommendations made by the International Monetary Fund and its policy of structural adjustment , that is , its insistence on the very same neo-liberal policies that brought about the economic and financial crisis that this country is now facing .
These same reasons are also behind our abstention on the remaining reports .
Moreover , there is no guarantee that the funding decided upon will not go towards the rearmament of Georgia , albeit indirectly , following the attack carried out by Georgian troops against the people of the provinces of South Ossetia and Abkhazia , which led to war with Russia .
We could not condone a decision that could lead to greater militarisation in the relations between countries in the Caucasus region , whose energy , wealth and geostrategic value is important to the EU and its monopolies .
Georgia was brutally attacked in August 2008 by the armies of the Russian Federation and , besides suffering damage on a large scale and numerous fatalities , has also experienced a serious deterioration of its economic condition .
The European Union cannot remain passive in the face of Georgia 's economic problems , and should be ready to give Georgia special macro-financial assistance to enable the country to rebuild after last year 's Russian invasion .
Financial assistance from Brussels will also help Georgia combat the effects of the world economic and financial crisis .
Taking into account the above circumstances , as well as Georgia 's strategic significance for the European Union in the European Neighbourhood Policy and the newly established Eastern Partnership , I endorsed the resolution on a Council Decision providing macro-financial assistance to Georgia .
The macro-financial assistance programme is vital for improving the financial stability of European nations that have recently emerged from armed conflict , the vicissitudes of which have left them with financial difficulties in terms of budget deficits and their balance of payments .
This assistance is crucial for the process of reconstruction in these countries , provided that it is carried out in a peaceful manner , something that is possible only with international assistance .
This assistance also ensures that these areas of instability do not jeopardise security and peace in Europe , particularly owing to the refugees and displaced people produced by such conflicts .
In this way , the EU must be an area of solidarity , combining this assistance to Georgia with the aforementioned appropriate aspects .
The macro-financial assistance programme is also vital for improving the financial stability of European nations that have endured the recent global crisis and suffered from the effects of this crisis on their main commercial partners , particularly Russia in the case of Armenia .
Financial imbalances are due to issues surrounding budgets and the balance of payments .
This assistance is important if Armenia is to face the crisis in a more consistent manner , and to prevent social instability , which could precipitate a mass exodus of emigrants , leading to problems within Europe .
In this way , the EU must act as an area of solidarity , combining this assistance to Armenia with the aforementioned appropriate aspects .
In the specific case of Serbia , the macro-financial assistance programme is vital for improving the country 's financial stability , as , in addition to the global crisis , Serbia has also emerged from an armed conflict whose effects are still being felt .
This assistance is an important tool for financial stability in Serbia , and for consolidating the stabilisation of the situation throughout the Balkan region .
Serbia and its economy play a role of paramount importance in the process of regional integration , and its participation in European integration is also essential .
In this way , the EU must act as an area of solidarity , combining this assistance to Serbia with the aforementioned appropriate aspects .
Over the next year , it is planned that Serbia will receive macro-financial assistance totalling up to EUR 200 million in the form of a loan .
This money is intended to support the economic stabilisation of that country , finance its external balance-of-payments needs and help it meet the consequences of the global economic and financial crisis .
I see the macro-financial assistance for Serbia , which will support the country 's economic stabilisation programme in the current crisis , as an important tool for promoting stabilisation across the Balkan region .
Serbia and its economy have a key role to play in regional integration and Serbia 's participation in European integration is likewise of major importance .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of Mr Ransdorf 's report and thus in favour of the granting of macro-financial assistance to Serbia .
The macro-financial assistance programme is vital for improving financial stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for combating the detrimental effect of the global crisis on the country 's economy .
This aid will be reflected in an improvement in the country 's economy in terms of the budget deficit and the balance of payments .
Bosnia is also situated in a sensitive region , so its economic and financial stability is especially important , as it will contribute to bringing about greater stability throughout the Balkan region .
In this way , the EU must act as an area of solidarity , combining this assistance to Bosnia with the aforementioned appropriate aspects .
We do not accept European loans and subsidies being subject to restrictions imposed by the IMF .
We shall vote against the MFA ( macro-financial assistance ) being presented today to the European Parliament .
You can see what kinds of conditions are involved : impossible deadlines , a lack of information ...
Whichever way you look at it , this defies the democratic demands that should characterise the European Union .
Nevertheless , we still support the peoples of Serbia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Armenia and Georgia .
We do not want them to suffer any more than they already do from the obsolete and dangerous neo-liberal system that the IMF is seeking to perpetuate .
I see this report on the draft Council Directive which aims to amend the common system of value added tax as a way of achieving a more simplified and harmonised system .
In fact , by combining certain aspects relating to VAT on the supply of natural gas , electricity and heat or refrigeration with the tax treatment of joint undertakings established in accordance with Article 171 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , with the identification of certain consequences of EU enlargement , and with the conditions for exercising the right to deduct input VAT , we will be moving towards greater effectiveness in applying VAT .
The Council 's proposal aims to clarify certain matters relating to the import and place of taxation of gas and electricity supplies to include the amendments agreed for the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU within the scope of the directive , and to clarify and emphasise the basic rule of law to deduct , which states that this right only arises if the goods and services are used by a taxable person and for the needs of his / her business .
However , the text adopted today does not correspond with certain specific features of national markets , such as the use of butane and propane gas .
In Portugal , as in other European countries where citizens have low incomes and whose relatively recent inclusion in the European natural gas networks is extremely expensive , the use of butane and propane gas in households and micro and small enterprises is an unavoidable reality .
Moreover , as a rule , the people who resort to this type of energy are the most deprived , meaning that the VAT directive discriminates against this group rather than those with higher incomes .
Furthermore , the changes to the report seem to restrict the Member State 's scope for action .
in writing . - I abstained on the Bullmann report .
Whilst I do believe that the Council has a duty to listen to the views of this House , the EU 's only directly elected institution , I do not believe that VAT systems should be harmonised .
The principle of subsidiarity dictates that taxation is a matter best left to the nations of Europe .
I voted in favour of the report on the protection of the marine environment of the North-East Atlantic in relation to the storage of carbon dioxide streams in geological formations as I believe that the existence of a regulatory framework and guidelines on the storage of carbon dioxide streams in geological formations will contribute to the protection of the maritime area , both in the short term and the long term , provided the aim is to permanently hold the carbon dioxide in these formations , and provided that this will not have significant adverse effects on the marine environment , human health and other legitimate uses of Europe 's maritime areas , specifically those of Portugal and , in particular , the Azores .
I voted in favour of the Rosbach report on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the approval on behalf of the European Community of the Amendments to Annex II and Annex III to the Convention for the protection of the marine environment of the North-East Atlantic ( OSPAR Convention ) in relation to the storage of carbon dioxide streams in geological formations .
Nevertheless , it is important to ensure that geological capture and storage technology for carbon dioxide , which has been little tested , is applied in accordance with the strictest safety standards , as set out in the directive on this issue .
The geological storage of carbon dioxide has been identified as a possible solution for mitigating the effects of an increase in the anthropogenic concentration of this gas in the atmosphere .
Nevertheless , this solution raises a number of questions about its future applicability , particularly given that the development of the technology required is still in its early stages , it is expected to be expensive , and there are potential risks associated with it .
It is worth following the studies that have been carried out on this subject , bearing in mind that some of the results obtained up to this point are positive in this respect .
It is , however , worth noting that under no circumstances must the pursuit of studies on this option or its possible implementation in the future compromise the necessary change of energy paradigm , which aims at a significant reduction in the current dependence on fossil fuels .
On the other hand , both the environmental effects and the safety of the technologies used in storage must be thoroughly investigated .
The approved resolution ensures that this will be done , and that is why we voted in favour of it .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Rosbach report .
Carbon capture and storage can make a significant contribution to efforts aimed at tackling global warming and my own country , Scotland , will play an important role in developing the necessary technology .
This amendment to the OSPAR Convention will mean that the EU and Scotland can take a lead in this area .
I must admit that I learnt something new from these two reports by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg : I learnt that those countries that chose not to participate in judicial cooperation in civil matters had , nonetheless , also lost their sovereignty .
Indeed , Denmark , which was able to negotiate an exemption , but which also sought , as a sovereign country , to conclude a treaty with the Community so as to participate in certain aspects of this cooperation , is today obliged to ask for the Commission 's permission in order to conclude new international agreements of this kind with others !
In other words , it has lost its right to take entirely independent decisions in one area of its external relations .
While , from an intellectual point of view , I can understand that consistency within and outside the Community is required in order to establish this cooperation , I do have more difficulty in accepting that the Commission is solely responsible for these kinds of international treaties , that it controls , even in part , a Member State 's ability to conclude treaties , and even more so that European law takes precedence over all others .
We have only voted in favour of these reports because there is no reason to prevent Denmark from concluding the agreements that it wants to conclude , and there are few opportunities to do otherwise in the current circumstances .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report relating to recovery plan changes within the framework of the North Atlantic Fisheries Organisation .
International fisheries organisations are essential to the management of global marine resources .
I consider it unfortunate , however , that it is the EU that negotiates with our North Atlantic neighbours .
Whilst the Treaty of Lisbon has now enshrined this principle , I still consider that there is scope for fisheries management to be returned to the fishing nations and maritime regions .
Specifically when it comes to rail freight and long-distance transport , the last few years have witnessed some change for the better .
Passengers must not be left behind in this , however .
Rules on compensation for delays to international rail services are not enough .
We must ensure that , in the rush to globalise , regional transport is not completely marginalised , with whole regions being cut off .
Equally , we must ensure that the delusional emphasis on privatisation hitherto does not lead to UK-style massive delays and safety failings .
It is important to overcome obstacles and technical difficulties in the way of cross-border rail traffic , and not only for environmental purposes .
That is why I voted in favour of this report .
I welcome the decision of the Community to sign the Hague Protocol of 23 November 2007 on the Law Applicable to Maintenance Obligations because the protocol brings a long-awaited and much-needed clarification of the rules determining the applicable law , which are supplemented by the Hague Convention of 23 November on the International Recovery of Child Support and Other Forms of Family Maintenance .
The harmonisation of the rules will provide legal certainty to persons entitled to maintenance and the possibility of taking action without being subject to differing legal systems .
Thanks to the special rules , it will also limit the avoidance of maintenance obligations , where entitled persons are unable to secure maintenance on the basis of the law of the country in which they normally reside .
The possibility of refusing to apply a right established on the basis of the protocol is restricted only to cases where the effects would clearly be contrary to public order in the country of the court in question .
I would also like to express my profound regret that the United Kingdom is not participating in the decision of the Council for the protocol to be signed by the Community .
in writing . - On 9 November 2009 , the report on the request for the defence of the immunity and privileges of Tobias Pflüger was voted and adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs ( JURI ) in the European Parliament .
This report is based on incorrect facts .
The central point is that the report cites a judgment at first instance which has been repealed .
The judgment is invalid , because the regional court in Munich http : / / dict.leo.org / ende ? lp = ende & p = 5tY9AA & search = dismiss " ed http : / / dict.leo.org / ende ? lp = ende & p = 5tY9AA & search = an " http : / / dict.leo.org / ende ? lp = ende & p = 5tY9AA & search = action " against Tobias Pflüger on 21 July 2009 in the second and final instance .
A conviction was not made .
For this reason , all reproaches are invalid .
It is politically unacceptable that this report , which contains incorrect facts , was voted in Plenary today ( 24 November 2009 ) .
We have tried to get this incomplete and therefore incorrect report taken from the agenda , unfortunately without success .
This kind of proceeding by the European Parliament creates the impression of supporting the persecution of politically active persons , in this case , the Munich II Public Prosecution Service against a former Member of the European Parliament .
in writing . - On 9 November 2009 , the report on the request for the defence of the immunity and privileges of Tobias Pflüger was voted and adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs ( JURI ) in the European Parliament .
This report is based on incorrect facts .
The central point is that the report cites a judgment at first instance which has been repealed .
The judgment is invalid because the regional court in Munich dismissed the action against Tobias Pflüger on 21 July 2009 in the second and final instance .
A conviction was not made .
For this reason , all reproaches are invalid .
It is politically unacceptable that this report , which contains incorrect facts , was voted in plenary today ( 24 November 2009 ) .
We have tried to get this incomplete and therefore incorrect report taken off the agenda , unfortunately without success .
This kind of proceeding by the European Parliament creates the impression of supporting the persecution of politically active persons , in this case , the Munich II Public Prosecution Service against the former Member of the European Parliament , Tobias Pflüger .
in writing . - On 9 November 2009 , the report on the request for the defence of the immunity and privileges of Tobias Pflüger was voted and adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs ( JURI ) in the European Parliament .
This report is based on incorrect facts .
The central point is : the report cites a judgment at first instance which was repealed in the meanwhile .
The judgment is invalid because the Munich regional court dismissed the action against Tobias Pflüger on 21 July 2009 in second and final instance .
A conviction was not made .
For this reason , all reproaches are invalid .
It is politically unacceptable that this report , which contains incorrect facts , was voted in the Plenary today ( 24 November 2009 ) .
We have tried to get this incomplete and therefore incorrect report taken off the agenda , unfortunately without success .
This kind of proceeding by the European Parliament creates the impression of supporting the persecution of political active persons , in this case , the Munich II Public Prosecution Service against the former Member of European Parliament , Tobias Pflüger .
in writing . - I consider the role of Parliament to be only effective if it can sustain the effect of legislation .
In this context , the application of the rule of ' regulatory procedure with scrutiny ' allows for ex ante consideration of proposals brought into law .
This report nuances Parliament 's role and enhances our ability to control and monitor the implementation of legislation in Member States .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Free questions
Mr President , is Europe going to have to face a new gas crisis this winter ?
Let us remember the conflict between Russia and Ukraine , suffered by millions of Europeans .
I welcome the agreement reached on 19 November in Yalta .
However , we know that Ukraine had great trouble in settling its gas bill with Russia last month .
We also know that the political context will be particularly difficult in January , with the staging of the presidential elections .
What preventive measures can be proposed by the Commission and implemented at European level so as to protect our fellow citizens from the effects of a potential new crisis , and what lessons have been learnt from the events of winter 2009 ?
Will the agreement reached on 16 November between the EU and Russia on an early warning system and the draft regulation on the security of gas supply , which I welcome , be enough ?
Mr President , Mr Daul , thank you for your question .
Like you , I wish to prevent a repetition of last year 's crisis .
We have worked closely - I myself have done a great deal of work - with President Yushchenko , Prime Minister Tymoshenko and the Russian authorities , as well as with the international financial institutions , to support Ukraine .
What more can be done ?
In the short term , the early warning system that we agreed on last week with Russia should help us to identify the problems in time .
In fact , I can tell you that there was an excellent atmosphere during this summit with Russia , which President Medvedev attended , a much better atmosphere than there has been on other occasions .
We are also working with the Gas Coordination Group - a group that includes the Member States and industry - on the storage of gas .
We are continuing to work with the international financial institutions on the reform and modernisation of the gas sector in Ukraine .
However , as you said , the situation within Ukraine is not easy .
In any case , I shall be in Kiev next week with the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Reinfeldt , to show once again the importance we attach to the reform of this sector in Ukraine .
I would like to ask you whether , in the past , you had any difficulties with the Bulgarian Government of Sergei Stanishev or with Ivaylo Kalfin as the country 's foreign minister ?

Did you have any reason to doubt the democratic legitimacy of Mr Stanishev or Mr Kalfin or their loyalty to the institutions of the European Union ?
If not , how do you view the statements by the current Bulgarian Prime Minister , Mr Borisov , who has said that the Bulgarian Socialist Party needs to be prohibited ?
Mr Borisov has said that they - meaning the delegates of the Congress of the Bulgarian Socialist Party - are a bunch of impudent bandits .
Thirdly , there is this week 's statement by Mr Borisov that ' everyone who hates the Socialists in Bulgaria must be with us . '
How do you evaluate this standpoint from a member of the European Council ?
Thank you for your question , Mr Schulz .
However , you will appreciate that I must exercise restraint when commenting on the remarks made by the various Heads of State or Government within the context of their domestic policy .
It is not my place to get involved here and now in this domestic dispute .
What I can say , to give you a concrete answer to your question , is that my relationship with the Bulgarian Government , when Sergei Stanishev was prime minister , was always characterised by extremely loyal cooperation .
I can also say here , as I have told him personally , that Mr Stanishev has always been a very loyal partner of the Commission and of all the institutions where the advancement of the European project is concerned .
I will not forget about the loyal cooperation and the commitment to Europe that he showed just because he is no longer in power .
( DE ) I understand that you do not want to interfere in Bulgaria 's domestic politics .
I sympathise with that position .
Can I interpret your answer to mean that you believe that there is no need for the party of Mr Stanishev - the Chairman of the Bulgarian Socialist Party , for whom you have expressed your personal high regard in respect of the work that he has done - to be banned ?
Mr Schulz , obviously I believe that all democratic parties have a place in democratic countries .
Since Bulgaria is , as we all know , a democratic country , all of its democratic parties have a place in the democratic system .
This applies to all of the parties in Bulgaria that respect , of course , the rules of our Community .
Mr President , I am going to ask a question about the structure of the Commission , which is normal , given that we are very soon going to have a new Commission .
Firstly , I have some misgivings about the fact that the environment portfolio is going to be divided into three areas : climate change , energy and the environment .
I have some misgivings in this regard , and this is a point that I wish to make .
However , the most important question that I wish to put to you concerns fundamental rights and the fight against discrimination .
I believe that it was agreed that there would be a commissioner responsible for this subject .
Now , it is a matter of ensuring that we do not have a ' home affairs ' portfolio that incorporates asylum and immigration issues , because ' asylum and immigration ' would then be a security issue and not a home affairs issue .
Mr Barrot has proposed the creation of three commissioner posts : fundamental rights , home affairs and security , with asylum and immigration being separate .
My question is simple : how do you view this issue ?
Firstly , concerning the question of the climate change , or rather the ' action in the field of climate change ' portfolio , I see this responsibility as being very important .
It is a horizontal responsibility , a dimension to be integrated into all of the Union 's policies .
The commissioner for climate change policy will clearly be responsible for following up the work done in Copenhagen , with all that that entails in terms of internal and external action .
With regard to the justice and home affairs portfolio , yes , I have decided to cut that in two , also .
One portfolio will be devoted to justice and fundamental rights , and the other to home affairs .
Moreover , this division is commonplace in many of our Member States in which there is a minister for justice and a minister for the interior .
Obviously I wish to discuss the exact definition with the commissioners concerned , but I can already tell you that I want the commissioner responsible for justice and fundamental rights to pay particular attention to eliminating the obstacles that European citizens face when exercising their rights .
Mr President , I would like to continue along the same sort of lines as Mr Verhofstadt , since the Commission is currently under construction .

We are reading and hearing rumours that are rather dangerous .
Do you think that it is you , the President of the Commission - you have been elected and confirmed President - who makes the Commission , who organises the Commission and who defines the commissioners ' remit , or is it the countries of the Union and the large countries that impose , or otherwise , a certain position on you ?
I find it unacceptable - but perhaps I am wrong - to read in the newspapers that France wants this , that the United Kingdom wants that , that Mrs Merkel wants the other .
Mr Sarkozy and Mrs Merkel appointed you , they have nothing left to say , you have to create your Commission !
Is this how you see the role of President of the Commission , or do you see it another way , which is more like the way that Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy see it ?
The way I see things is very simple : it is about respecting the Treaty of Lisbon , and respecting the current treaty , for that matter .
From 1 December , this Treaty of Lisbon declares very clearly - I have the English version here , specifically Article 17 - that it is the President of the Commission who shall decide on the internal organisation of the Commission , and that is what I am of course going to do , including as regards the allocation of portfolios .
Let us be clear , there is always pressure , as you know .
We all have demands made of us .
However , I am the one who ultimately takes full responsibility for the composition of the Commission and I believe that this Commission will also benefit from fairly strong support within the European Parliament .
I have worked hard to obtain a fairly strong consensus .
Moreover , I have some good news - as well as some words of thanks - to give you today : the next Commission will include nine women , so one more than at present .
A week ago , only three women were prospective candidates .
Many of you have helped me to impress upon the Member States the importance of this request to nominate more women .
This is a practical example that shows my commitment to forming a college that can benefit from the support of your Parliament .

( FR ) Mr Barroso , since you are talking about the Commission and about women , do you not think that it would be easier for a President of the Commission in the long term if each country put forward two commissioners , presented two candidates , to him : a man and a woman ?
That way , you would be able to form a balanced Commission , not with nine women , but made up of half women , half men .
You are quite right .
I would very much like to achieve that .
Unfortunately , it is not provided for by the treaty .
I agree with your fellow Member , Mr Verhofstadt .
The serious issue is this : this obligation is not provided for by the treaty .
As you know , I even made public a letter in which I called on the Member States to help me in regard to this issue of gender balance .
Ideally , we would have a Commission that is even more balanced .
In any case , I am happy with the situation that we have reached in the end , and I should like to thank everyone in Parliament who has helped me in this task .

Mr Barroso , I would like to thank you very much for being with us today , and I would like to start by saying that it seems we should give more encouragement to our fellow Members to participate in these debates with you , because some Members are more interested in other attractions of Strasbourg than in the possibility of a meeting with you .
My question concerns the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , which , for the European Conservatives and Reformists , has always been very important .
This is particularly true of what you said not long ago , when you presented it as part of your strategy : a new start for the common market .
We do , truly , think that Europe needs a common market .
The recently adopted Lisbon Treaty gives more authority to European institutions in a political sense , and it seems to me that a particular kind of divide is opening between political integration , which is making progress , and economic integration .
Mr Barroso , I would very much like you to give attention to the question of the start of the new market from the beginning of your new term of office .


President of the Commission . - I have good news for Mr Kamiński : today , at the meeting of the Commission here in Strasbourg , we adopted a Commission working paper launching the consultation on what I call the ' European 2020 ' , the successor to the Lisbon Strategy , which is , of course , for consultation with Parliament and with European governments and societies at large .
There is great emphasis in the working paper on the need to deepen the internal market , and I have even asked Mario Monti , a well-known European figure , to send me a report on the ways in which we can address the missing links in the internal market .
I hope that the first draft of this report is ready before the European Council in March at which , by the way , the Spanish Presidency of the Council is also keen to contribute and lend urgency to these developments .
Development of the internal market is one of the ways we can find new sources of growth to respond to the challenges of competitiveness from other parts of the world .
What I found pleasing about the special summit was that there was a gender balance .
We would like to pay tribute to that achievement .
I would also like to add that we will continue to support you if you continue to maintain this gender balance .
We now have two new figureheads for the European Union to deal with , about whom all sides have said that they will have to grow into their roles .
That , of course , will always be the case .
There is also talk of lightweights and heavyweights .
I see it like this : today 's lightweights are tomorrow 's heavyweights , and vice versa .
Many a heavyweight one day is a lightweight the next .
That notwithstanding , we also have a severe economic crisis to overcome .
The social consequences , especially , are giving us lots to deal with .
In Europe , tens of millions of people are affected by unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
The number of crisis victims is going through the roof .
In the developing world , the consequences are much worse .
Are you prepared , Mr Barroso , together with the new Commission , to learn the lessons of the wrong turns taken through radical free-market policies ?
Are you prepared to bring about an urgently needed change of policy to put people ahead of profits and social interests ahead of competitive ones ?
President of the Commission . - In the new European Union 2020 strategy that I announced just now , there is a strong emphasis on the social matters that you have just mentioned , Mr Bisky .
I believe that we now have an urgent situation regarding social matters , particularly in view of rising unemployment .
There is a risk of a decade of low growth and high unemployment , and that would put severe strain on our social models and our living standards .
That is why I think it is important to work on matters relating to social inclusion .
We also need to make sure that our people are equipped with the right skills to succeed in this new economic model .
One of the priority areas of the European Union 2020 strategy will thus be to empower people .
Emphasis should be put on education and skills , lifelong learning , mobility of workers , supporting entrepreneurship and self-employment , but also on fighting exclusion and poverty .
I think we , as the European Union , have a duty to make the fight against exclusion and poverty one of our priorities .
Mr President , back in September , I approached you about the continuation of operations at Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant .
From your answer , I received the impression that the Commission is either unaware of the true situation , is not informed , or is trying to brush off MEPs .
Therefore , Mr President , I think you know that no nuclear fuel repositories have been built and spent fuel rods will be kept in the reactor , reducing nuclear safety in the region .
This is the first thing .
Secondly , I think you know that replacement generators will only be built three years from now and Lithuania will have a shortage of electricity .
That is the second thing .
Thirdly , I believe you are aware that the circumstances I have mentioned permit the continuation of the nuclear power plant 's operations and that it is not ready to be shut down .
My question , Mr President , is who will take responsibility for the reduced nuclear safety in this region and for the increased risk to European Union citizens ?
President of the Commission . - Regarding the Ignalina question , as you know , this is a matter concerning the Treaty of Accession of Lithuania .
We have to respect that Treaty of Accession , which was signed by all the Member States , including Lithuania .
What we are doing now is looking at not only the economic aspects but also the safety aspects .
I believe all this is taken into consideration in our decision and that we can work with the Lithuanian authorities to assure the safety of the nuclear situation there .
By the way , at my recent meeting with President Medvedev , I once again made the point about the supply of energy from Russia to Lithuania .
I asked him why they cannot be more cooperative regarding the issue of the Druzhba pipeline .
So we are working actively with our Lithuanian friends , and also with other partners important to the security of energy supplies to Lithuania .
( DE ) President of the Commission , the issue of the continuing existence of the Opel factories exercises the European public , and it was also a key issue in the German federal election campaign .
Long before the election , it was already clear that a sale to the consortium led by Magna was planned , yet it was not until 16 October that the Commission hinted that it had some misgivings .
Why did you wait until after the German election ?
That decision did have an important impact on the outcome of the election in Germany .
How can you refute the suspicion that this came down to political considerations , particularly given that your close relationship with Chancellor Merkel is well known ?
Are you prepared to open up your written and oral dialogue on the Opel issue dated prior to the German federal election on 27 September to public scrutiny ?
President of the Commission . - Taking your last question first , of course I am happy to give you all my correspondence with Chancellor Merkel .
There is no problem about that .
Having said this , we organised two meetings before the German elections with all the countries involved with General Motors / Opel , and yesterday we organised the third one .
It was the third ministerial meeting on Opel organised by the Commission , and the first since General Motors decided not to sell Opel .
Other than being a facilitator , mainly by ensuring that all stakeholders have the same information , the Commission will continue to ensure that internal market and State aid rules will be respected .
This is very important to avoid a ruinous race to subsidies between Member States which will , in the end , benefit no one .
But the ball now is clearly in GM 's court .
Indeed only after the GM business plan is known , and our Member States might be willing to provide State aid , can the Commission assess whether competition rules are being respected .
We cannot act on suppositions .
Only in the face of business plans can we say whether they are or are not compatible with our Community rules .
( DE ) I am very grateful for your offer , Mr Barroso , and I will be happy to take you up on it .
Your oral dialogue is also at issue though , of course .
I am sure that we can come to an arrangement in this regard .
In the second part of your answer , you mentioned an absolutely key issue , namely that there is not only a race to carry out wage dumping , but also a subsidies race .
It was a very clever move to convene the summit yesterday .
What conclusions have you drawn from it ?
How , in future , can we combat the emerging danger of a subsidies race , as we have experienced time and again between various EU Member States at the cost of European taxpayers , while also , of course , intervening in the economic process of these dynamics ?

President of the Commission . - It is precisely by strict implementation of State aid rules , and this case is indeed a very interesting one for all of us - apart from those parties involved - because , as your question suggests , if every Member State were to start competing with the others to see who can give more money to a company , we would have something that is bad for the Member States , that is not good for consumers , and not good for taxpayers ' money .
The guarantee I can give you is that the Commission will be strict in the implementation of State aid rules , not because we are fundamentalists as regards the market or competition rules , but because we believe it is important to have a strict Community approach and to have a level playing field for all companies and all Member States - the big and the small , and the rich and the not-so-rich .
That is the best way to ensure that we remain fair in our Union .
Mr Barroso , I warmly welcome your statement just now that you intend that there should be a portfolio within the Commission dealing with fundamental rights .
I would add a further question to this .
As you are perfectly aware that a significant number of autochthonous national minorities and language minorities live in the EU - 15 million people , 10 % of the population - do you intend to incorporate the issue of these communities , these national and language minorities , into the portfolio of the new Commissioner dealing with fundamental rights ?
I think that especially after the Lisbon Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights enter into force , the EU should further elaborate its approach towards these communities .
President of the Commission . - The answer is simple : yes .
My intention is precisely to place non-discrimination issues - including , of course , issues of minorities - under the responsibility of the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights .
I was also going to ask a question about gender balance in the Commission , so I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Cathy Ashton on her appointment .
I am sure you will agree with me that she is a great talent .
I am delighted that the first High Representative role is going to someone from Britain , and I am particularly pleased that it is going to a British woman .
It is something that we , the women in the Socialist Group , have , for some considerable time , been calling for .
Cathy Ashton was the leader in the Upper House in the UK when the Lisbon Treaty was steered through - no mean feat .
She has great political skills and has accomplished a great deal since being a Commissioner .
Her quiet diplomacy , rather than an ' ego on legs ' , has ensured agreements where others have failed and where it has proved difficult in the past .
I would say to Cathy Ashton that she is not there to stop the traffic , but actually to create the traffic system .
I know she will do a fantastic job .
President of the Commission . - I am extremely proud and happy that Catherine Ashton has been designated as the first Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative .
It is an appointment that I very much supported and approved during the European Council .
Of course , we all know her well as someone who has both the political skill and the sense of direction to take on the demanding task of High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission .
We all know that this in an innovation .
It will take time for all of us to learn how to use new arrangements to deliver the best results in terms of the European Union 's increased role in the world .
What is clear is that we will only achieve this by a real partnership between institutions .
That is what the double head is designed to provide and what I am determined that the Commission will offer : to have the best possible role in the world .
Of course I am extremely happy that she comes from Britain - I think it is essential that Britain remains at the centre of the European Union - and also that she is a woman because , as you know , I have been very committed to the gender balance .
So for all these reasons , and also because she is my colleague in the Commission , I was - as you can imagine - extremely happy with that decision .
( BG ) First of all , I want to make one clarification for Mr Schulz .
The Bulgarian prime minister has never called for the Bulgarian Socialist Party to be banned .
Now for my question to Mr Barroso .
After 19 November , is it clear which areas of foreign policy will remain as part of the Commission 's competences and which will be transferred to the External Action Service , such as enlargement , trade or aid to developing countries ?
President of the Commission . - Yes , the High Representative will , at the same time , be Vice-President of the Commission , so it is a great opportunity to put together the CFSP competences - which lie with the High Representative - and the traditional Community competences in external relations .
To put it simply , we have the same person performing the task of Javier Solana and Benita Ferrero-Waldner .
That person will be doing this as Vice-President of the Commission but also as President of the Council of Foreign Affairs .
I think it is extremely important to have this idea at that level .
In general , at the level of Heads of State or Government , as the Treaty of Lisbon states very clearly , it is for the President of the Council to represent the European Union in CFSP matters at this level and in that capacity , and for the Commission to represent the European Union in all other external matters , as set out in Article 17 of the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr Barroso , you may or may not wish to comment on the recently leaked budget review paper , but you will no doubt be aware that it has caused great concern in many regions across Europe .
Indeed , the First Minister for Wales , Rhodri Morgan , has recently written to you expressing his concerns .
In view of this , can I ask you if you will be bringing forward new proposals that ensure regions across Europe will have access to structural funds post-2013 ?
And , if you do intend to bring forward such proposals , will it be under this existing Commission or under the new Commission , when it is appointed ?
President of the Commission . - I can tell you that I have read the letter from the First Minister for Wales , but I have never read the document mentioned .

There are some working documents in the Commission , drawn up by all its services , but they do not reflect the Commission 's views .
It is only the College of Commissioners that takes positions that are binding on the Commission .
We are at a preparatory work stage .
I can tell you that personally , I am extremely committed , as you know , to social , economic and territorial cohesion , and that regional policy remains a top priority of the next Commission .
Regarding the budget review , I have decided in agreement with Parliament - in the person of the Chair of the Budgetary Committee - to present the budget review at a later date .
It makes sense first to have an agreement on the broad outlines of the European Union 2020 strategy , with the budget review then being presented by the new Commission so that the new College will have full ownership of that proposal in order to work with you very closely on the future financial perspectives .
Chris Patten said the danger in the Balkans is that they pretend to reform and the EU pretends to believe them .
That seems to be happening in Bosnia , which is sliding alarmingly towards dysfunction if not destruction .
The international community and the EU are perceived in Bosnia as failing to insist on reforms and failing to stand up to Milorad Dodik , Republika Srpska leader .
The office of High Representative , while it still lasts , has been undermined and the authority of the international community weakened .
How would you answer the charge that the EU is running an agenda in the Western Balkans which is to the benefit of the Serbs in Belgrade and Bagna Luca - with the Bosniacs the losers ?
Will you encourage the new High Representative and , when she is confirmed , Vice-President of the Commission , Cathy Ashton , to make Bosnia an absolutely top priority ?
How will you ensure that the EU 's special representative has real leverage , a clear mandate and the united support of the EU behind him or her ?
I would like to say something which is very serious .
We are talking about the outcome of the last Council meeting , of 19 November 2009 .
I know that almost anything could have been said or could have happened during the Council meeting , but this was probably not an issue at the last Council meeting , so please keep to the topic , because it is necessary .
I asked about Cathy Ashton , the High Representative , who was appointed last week .
That is very much ' follow-up to the European Council ' .
OK , fine , if President Barroso would like to answer that , but I would like to ask you , colleagues , to keep to our topic , which is very clearly defined .
President of the Commission . - First of all , let me tell you that I fully share the concerns expressed regarding the situation in Bosnia .
In fact , it is becoming an extremely difficult matter .
We are discussing this with the Bosnian authorities and with all the relevant players , within and outside of Europe .
Of course my answer to you is yes , I hope that Cathy Ashton will devote great attention to it , together with the Commissioner for enlargement , because Bosnia , as you know , is in the European Union 's area of potential enlargement .
Certainly we have to do everything to be sure that the country establishes itself on its own feet and that it is able to consolidate its existence as a full state , a democratic state , that has aspirations one day to join our Union .
( DE ) You just spoke of how you have now opened the consultations for the post-Lisbon process .
The post-Lisbon process will , then , be taken care of by the new Commission collectively .
There is a great deal of irritation that the consultation process has been so long in coming .
There is also a serious fear that it is only a formality and that the results of the consultations will not have any serious influence on the post-Lisbon process .
What is your proposal for how all the stakeholders and a fundamental analysis of the consultation process can be integrated into this process and into the Commission documents ?
Which Commissioners will you give the task of ensuring that this takes place , and what is your own responsibility in this regard ?
President of the Commission . - My responsibility is the overall coordination of the Commission and of the strategy , but I will be working with several Commissioners because , as you know , this European Union 2020 strategy is , by nature , a transversal strategy , covering very important sectors , from economic competitiveness to sustainability - i.e. the environment - as well as social inclusion aspects .
So it is a very broad remit of competences .
Regarding the delay , you are right : there is some delay .
Unfortunately , this is due to the fact that the European Council did not take its decision any sooner , with the result that we cannot have the Commission in place .
So we are launching the working document today so that everything can be ready for the Spring European Council in March , because we ought to have had a new Commission by now and we have not got one yet .
I hope to have it by the end of January .
Anyway , I have only today - and this is another piece of news I want to give you - received the final name of the 27 Commissioners-designate .
Only today .
That is why we are running a little late , but nevertheless I think we have to make the most of the consultation period so that we have a serious consultation about the future European Union 2020 Strategy .
( FR ) Mr Barroso , I would like to go back to the question that my colleague asked just now .
The timetable that you are giving us is extremely tight .
How can we define a strategy for now until 2020 in three months ?
We have to draw up a strategy for the whole of the European Union on social , economic and environmental matters , and we are given three months and a consultation period that starts today .
I would therefore like to draw your attention , Mr Barroso , to the fact that I believe that we must wait for the Commission itself to be formed , so that we can put our questions to it , but above all , that we should take the time to create a real project .
We cannot define a project for the European Union in three months .
I share your concern on this issue .
That is why , moreover , we have decided to do this now and not to leave it until a later date .
You will therefore have more time .
If we wait for the new Commission to take up office , you will probably have to wait until the end of January , and so we are already doing it .
The details will be published on the internet today , if they are not already on there .
I am also hoping for a commitment from you on this point .
I myself am ready to make a commitment .
In any case , the spring European Council marks the beginning , not the end , of the process .
However , the rotating Presidency of the Council - which the Treaty of Lisbon preserves , as you know - the Spanish Presidency , has urged us to draft an initial document that will serve as a basis for discussion .
That is why I was keen to present it now .
I will do my level best to ensure that all those who are affected by this issue can participate in and make a contribution to the revision of what is , as you yourself have emphasised , a highly important strategy .
( PL ) Mr Barroso , if we look at the main executive positions at the top of the European Union , in the match between the new EU and the old EU , the result is 3 : 0 to the old EU .
From 1 January 2012 , when there will be a new President of the European Parliament , there will be no one at the top of the European Union who will represent the 12 new Member States .
How would you defend this decision ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , the President of the Council and the High Representative are not there representing a part of Europe : they represent all of Europe .

Let me say that I was very happy also with the nomination of Herman Van Rompuy .
When Prime Minister Reinfeldt put forward his name , it was evident that this was the name that could secure consensus around the table .
And the fact that he comes from Belgium , bringing instinctive support to the Community method and being instinctively pro-European - that is a very good tribute to Belgium as well .
Having said this , with regard to the importance of the new Member Sates , I think you have already made their importance clear by the election of Mr Buzek as President of the European Parliament : someone coming from a new Member State , someone who has given so much for the reunification of Europe .

So , when we are in these positions , I am not here representing one country or one region : we are representing the whole of Europe .
( PT ) Mr President , last week , the Council acknowledged the agreement between the institutions on the budget for 2010 .
The consequences of the decisions made in Copenhagen should not form part of this agreement or commitment .
Rather , they should be the subject of an amending budget .
The question I would like to put to you is a very simple one : bearing in mind the difficulties we have seen in funding the second tranche of the economic recovery plan for this very budget , where does the Commission suppose that it will get the funds to finance the first year of combating climate change , which will call for EUR 2 billion , at the very least ?
Moreover , this total will increase year on year , so where does the President suppose the money will come from ?
Mr Portas , thank you for your question .
It is true that getting Parliament to agree to approve a specific budget for some of the actions relating to energy efficiency , energy security and the fight against climate change proved extremely difficult , and I am very happy that this has been achieved .
I would like to thank all those who made the approval of this budget possible .
If , as I hope , we come to an agreement in Copenhagen , we will then have to work to find the funds necessary to implement that agreement within the budget .
We are not quite there yet , but I am absolutely certain that if the Member States come to an agreement on future funding for mitigation actions needed for developing countries , then they will also have to come to an agreement on the funds that will have to be made available to meet this objective .
( PL ) Mr Barroso , the designation of Mrs Ashton and Mr Van Rompuy , and the Lisbon Treaty itself , will cause changes in the way the Commission works .
Some changes are set down in the Lisbon Treaty , but other changes are imprecise and unclear , and will be shaped by certain practices and decisions .
I would like to ask what changes you foresee in the work and function of the European Commission in the immediate future and in the next few years .
Now is a good time to introduce such changes and , as I said , there are currently possibilities which are not fully specified in the Lisbon Treaty .
You spoke of the designation of certain Commissioners .
I am talking about policies and actions which are not just limited to the designation and division of function of new Commissioners .
President of the Commission . - I agree with your general point that the institutions are also the way we shape them in practice .
That is why I was so happy with the designation of Cathy Ashton and Herman Van Rompuy , because I know that both of them are committed to a real European spirit and to Community matters .
Regarding the practicalities , Cathy Ashton will become High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , by virtue of the European Council Decision , on 1 December .
On the same day , she will become responsible for the external relations portfolio as Vice-President of the Commission .
As Vice-President of the Commission , she is accountable to Parliament , and Parliament knows how much Cathy Ashton is committed to parliamentary democracy .
I know that she is anxious to meet as quickly as possible with the Committee on Foreign Affairs so that her new role can be launched on the right footing .
With regard to the next college , Catherine Ashton will also have a hearing alongside the other Commissioners-designate and will be subject to your collective vote on the next college .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , with reference to last week 's meeting , I would like to ask if you yourself are happy with the selection process by which two important top posts were filled , or do you also agree that some of the Union 's decision-making procedures could still do with a large dose of extra transparency and democracy ?
I would like to ask you if the selection method applied , where the candidates appeared as if out of thin air , was a way to confirm the EU 's authority , and did it boost confidence in EU decision making ?
Should the big political groups be thinking seriously about what sort of candidates to put forward for top positions in the future , whether the selection process can be revised and improved in some way , and who should do it ?
Presumably , that will be the task of the European Parliament and its Members .
This time , Finland had highly qualified candidates and we should be glad about that .
President of the Commission . - First of all , as you know , the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty were fully respected and I , of course , support the implementation of the Treaties .
We have to respect the rule of law in the European Union .
Regarding the persons that were chosen , honestly I think we have to respect them because Minister van Rompuy is Prime Minister of Belgium and Lady Ashton is a Member of the Commission .
So I believe they have the qualities to fulfil their responsibilities .
Regarding the institutions , it is important to note that the President of the Council has to be selected by the Heads of State or Government .
It is not an election like that for the President of France or the President of Portugal .
It is the President of the European Council , and that President is selected by the Heads of State or Government .
It is different from the President of the Commission , who was selected by the Heads of State or Government and elected by this Parliament .
So we have to respect the different logic of the different institutions .

( DA ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , in this item , there has been a lot of discussion of the composition of the Commission and the portfolios that the Commissioners will be given .
One thing that we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Group are very concerned about is what portfolio the new climate commissioner will be given , since that will be crucial in deciding whether it is all just a load of hot air or whether we will have a commissioner who can really make a difference when it comes to climate change - while at the same time safeguarding Europe 's competitiveness .
I would therefore like to ask what the President of the Commission is doing and will do to ensure that the post of climate commissioner will have the weight that the President of the Commission has indicated that it should have .
In this connection , I have two specific questions : will the climate commissioner be responsible for the area of energy , and will the climate commissioner have his or her own directorate ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , I think it is fair to welcome the fact that we are going to have a Commissioner for Climate Action .
So far , that position has not existed .
It is precisely because there is a lot to do and I want to give weight , to use your expression , to this function that I have decided and have announced to Parliament the creation of the post of Commissioner for Climate Action .
That Commissioner will have a lot of responsibilities .
He or she will have to mainstream climate action , because climate action has to do with energy but also with the environment , research , agriculture and industry .
So this is a very important coordinating role for climate action , both internally and externally .
It is quite evident that Copenhagen will not be the end of the process .
I hope we will have an operational agreement at Copenhagen , but there will also be a lot of things to do after Copenhagen , including the work with our main partners .
The Commissioner for Climate Action will therefore have a very important role , externally and internally , to fulfil all our expectations for a strong climate policy in the European Union .
Mr Barroso , following the appointment of the new President , Herman van Rompuy , there has been a lot of speculation over whether direct EU taxes will be introduced .
Can you tell me please , honestly , if this is the case , and how you intend to raise such taxes ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , I do not see what the relation is between taxes and Herman Van Rompuy because it is not for the Council to propose taxes .
That is a competence of the Commission .
My answer is the following .
Firstly , I always give honest answers ; you do not need to ask me to give an honest answer .
Secondly , I intend to look at all issues of taxation in the European Union .
We have to look at this .
We have to look at own resources of the European Union .
We have promised it to Parliament .
The programme with which I was elected was to look at possible own resources , and this is in the programme that was adopted by this European Parliament .
( DE ) The Commission is pushing on with the accession negotiations with Turkey in an extremely uncritical way .
In so doing , it is paying scant regard to the mood of the Member States and their residents .
The appointment of Mr Van Rompuy as President of the European Council is the appointment of a clear opponent of Turkey 's accession and I will quote him now , ' Turkey is not Europe and never will be Europe .
The universal values that prevail in Europe , which are also the fundamental values of Christianity , would lose vigour with the accession of a large Islamic country such as Turkey . '
I therefore ask , what is the Commission 's position on this unambiguous statement ?
Furthermore , if the concerns of the public in this regard are not to be taken seriously , what about those of the President of the European Council ?
President of the Commission . - The Commission respects the position taken by the Member States , and the Member States have decided unanimously to have negotiations with Turkey .
We are fulfilling the mandate we received for negotiating on behalf of the Member States with Turkey and with other candidate countries .
It is important to know that this was a unanimous decision by the Member States .
It was not an invention of the Commission .
There was a unanimous decision by the Member States to negotiate with Turkey , and others , the possibility of their accession .
It is quite clear that Turkey is not ready for accession - neither are we to give them membership - but we should keep negotiating in the spirit of good faith with all the candidate countries .
Regarding the comments made by Mr Van Rompuy , I usually do not comment on comments .
As President of the Council , he was very clear that he will also respect the mandate that he receives from the Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , I am going to talk about two concepts , namely coordination and flexibility .
A problem has been found with all the matters that were discussed in the Council .
In recent years , there has been an extraordinary lack of coordination between the different Directorates-General in the Commission .
Climate change policy has frequently been considered independently of the scientific knowledge of the Directorate-General for Research .
It has also been conducted independently of land use , for example , which is linked to climate change .
My first question is as follows .
Are you prepared to organise and strengthen internal coordination , in such a way that , when we appoint our commissioners , we can be assured that internal coordination is guaranteed ?
My second question relates to the fact that we are talking about competitiveness , about an economic crisis .
Is the Commission also prepared to be more flexible on some matters such as REACH and its implementation , which is going to cause extraordinary damage to our own competitiveness ?
Is it prepared to be more flexible ?
My last idea on this coherence policy is that we cannot talk about the economy and recovery without talking about opening up the energy markets .
There are countries that do not have an energy market , such as Spain in the case of gas .
This means that prices rise and development becomes impossible .
I will do everything within my power to improve internal coordination within the Commission , but I must say that I think that coordination has been good .
Proof of this is the fact that decisions by the Commission have always been taken by consensus .
It is perfectly natural that when we look at different commissioners , we see that each tries to make a priority of the issue that is his most pressing concern .
It is no surprise that the Environment Commissioner shows a greater interest in environmental issues than the Industry Commissioner who , in turn , will show a greater interest in issues of industrial development .
What counts , however , is the decision of the College , and here there has been effective coordination .
Moreover , we want to develop an advanced environmental policy while , at the same time , guaranteeing the competitiveness of our businesses .
I believe that the proposals put forward by the Commission ensure that we will have appropriate solutions should other countries not subscribe to our high level of ambition in matters of environmental protection .
We do not wish to outsource European jobs to countries that do not have the same level of environmental requirements that we have here .
( ES ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , I would like you to clearly express your point of view on two matters associated with the composition of the next Commission .
Firstly , I heard you saying in this House that you were planning to subdivide the Justice and Home Affairs portfolio into two separate portfolios : one for Fundamental Rights and Justice , and another for Security and Immigration .
This afternoon , however , I heard you talking about a Fundamental Rights and Justice portfolio and a Home Affairs portfolio , which I think is a much better combination , because it means immigration will no longer be perceived as a threat to security or as an issue that is subordinate to security .
In my view , focusing on immigration in that way is not only wrong but also dangerous .
I would like to know if this approach will be adopted and if it is going to affect the structures of the Directorates-General - currently the Directorate-General for Justice and Home Affairs .
I would also like to hear a commitment from you in relation to the legislative programme that the Stockholm Programme will implement in the area of justice , security and freedom .
With the Treaty of Lisbon entering into force , Parliament is going to be decisive from the start , and I want to hear a clear commitment from you that you will involve this House in developing the legislative programme arising from the Stockholm Programme .

Mr López Aguilar , to answer your second question , yes , we do wish to closely involve Parliament , which is why this will be one of the priorities of the next Commission and something which is already expressed in the constitution , not least because Parliament will have greater powers of decision on this matter .
As for the question of the portfolio , I would like to say the following : there will be a Justice and Fundamental Rights Commissioner and a Home Affairs Commissioner .
Issues relating to immigration have a security aspect .
For instance , the Frontex agency will remain under the authority of the Home Affairs Commissioner .
It does not make sense to make it the responsibility of any other commissioner .
When it comes to matters of inclusion and integration , however , my idea is to make this the responsibility of the Social Affairs Commissioner .
After all , just like Mr López Aguilar , I believe that we should not view immigration solely through the prism of security .
Another aspect is combating illegal immigration and trafficking networks .
Frontex takes care of this .
It must be under the authority of the commissioner who deals with these matters .
However , I will place all immigration issues relating to integration and inclusion under the authority of the Social Affairs Commissioner , because these are matters of social inclusion .
( DE ) The European Council has expressed its hope that an agreement on the structure of the European External Action Service might be reached , wherever possible , by the end of April .
The Commission must give its approval to these proposals , and I would like to ask you , Mr Barroso , whether the Commission , before approving such proposals , will put forward suitable proposals and take these into the negotiations , specifically with regard to the adaptation of multiannual financial planning , the adaptation of the interinstitutional budgetary agreement and - where there are shifts of responsibility for foreign policy programmes - the adaptation and re-negotiation of these programmes which are , of course , already subject to codecision .
This is necessary because , unless there is resolution of the issues I have mentioned , the External Action Service will be just a torso without the requisite budgetary provision and without the requisite abilities to determine content .
How will the Commission accomplish these tasks with Parliament over the coming months ?
President of the Commission . - Thank you , Mr Böge , for your question .
I know how committed you are to the rules of the budget and the competence of Parliament .
My answer to you is yes , of course we will come at the proper time with proposals for this Parliament to adopt the necessary adjustments so that this new entity , the European External Action Service , can have the means , the budgetary means , to implement all its actions .
As I have said before , we want this to be one of the great successes of the Lisbon Treaty .
I think it is a very important innovation and of course , based on the proposal that will be made by Vice-President Ashton , as High Representative , we will work on this matter together with Parliament .
( FR ) Mr Barroso , I would like to inform you that , in a few days ' time , we will be observing the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People .
The situation of the crushed , colonised , wounded , killed Palestinian population must not continue .
We Europeans , through our values of solidarity and fraternity , have a responsibility to find a solution to this situation quickly , before it turns into a bloodbath .
The Israeli Government is continuing its colonisations by forced march , and this after it committed war crimes at the start of this year .
Symbols and tears are no longer enough .
Today , the only solution to stop this deadly policy of the Israeli Government is the recognition and , above all , the existence of the Palestinian State .
The Palestinian people , like other peoples , have a right to a dignified existence that fulfils their aspirations .
As President of the Commission , and together with Mrs Ashton , will you take action along these lines and , if so , how ?
Firstly , I would like to echo your comments about showing solidarity with the Palestinian people , who are in fact suffering from a lack of respect for their right to self-determination .
With regard to the specific question that you asked me , it is the responsibility of the Member States to decide whether or not they recognise another state .
Our position - the position that the Commission has always upheld - consists in supporting the coexistence of two states : the right of the State of Israel to exist freely and without its security being threatened and , in parallel to that , the right of the Palestinian people to build their own state .
We want the coexistence of these two states to be able to create a new situation , not only for the Israeli people and the Palestinian people , but for the entire region too , since the situation there is really very serious .
It is jeopardising not only the hope of the Palestinian people but also peace in the region and peace in the world .
Thank you , Mr President of the Commission .
We achieved much more than last time , one month ago .
Thank you very much , too , for keeping perfectly to your time .
We understand that it is not always easy to answer sometimes complicated questions in one minute .
I think it is very helpful for all of us in the two institutions to understand each other .
This is very responsible , and it is a very important signal for our citizens that the two institutions can discuss matters and communicate with each other .
We will see you again for Question Hour next month .
( Applause )
Multi-annual programme 2010-2014 regarding the area of freedom , security and justice ( Stockholm Programme ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the multi-annual programme 2010-2014 regarding the area of freedom , security and justice ( Stockholm Programme ) .
Mr President , committee chairmen , honourable Members , at the European Council on 10-11 December , a new five-year programme for the area of freedom , security and justice will be adopted .
The programme is intended to supersede the current Hague Programme from 2004 .
The new programme has been preceded by a long preparatory process that was started more than two years ago by the future groups .
The programme will be based on the Commission communication , but also on the many opinions that have been put forward by national parliaments , civil society and various EU bodies and agencies during the process .
The programme is , of course , also a result of intensive contact and in-depth negotiations with the EU Member States and also with the European Parliament .
The European Parliament 's attitude to the future cooperation is important , particularly in view of the greater role that Parliament will have as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon .
On the basis of the previous Tampere and Hague Programmes , significant progress has been made by the EU in the area of freedom , security and justice .
However , Europe is still facing challenges that we need to deal with jointly at European level .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon will give us new opportunities to do that and the new multi-annual work programme - the Stockholm Programme - will therefore be based on the new opportunities that the Treaty of Lisbon provides .
The vision of the Stockholm Programme is for a safer and more open Europe where the rights of individuals are protected .
The needs of citizens , of individuals , will form the basis for future cooperation in this area in a way that is much more evident than it was previously .
We are working on behalf of the citizens , and they need to feel that future EU cooperation is important to them .
It should therefore be based on real problems , ask relevant questions and focus on specific measures that will provide added value to people 's everyday lives .
Future cooperation in this area must also be based on a better balance between measures aimed at creating a safe and secure Europe and measures aimed at protecting the rights of individuals .
From the citizens ' perspective , combating crime is important .
Citizens expect EU cooperation to make it easier to prevent cross-border crime , but they also expect freedom and justice .
As I have emphasised to the European Parliament previously , measures aimed at providing increased security and measures to ensure legal certainty and the rights of individuals go hand in hand and , of course , this is also possible .
When it comes to combating cross-border crime , the challenges are great .
Drugs trafficking , people-trafficking and terrorism are a reality on our continent , while at the same time , we have new types of crime , as a result of the internet , for example .
We cannot allow national or administrative borders to prevent the crime-fighting authorities from carrying out their work efficiently .
Cross-border crime-fighting cooperation has been developed , but we still have more to do to achieve effective European police and criminal law cooperation .
We need common solutions to common problems .
Well-developed police cooperation , an efficient exchange of information and experience and well-developed working methods are fundamental in dealing with these problems .
A key element of combating crime is , of course , an efficient exchange of information , tailored to our needs .
At European level we should , in certain cases , standardise the exchange of information , adapt it to our needs and make it more efficient .
At the same time , it is extremely important to ensure that the exchange of information complies with the basic requirements for data protection and the protection of privacy that we must impose and that no more information is gathered and stored than is needed to serve the purpose .
We must create a secure Europe in which cross-border crime is combated effectively , while at the same time , the privacy of individuals is respected .
It is completely possible and absolutely necessary to do both of these things .
It is a matter of finding the right balance for the various measures .
The principle of mutual recognition must continue to be a fundamental principle in our legal cooperation .
A prerequisite for Member States wishing to recognise and enforce the judgments and decisions of other States is that there is mutual trust in one another 's legal systems .
It is also a question of trust between our national authorities , and citizens should have trust in the measures that are decided on .
One way of increasing trust is to increase our knowledge of one another 's legal systems .
It may be a matter of providing training , exchange programmes , strengthening existing networks and well-developed evaluation mechanisms .
However , perhaps the most important measure for developing trust is to guarantee certain minimum rights irrespective of where someone is within the European Union .
These are simple things such as being able to find out , in a language that you understand , what you are accused of and what rights you have as a suspect or victim in a legal process .
It is very gratifying that , within the Council , we have been able to agree on a road map for how the procedural rights for suspects and defendants are to be dealt with and implemented step by step .
It would be desirable for the road map to be included in the Stockholm Programme and I believe that it will be .
The Stockholm Programme should also clearly take the perspective of the victims of crime .
Citizens who become victims of crime in their own country or in another Member State should receive relevant information in a language that they understand and be offered adequate support , information and protection prior to , during and after criminal proceedings .
Victims should also be offered adequate compensation for the damage or injury they have suffered .
Finally , I would like to say a few words about the civil law issues which , to a large extent , affect the everyday lives of individuals .
One specific issue is the review of the Brussels I Regulation on recognition and enforcement of judgments from other Member States .
They may seem like very technical issues , but they are very important for individual citizens .
One of the most important issues is the abolition of the exequatur procedure .
Currently , anyone who wishes to have a judgment enforced in another Member State must first apply for and then be granted enforcement by a court in that country .
It takes time and incurs costs for the individual .
We have noted that there is a high level of support for the abolition of the exequatur procedure , but it must be compatible with procedural guarantees and rules on the choice of law .
These are some of the major and important issues that have been highlighted by Sweden and by many Member States .
Thank you very much for your attention and I look forward to listening to your comments and answering your questions .
However , before I do that , I will pass the floor to my colleague , Mr Billström , who is responsible for some of the asylum and migration issues that will be important in the forthcoming Stockholm Programme and he will present these to you now .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to begin by thanking the European Parliament for its very constructive cooperation in respect of the European Asylum Support Office .
There are still a few formalities to iron out , but the conditions will soon be in place for this office to be set up .
The Council has a very positive view of the constructive cooperation with the European Parliament that has led to us achieving this result .
It bodes well for the increased cooperation that we will experience once the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force .
The fact that we have been able to arrive at a quick decision with regard to the Support Office is a good example of an efficient and well-functioning codecision process .
What we are to debate here today is , of course , the forthcoming five-year programme for the work in connection with justice and home affairs .
I will start by saying that much has happened within the EU in the area of asylum and migration over the last few years .
For example , we have taken decisions on joint legislation with regard to the first foundations of a common immigration policy and a common asylum system .
Incidentally , that is an objective that was stated in both of the previous work programmes from Tampere and The Hague .
When the European Council adopted the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum last year , this policy area was given new political force .
Now it is time to set the course for the continued development of the policy in this area .
The basic premise for our work is that well-managed migration can be a positive thing for all parties concerned , not only for the individual Member States and for the EU as a whole , but also for the countries of origin and the individual migrants .
If we are to be able to meet the objectives of the Lisbon strategy that the EU should be a dynamic and competitive economy , we will probably need to allow the immigration of workers on a larger scale than we are currently doing , particularly in view of the demographic challenge we are facing .
In order to emphasise the international dimension of migration , the issue of cooperation with the countries of origin and transit within the framework of the global approach to migration and development should have its starting point in the Stockholm Programme .
The instruments that have been developed , such as the partnership for mobility , should continue to be developed and consolidated in a strategic way .
The link between migration and development must be utilised better and appropriate measures for better utilising the positive effects of migration on development must be stepped up .
During the work on the Stockholm Programme , it emerged that there is agreement on the need for the Member States to prevent illegal immigration into the EU in a joint and coordinated way .
The development of an effective repatriation policy is an important element of this work .
There is no doubt that Frontex has an important role to play in this regard , and it is clear that the Member States want to see the agency strengthened .
Increasing cooperation with the countries of origin and transit is also of major interest .
However , I would like to emphasise that , in the work to prevent illegal immigration , it is important that we maintain a balance , so that security measures are not implemented at the cost of making lawful immigration to the EU complicated or access to the asylum process more difficult for asylum seekers .
The risks to vulnerable groups , for example , children coming alone , must also be minimised .
The Commission is going to produce an action plan containing measures that take account of the best interests of the children .
The issue of solidarity and division of responsibility will be dealt with in the Stockholm Programme .
There are no simple solutions .
Our starting point should be to seek broad and sustainable solutions , based on the global approach to migration and the awareness that joint cooperation with third countries is a crucial factor .
Some form of solidarity mechanism needs to be developed to be able to help those Member States that find themselves under particular pressure and that receive a disproportionate number of asylum seekers .
The Member States must also receive support for further capacity building .
Frontex must be strengthened and be given a greater role in repatriation .
The aim is for us to be better able to show solidarity with both the Member States and the third countries that are subject to the greatest migration pressure .
At the same time , we must be clear that we need a comprehensive approach that is sustainable in both the short and the long term .
It is important for it to be stated in the Stockholm Programme that the goal previously set of creating a common European asylum system by 2012 at the latest remains .
The mainstay of the common asylum system must be that an individual asylum seeker should experience the same reception and have his or her application assessed according to the same criteria irrespective of which Member States he or she arrives in .
Well-functioning practical cooperation is fundamental to us being able to achieve this .
In this connection , the Asylum Support Office will have an important role to play .
Another important element of the common asylum system is what is known as the ' external dimension ' .
I am thinking primarily of the resettlement of refugees from third countries .
The Commission has recently presented a proposal for a joint EU resettlement programme .
This is one aspect that the majority of Member States would like to see reflected in the Stockholm Programme .
In order to be able to meet the objective of having a common asylum system by 2012 , we need close cooperation between the Council and Parliament .
There are a number of proposals for legislative acts on the table .
We need , first and foremost , to make progress on these .
The link between the EU 's internal work on justice and home affairs and the Union 's external relations has become more and more important to enable progress to be made , and not only within asylum and migration policy .
The EU 's role as a global player in this area should therefore be strengthened , and particular focus should be placed on partnership and cooperation with third countries .
The justice and home affairs perspective in the EU 's external relations needs to be developed .
This is the main feature of the Presidency 's draft of the Stockholm Programme .
We are now at the end of a very intensive period of negotiation and the programme will hopefully be adopted in a couple of weeks ' time .
Finally , I would like to say a few words about the Treaty of Lisbon .
The new treaty will bring major changes in the area of freedom , security and justice as a result of the introduction of a number of new legal bases .
The ordinary legislative procedure that is being introduced will mean that the European Parliament is given a greater role in the legislative process in a number of areas .
Mrs Ask and I are looking forward to increased cooperation with the European Parliament .
I also believe that the new tasks conferred on the national parliaments will be important in strengthening the democratic control over this policy area .
Thank you very much for your attention .
As my colleague Mrs Ask said , we now look forward to hearing your views .

Mr President , following the excellent reports by Mrs Ask and Mr Billström , I am going to focus on the main issues .
Firstly , I wish to thank the Presidency for having kept the spirit of the Stockholm Programme and for having put Europeans at the heart of its action , in its communication .
We hope that this text , which should be adopted by the next JHA Council and then submitted to the December European Council , will be an ambitious and balanced text and obviously one that reflects the new institutional balance .
You are going to become colegislators now in virtually all areas of justice and home affairs , and it is therefore true that this parliamentarisation of the European Union represents increased powers for the European Parliament in the decision-making process , but also greater control by the national parliaments of their respective governments .
This involvement of the parliaments is an opportunity for this major area of security , justice and freedom .
I now come to the priorities highlighted in your draft resolution .
You emphasise respect for fundamental rights .
You are right to emphasise this freedom of movement , which is a major asset and which obviously must not be called into question .
With regard to fundamental rights , we have achieved two major breakthroughs with the Treaty of Lisbon : the Charter of Fundamental Rights becomes binding , and the door is open for the Union to become a party to the European Convention on Human Rights .
As you stress in your resolution , we must come up with a comprehensive data protection system that incorporates technological developments .
The Commission will present a communication on this subject in 2010 .
I also believe that we will have to cover all of the Union 's policies with this comprehensive data protection system .
You emphasise child protection .
With the Swedish Presidency , we have celebrated once again the International Convention on the Rights of the Child , which is in its 20th year .
The Union must remain at the forefront on this issue .
That is why we will present an action plan on unaccompanied minors in early 2010 .
Generally speaking , the Commission and Parliament share the same will when it comes to combating all forms of discrimination and to promoting equality between men and women .
I welcome the fact that Parliament and the Commission take the same approach , which is to put Europeans at the heart of their action with regard to freedom of movement , electoral rights , consular protection , and so on .
We are now going to be able to put all of this into practice .
The Treaty of Lisbon authorises the citizens ' initiative procedure , and the Commission has just published a green paper on this point .
A proposal will be submitted in 2010 on the basis of the outcome of the consultations carried out .
As Minister Ask explained very well just now , we need to make the judges in our Member States share a common European judicial culture .
This hinges on training .
We have made a commitment in the Stockholm Programme : at least half of the judges and the prosecutors in the Union will have to have received European training or have taken part in an exchange with another Member State .
You also stress the need to facilitate access to justice and to support the proper functioning of the economy .
You emphasise the protection of victims - victims of domestic violence and victims of terrorism .
The Commission will also submit proposals on this issue , taking advantage of the opportunities offered by the Treaty of Lisbon .
With regard to the security and protection aspect , you highlight the lack of a comprehensive strategy on security architecture and border management .
That is why , as Mrs Ask explained very well , the Stockholm Programme contains a genuine internal security strategy - a strategy that respects , of course , fundamental rights , and that complements the external security strategy .
This comprehensive internal security strategy is based on police and criminal justice cooperation and on managing access to European territory .
As Mr Billström rightly pointed out just now , immigration policy must be part of a long-term vision for optimising the contribution that migrants make to economic and social development .
We must provide legal immigrants with a clear and common status .
We must also prevent and reduce illegal immigration while showing respect for human rights and human dignity .
I would add that we have outlined in this part the elements of the overall approach that will enable development and migration to be linked .
On the subject of asylum , I support your call for genuine solidarity between the Member States .
The Union must become a true common and united area of protection , based on respect for fundamental rights and for high standards of protection , and asylum must be offered , as Mr Billström said , in accordance with the same criteria in Europe .
Solidarity among Member States and , in particular , towards those who receive the largest numbers of refugees , must be demonstrated in full .
This area of freedom , security and justice does , of course , demand a strong external dimension that is consistent with the Union 's foreign policy .
You mention on several occasions , in your resolution , the importance of monitoring , the conducting of assessments .
We share your view on this point too .
We must reduce the considerable gap between the standards and policies adopted at European level and their application at national level .
We must also give thought to the possible impact of legislative proposals on citizens and we must improve the way in which the evaluation of the instruments adopted is used .
To conclude , the Commission is fully involved in negotiating the Stockholm Programme .
I said how satisfied I was with our cooperation with the Swedish Presidency , with which we have really done a thorough , serious job .
Obviously , Parliament 's opinion is very important to us , not least in these final moments before the Stockholm Programme is adopted by the European Council .
That is why I thank you most sincerely , and that is also why I , in turn , will listen to you very carefully . Thank you , Parliament .
Mr President , Mr Vice-President , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , I have been here in the European Parliament for 5 years now , and I work in the field of internal affairs and the law .
Today , therefore , is a day of joy for me , when we have the opportunity to debate the programmes for the next five years , when we will be able to deliberate on this future as a European Parliament on an equal legislative footing .
We are discussing a dossier , a subject area , that exercises the public , where the public expect answers from us , where they even say that this is an area where we need more Europe .
That is not so for every subject area , but in this case it is .
They are making demands of us .
They want answers from us .
I therefore want to very briefly describe the change that will result from the new working basis and these subjects .
The first point is working with the Council .
We always have representatives of the Council here and they always tell us , as Presidents-in-Office of the Council , that Parliament is very important and that we must work together .
When they leave that role , however , that understanding often crumbles away .
It will be our job , as parliamentarians , to demand of the Council that it no longer allow this understanding to slip away , or for it - as with the SWIFT agreement , for example - to create precedents , despite not involving us here in Parliament in the approval process .
That cannot , and in future , will not , be the situation any longer .
It was a bad example of the institutions taking each other seriously .
My second point is that we must be creators of ideas .
The new treaty gives us the opportunity to table legislative initiatives .
If we want to strengthen Frontex , we cannot just call for things to happen and just make proposals , we must also put legislation on the table .
In future , we will have the opportunity to do that .
My third point is that we also need to be a serious partner , one that does not just draw up wish lists .
If , for example , we are dealing with the fight against illegal migration , we must not just take on NGO positions , we must be a serious partner .
Finally , the European Parliament must take subsidiarity seriously .
If we have competence , we must also consider which subject areas would be better dealt with at the national or regional level .
These are four subjects that I think are important for the forthcoming few years .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) would have liked the proposals for the Stockholm Programme to have been much more ambitious still , but today is a day to rejoice that we are entering this new phase , and all that remains to be said is let us get on with the work !
The introduction of the Lisbon Treaty will make an important contribution to the success of this entire initiative .
The process brought in by the treaty will strengthen the Union from within and also in a global context , and is also very closely linked to strengthening cooperation in the area of the current third pillar .
The Union will be more open , more effective and more democratic .
The main challenge and priority is to secure fundamental rights and freedoms as well as integrity and security in Europe through fully supporting effective implementation and sufficient respect for and improvement of existing legal instruments , while taking into account the protection of human rights and civic freedoms .
The Stockholm Programme emphasises the assertion of these rights , especially in the areas of justice and security .
We must give precedence to mechanisms which facilitate the access of citizens to the courts so that their rights and lawful interests can be enforced throughout the Union .
It must also be our strategy to strengthen police cooperation and the enforcement of rights as well as improving security in Europe .
I would hereby also like to thank all of the rapporteurs for their conclusions and you , Mr President , for the time .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , officially I could now sum up the parts of our 27-page resolution that are most relevant for the other groups , but I will not .
I would like to share the following story with you .
On a British Airways flight from Johannesburg , a well-off , middle-aged white South African lady found herself sitting next to a black man .
She called the stewardess over to complain about her seating .
' What seems to be the problem , Madam ? '
' Well , can 't you see ? ' she said , ' I can 't possibly sit next to this disgusting human .
Find me another seat ! '
A few minutes later , the stewardess returned .
' Madam , unfortunately , as I suspected , economy class is full .
I have spoken to the cabin services director and Club is also full .
However , we do have one seat in first class . '
Before the South African lady had a chance to answer , the stewardess continued , ' It is quite exceptional to make this kind of upgrade , but given the circumstances the captain felt that it was outrageous that someone should be forced to sit next to such an obnoxious person . '
She then turned to the black man sitting next to the South African lady and said , ' Sir , if you would like to get your things , I have a seat ready for you in first class up at the front . '
The surrounding passengers gave a standing ovation while the black man walked up to first class .
Now , what has this got to do with us ?
Do we consider others inferior ?
The white South African lady would shock us all .
But that was obviously an extreme example .
However , I do think that some of our colleagues in the EPP in particular , but also in the Council , understand perfectly what I am trying to say here .
The other group , my group , firmly believes in a Europe which people can understand , trust and believe in .
Such a Europe must be based on human rights , fundamental freedoms , democracy , the rule of law and , yes , true equality for all .
It is high time to tackle all forms of discrimination on all grounds , including on the basis of sexual orientation .
Mr President , we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are already very much asking ourselves how it can be that we are deciding here about a resolution on a programme that is already out of date ?
Only yesterday , the Swedish Presidency tabled a new and highly amended proposal for the Stockholm Programme .
I would assume that the vast majority of Members of this esteemed Chamber have not had the opportunity to read the proposal in question .
In my opinion , that is an unacceptable situation for this highly sensitive matter .
What is more , the procedure within Parliament that led to this resolution was largely opaque and , at times , chaotic .
The smaller groups were excluded from the process of drawing up the resolution as far as possible , and the abundance of amendments to the procedures of the joint committees posed significant obstacles to democratic decision making .
Please make allowance , then , for our requests for a whole series of split votes .
Parliament seriously needs to consider how it wants to deal with these conditions , both in respect of the Council and of its own Members .
I will turn now to the content of the Stockholm Programme .
Parts of this work programme are undoubtedly to be viewed as progress .
When it comes to justice and the common construction of civil law rules , we Greens , too , see positive beginnings for the coming years .
However , when it comes to the relationship of the citizens to the State , the programme is a manifestation of an utterly badly erected framework .
In relation to migration and asylum policy , civil rights and data protection , the need for security in Europe has been prioritised ahead of human rights and freedom .
It is being openly suggested that more freedom in Europe would automatically lead to less security .
I ask you , what happened to the founding myth of the European idea , in this case ?
Fear is being stoked here , and not - as it says in the programme - justified fear of organised crime or terrorism , but fear of our fellow human beings here in Europe , fear of those who want to come to Europe and , above all , fear of anything that we think in some way foreign .
The Stockholm Programme , and regrettably also the proposed resolution , continue the linking of internal and foreign policy in order to facilitate the monitoring of everyone in Europe and the depriving of the people on our external borders of their rights , which is to be enforced by Frontex .
Europe must finally leave this trend behind it and put the wrong moves of recent years under the microscope .
That also means consciously standing up and advocating what you believe in .
This applies , for example , to our debates about the SWIFT agreement .
Why are we once more giving way to US policy when it comes to security policy matters - as in the case of the SWIFT agreement - without reason , and without having a comprehensive debate on the matter in this House once again .
Why do we , Parliament , allow the Council to run rings around us time and again ?
We , Parliament , very much need to do something about that .
Send out a message here and now in favour of human rights and in favour of freedom - including to your governments - and vote in favour of all our amendments .
We Greens cannot vote ' yes ' to the resolution as it stands .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the motion for a resolution to which we are referring in this debate is a perfect example , I have to say , of the European Parliament at its worst .
Whilst I acknowledge the hard work of the rapporteurs , and no doubt their noble intentions , by trying to include everything in the 27-page text , the motion is confused and , in my view , a lot less valuable than the Stockholm Agenda and the Swedish Presidency deserve .
Let me stress that we , too , want to see greater cooperation in the quest to find solutions , and to have solidarity on immigration and in fighting corruption and exchanging information , but this should not necessarily be at the cost of national sovereignty , nor should it be overly prescriptive .
Applying the 1951 United Nations Convention on Refugees all over Europe in a proper manner is still the best way of dealing with asylum issues .
We support exchange of information to ensure that we have a true JHA approach to the use of data , underpinned by strong data protection , founded on principles of proportionality , necessity and transparency .
We also support the principle of mutual recognition , and free movement rights should be assured for European citizens , but abuse of those rights must be curtailed through strong border controls and by using the EU 's weight to secure quicker returns , and through the development of Frontex protecting the EU 's external borders .
The exchange of information helps combat terrorism .
We also support the EU 's serious organised crime strategy , targeting gangs who trade on the trafficking of people , guns and dogs , confiscating profits illicitly gained and working with European organisations on the EU border .
However , we cannot support items that we see as blatant encroachments on sovereignty , unless they are in themselves leading to greater cooperation .
Surely there is a certain irony in calling for compulsory and irrevocable solidarity : surely solidarity is something that is offered and not compulsory .
In the main , I think the Swedish Presidency , and indeed the motion itself , have good ideas , but unfortunately , as usual , we go on providing ourselves with massive Christmas trees where very little can actually , therefore , be achieved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left will not be giving the resolution its backing .
The Stockholm Programme completely fails to address the real challenges of the present day .
Its main error is that a Europe of rights is being created to which EU citizens will be granted access but others who live in Europe will not .
These other people will not be entitled to the same human and civil rights .
The EU wants to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights - something that we welcome - yet , at the same time , migrants are to be separated out according to the ' legal or illegal ' principle .
Frontex is therefore being tooled up to wage war on so-called illegal migration , completely obscuring the idea of an unprejudiced immigration policy from view .
This is where Stockholm fails .
Another problem is the complete imbalance between freedom and security .
It is true that there is no freedom without security , but it is also the case that there is no security without freedom .
Freedom is not something to be negotiated , it is a universal right for every human being .
Stockholm , in contrast , symbolises the EU 's manic lust for security , in which giant supranational databases are to be created without adequate opportunities for control , which will then mix intelligence service and police data on a pan-European basis .
This will mean the shredding of people 's right to self-determination in relation to their data and that the vision of a see-through human being will actually be the reality .
Allow me , as an MEP from eastern Germany , to conclude by observing that I find it insufferable , 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , that Europe is coming more and more to resemble a fortress .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the document on the Stockholm Programme is reductive when compared with the European Council 's conclusions and does not , for example , include significant requests made by the Italian Government on specific subjects .
In fact , the document does not deal with a series of European strategies to attack the assets of organised crime .
Today , I have heard much said - and I have heard it on many previous occasions - about various worrying aspects of crime .
We need to move from words to deeds .
Europe should act like Italy , which is setting an example for the whole of Europe in attacking Mafia assets , thanks to Minister Maroni .
Europe seems not to want to move in the same direction .
We need to create a single European legal system if we want to combat , at European level , crime that has become international and moves easily between banks , tax havens , financial markets and movable and fixed assets markets .
Furthermore , little attention is being paid to combating immigration on Europe 's southern border where , for instance , the agreement with Libya , which is now operating as far as Italy concerned , could run into difficulties .
This would happen if the European Union did not continue with its commitment to cofinance the satellite survey system of the southern Libyan border , across which enormous numbers of illegal immigrants pass .
Finally , with regard to the incident of racism against a non-white person , I would like to point to the huge numbers of equally serious anti-white racism incidents occurring in the enclaves of illegal immigration , not to mention the ' white-hunting ' taking place under President Mugabe 's reign and also even in South Africa .
Those who talk so much about racism against black people ought to be aware of anti-European and anti-white racism too .
( DE ) Mr President , the fight against terror , against organised crime and against illegal immigration is certainly an important concern for Europe .
It must be said , however , that the Stockholm Programme , regrettably , is a consistent continuation of the path of constant degradation of and interference with guaranteed human rights , civil rights and freedoms that we have been pursuing since September 11 , 2001 .
Concerns in relation to data protection law are simply brushed aside in the fight against purported terror .
When this happens , it is the individual citizens , the very people who the EU pushes to the top of the agenda time and again , who have their data recorded and collected , even where there is no suspicion of criminal activity , and whose data is then potentially subject to misuse .
Officially , the aim here is to combat organised crime .
That is all well and good , but there are already first signs and tendencies , expressions of opinion , that do not correspond to the consensus of what has come to be called political correctness , to restrict , to prohibit and , who knows , sooner or later , to punish .
George Orwell warned us of this - and we must prevent it from occurring .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which I have the honour of chairing , gave me the task of acting as rapporteur on this document , together with the rapporteurs from the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs , sitting jointly .
This is the first time that Rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure has been applied and I must say that , in my view , the result has been very satisfactory with regard to the cooperation between the three rapporteurs in carrying out their work .
There have , in fact , been problems , some of them serious , with regard to the timeframe and , above all , the involvement of the shadow rapporteurs and the timely translation of the amendments , of which there were nearly 500 .
However , all that is due not to Rule 51 itself , but rather to the very short deadlines that we gave ourselves in order to have a document that we could submit to the Council summit taking place on 10 December .
It was thus inevitable that there would be these problems linked to the pace of work .
For the rest , I believe that we should acknowledge that Rule 51 , which has been used for the first time , is useful .
The document under consideration by this Parliament cannot be explained in the few seconds that remain to me .
However , I must express my satisfaction that the codecision system has been extended to become the normal system of legislation , that immigration is now understood to be a European issue - and I hope that this is how the Commission and the Council interpret it - and not a problem for individual Member States acting in solidarity with each other , that the view taken of cooperation with the national parliaments is not that they are guardians laying down limits , but rather positive collaborators in the legislative process , and finally , that there is that reference to human rights which is extremely important , and which is the spirit of the European Union .
I therefore believe that , in view of the fact that it was not supposed to detail down to the finest particulars the implementation of the Stockholm Programme , but only to formulate general outlines , this document is certainly a positive step .
There will be time and a way in which to make it more comprehensive , and to include more details .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to start by acknowledging the work done by the Swedish Presidency of the Council and the Commission to drive forward the multi-annual programme for the next five years in the area of freedom , security and justice .
Above all , however , I would like to highlight the work of this Parliament , because three committees , the Committee on Legal Affairs , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , have worked shoulder to shoulder under the Article 51 procedure for the first time , and we have done so in order to be ready on time .
This is because it is important , really important , to drive forward the area of freedom , justice and security , keeping in mind that the Treaty of Lisbon is going to enter into force , which represents a great step forward .
It will be a great step forward because it will strengthen Parliament , which is going to be a colegislator and decision maker in a whole area that , until now , had been the domain of intergovernmental cooperation , but also because the European Charter of Fundamental Rights and the mandate to ratify the European Convention on Human Rights are entering into force , which will strengthen the harmonious relationship between freedom and security .
Security is not subordinate to freedom , nor is it a threat to freedom .
Security is a citizen 's right , as is freedom .
This is the case in many of the constitutions of the Member States , and they must come together in a single effort to cover the status of European citizenship , the fundamental rights of citizens , immigration , asylum , refuge , managing the EU 's external borders and judicial cooperation .
This needs to be done in order to strengthen mutual trust , mutual recognition of our civil rights , of the law of contracts , which boosts economic growth and job creation , and , above all , police and criminal judicial cooperation in order to combat real common enemies together : organised crime and terrorism .
Parliament has worked hard , and has improved the document produced by the Council .
It has improved it by strengthening the anti-discrimination clause , in particular , with regard to women and children , and there is a commitment to combat gender violence and to protect the victims of gender violence by strengthening the solidarity clause in terms of asylum .
This demonstrates that neither immigration nor asylum are a problem affecting just one Member State , but that they require cooperation between all the Member States , because otherwise we will not be able to tackle them .
Parliament has also improved the text by highlighting the importance of training legal professionals to cooperate and to bring our legal structures closer together through mutual recognition and trust , so that we can integrate the response instruments in order to make the European Union a true area of freedom , justice and security .
This is why I think that it is worth Parliament sending a clear message to the citizens who are watching us when we vote tomorrow on the parliamentary report that the three Committees have drawn up together .
The message is that their fundamental rights matter to us , their freedom matters to us , their security matters to us , it matters to us to work together to fight trans-national organised crime , violence and terrorism , and to protect all victims of these types of crime , especially the victims of terrorism .
I do not think that citizens would understand if we let them down on this .
I therefore ask for the broadest possible support from this House for the report that we are presenting tomorrow and which must be voted on in this part-session .
( NL ) First of all , I welcome the warm words the Council has spoken about the cooperation with Parliament , but I should prefer to see it taking on board Parliament 's recommendations .
After all , like Mr Albrecht , I note that the Council is actually turning a deaf ear , to some extent , and simply continuing to go its own way , whilst Parliament is working hard to take a position , without this subsequently ending up in the Council programme .
My second point is the one illustrated very well by my colleague Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert .
I should like to remind Parliament , particularly the two large groups , that equality is indivisible .
We cannot give a bit of equality to some groups and not to others .
In the past , the State would interfere in people 's choice of partner and ban marriages between people of certain religions and between people of different races .
Fortunately , those days are gone ; and so , in my opinion , no Member State of the European Union should be refusing to recognise a marriage legally contracted in another Member State , and that includes marriages between two people of the same sex .
Therefore , I would appeal to the two large groups to withdraw the compromise by which they seek to weaken the rights of homosexual couples .
Here , I am looking in particular at our friends in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
This is the 21st century , and I believe that all European citizens , irrespective of racial origin , religion , age or sexual orientation , deserve our protection .
It is high time Parliament recognised this for once .
( PT ) Mr President , I believe that this Parliament would welcome a concrete and concise Stockholm Programme which is capable of really promoting a Europe of citizens .
Unfortunately , I think we are a little short of where we could be .
The Stockholm Programme does have an unfortunate tendency towards vagueness , woolliness and generalities , and I am bound to say that Parliament 's lack of democratic control or power to intervene in any real way which might bring about change or have a practical impact is part of the problem that has led to an inconclusive and oversimplified programme .
One example is the immigration policy .
We have all followed the implementation of the European Asylum Support Office with great interest , but I believe , for instance , that very few steps have been made towards opening legal channels of immigration , which are absolutely necessary , or towards the directive on seasonal immigrants , which we have been anticipating for so long , but which does not even seem to have been considered by the Stockholm Programme .
Mr President , the Stockholm Programme is part of creating a common legal and judicial system across the European Union .
The document talks about ' making people 's lives easier : a Europe of law and justice ' .
Let me tell you what your common legal system has done for the life of one person .
Andrew Symeou , a 20-year-old London man , was extradited to Greece this summer on a manslaughter charge .
He now languishes in a Greek prison awaiting trial .
The evidence against him would not stand up for five minutes if examined by a British court .
The identification evidence is contradictory .
Witness statements have all the signs of having been written by the police .
Two witnesses claim they were beaten and mistreated and forced to sign statements which they later immediately withdrew .
The appeal court in London knew very well there was no real evidence against Mr Symeou but they were forced to extradite him because , under the European arrest warrant , they had no power to stop it .
The British courts cannot now protect British citizens from unjust arrest and imprisonment by foreign courts .
We had a perfectly good area of freedom , security and justice in Britain before we joined the European Union .
The European Union is destroying the legal protections that we enjoyed in England for centuries .
In the process , it will destroy people 's lives .
The Stockholm Programme may be about law , but it is not about justice .
If the British people want to preserve their liberties , then they have to leave the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , the Stockholm Programme doubtless contains a number of useful initiatives , and I am all in favour of pushing forward the fight against child pornography and terrorist networks on the internet .
Measures against illegal immigrants and against organised crime also have my support .
Unrestricted access for the security services to the EU fingerprints database is justified in this regard .
However , monitoring must not go so far that the EU becomes a surveillance state which then also passes on its data to the United States .
There is therefore a need to ensure that the data collected is not abused .
Ultimately , this is about the key fundamental right of every EU citizen to have his or her privacy protected , and in this context we must observe the fact that freedom means freedom from the State and not freedom through the State .
I also want to say something about the harmonisation of EU asylum law .
This is definitely the right thing to do .
We need to make absolutely clear , though , that without harmonisation of the economic conditions in the different countries , this will not work , as people will , naturally enough , go to where they can find the best social security , the highest incomes , the cleanest streets and the safest towns and cities .
One thing is clear , and that is that we should indeed have harmonisation , but Europe must not become a land of self-service asylum policy .
( MT ) We consider the issue of justice , freedom and security as the European Union 's next big project .
I would say that this project has to be tackled along the same lines as we tackled the large internal market project of the European Union .
We need to create an area of justice , freedom and security for all European Union citizens .
How are we going to get there ?
We will succeed by means of the Stockholm Programme , which is a five year work programme .
It is a far reaching programme which covers several areas falling under the umbrella of justice , freedom and security .
Parliament 's resolution defines the European Parliament 's political priorities in this area .
For example , our priorities in the area of immigration lie in the fight against illegal immigration as well as a common asylum policy that is built upon true and obligatory solidarity .
I must also add that the European Parliament has a very significant and constructive role to play by way of the codecision powers it will enjoy once the Lisbon Treaty comes into force .
There are also certain political differences within the internal dimension of this Parliament .
Why not ?
There are different political groups and there are differing political views .
However , allow me to say , with particular reference to my fellow Member , Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert , for whom I have a lot of respect , that human rights are a political priority for the European Popular Party Group too , and that they do not pertain to the monopoly of the Liberal Group in this Chamber .
We cannot accept the Liberal Group 's presumption to the right to monopolise the principle of non-discrimination .
We believe in this principle ; however , we also believe in the subsidiarity principle , meaning that we are also under obligation to respect national sensitivities in the European Union 's Member States .
We must not forget that this Union is built upon unity in diversity and not unity in homogeneity .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two innovations have been introduced by the Stockholm Programme as compared with the Hague Programme : a fair balance between rights and security and legal protection in both the criminal and the civil spheres .
Security is a right : it means not being attacked in one 's own workplace , walking the streets without risking one 's life , not being the object of violence as a woman , not being exposed to acts of terrorism .
The Member States and Europe must guarantee security .
However , security measures that diminish the guarantees of freedom are measures that remove certainty from the law , and are thus the source of insecurity and barbarities .
Think of Guantánamo .
Europe is the fatherland of rights .
The Stockholm Programme defines them today with an abundance of detail .
There is a fair balance between , on the one hand , the discipline of measures to prevent crime and , on the other , the daily lives of citizens and their family , social , economic , work and study relations , which are all regulated by civil law and the civil justice system .
That is the citizen 's Europe .
It should be constructed within the Member States and the Community institutions .
European society is more united , and mobility is more pronounced than is commonly believed .
Mobility is now a right .
The borders between the Member States are not impermeable walls , but nets through which society filters daily .
The Stockholm Programme constitutes the institutional cornerstone that provides for judicial cooperation and mutual recognition , a European justice system ( made up of the national systems and the Community system ) , both national and Community law , European citizens and European courts ( both national and Community courts ) .
European rules are dictated by Community rules and by the case-law of the European courts , but they also derive from the conduct of workers , businesses , students , and judges , both national and belonging to the European networks between operators of justice .
It is a bottom-up process that the Stockholm Programme wishes to support .
Parliament has done a great job with this resolution , which I hope will be adopted here by a large , unanimous vote , for which we have worked extremely hard .
The Council should take it into proper account .
The Treaty of Lisbon has not yet entered into force , but it is here , and present .
Minister , may the Council be ambitious , and may it take to heart what we have drafted here and the many demands arising from it .
Mr President , the Swedish Presidency is to be congratulated for the way they have pushed the overdue question of defendants ' rights to fair treatment across Europe .
This is absolutely essential to accompany the European arrest warrant .
We need to ensure that mutual recognition really can be based on mutual confidence in all the national criminal justice systems .
This is not the case at present and there are severe weaknesses .
I also have a constituent , Andrew Symeou , who has been in jail in Greece since July , refused bail because he was a foreigner .
His Greek lawyer has made a complaint about police abuse and destruction of evidence .
An application will be made to the European Court of Human Rights , and it is pretty shameful that this is necessary , because this is about the treatment of one EU citizen by another Member State .
It is shocking that this has to go to Strasbourg .
So I support the European arrest warrant , but we absolutely must have the defendants ' rights to go with it .
Otherwise , we will have scandals like that of Andrew Symeou which destroy public support for the European arrest warrant , as is happening in my country .
( EL ) Mr President , for some months now , we have been talking about the need to strike the right balance between maintaining security and defending citizens ' personal rights , emphasising that citizens must be at the epicentre of the Stockholm Programme .
However , the European Union is adopting and applying measures which upset the balance between security and rights , result in the creation of bodies to monitor and collect all sorts of personal data and insult our dignity by making suspects of us all .
Furthermore , it is unacceptable for immigrants to be treated as criminals and possible terrorists .
We disagree with the draft resolution , because it lays the foundations for us to build a modern European Panopticon in which , like the prison designed by Jeremy Bentham , everyone 's actions are constantly monitored without the detainees ' knowing the extent of their supervision , thereby giving them a false sense of privacy .
( PL ) Mr President , I do not hesitate to say that in the area of justice in the European Union , the Stockholm Programme is the most ambitious initiative of the last few years .
I am all the more pleased because one of the fundamental ideas of the programme is to make life easier for the residents of the European Union .
Of course , proper implementation of the Stockholm Programme in the area of justice will depend on the establishment of a truly European judicial culture , changes in the practical approach to establishing new legislation , and also on the proper function of the e-justice portal .
The principle of mutual recognition , which is , to me , a fundamental one , requires mutual trust , but also confidence in the legal systems of other countries , as has been talked about here today .
These values can only come from mutual recognition and understanding , which will then give rise to a European judicial culture .
Mutual acquaintance and understanding can themselves only come about as a result of active , favourable policy , including exchange of experience , visits , sharing information , and courses for people working in the justice system , especially judges in courts of first instance .
It also includes thorough modernisation , and this is extremely important , of university education programmes within the European Union .
Another matter is to stress the significance of the multilingual e-justice portal .
The portal should have access to legal databases and to judicial and non-judicial electronic means of appeal .
It should also give access to intelligent systems developed as aids to citizens who are seeking ways to resolve legal problems or who are using extensive registers , lists of people working in the justice system or just simple guides to the legal system of each Member State .
So I am very pleased that Mrs Ask and Mr Barroso have spoken about this .
I would also like to stress the need to develop European legislation of the highest quality in the area of judicial cooperation in civil cases , which would be based on suitably made impact assessments , to give citizens and businesses effective instruments allowing them to solve a variety of legal problems in the internal market .
At a time of growing euroscepticism in many EU Member States , the Stockholm Programme offers us the opportunity to show the citizens that the EU institutions can respond to their current needs .
Mr President , my special thanks to the three secretariats who got this resolution ready for this plenary .
The Stockholm Programme can be regarded as a pragmatic action plan for a more secure and open Europe based on common values , principles and actions .
It contributes to practical cooperation between law enforcement institutions , courts and immigration services .
It balances measures , sustains common security , the rule of law and the rights of the individual .
However , it is also an extremely complex issue .
I would like to emphasise the introduction of the convergence principle .
It is another step in the building of the EU state .
It is nothing other than the pooling of sovereignty .
It is based on the principle of availability of all data , information and intelligence held by all agencies across the European Union .
The interoperability of EU information systems must be achieved so that all agencies can access each other 's data .
Parliament gives added value to the Commission proposal .
All areas of equality , gender and discrimination-related issues are mentioned and well described in the document .
After the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , we can seize the historical moment to create a vital and strong area of freedom , security and justice .
Parliament rightly highlights its new role as colegislator on the same footing as the Council after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force .
I am satisfied to get a bunch of European common values into the text like : freedom , liberty , justice , fundamental rights , democracy , quality and , in this context , privacy .
I know these values have different meanings depending on the general political climate , but this resolution has found the right balance between them .
I would like to reflect on the PES campaign ' Put the Children First ' .
I gladly note the children- and family-related paragraphs in the paper .
My political intention is to assure equal rights and engagement within the European Union to all citizens .
Our citizens need a pragmatic , forward-looking and comprehensive European migration policy based on common values and rules , including the principles of solidarity and transparency .
Well-managed migration can be beneficial to all stakeholders and contributes to the economic growth of the EU and of the other Member States that need labour migrants .
Thank you , Zita . You succeeded in speaking for two minutes but I do not know whether the interpretation followed you because I was permanently getting the red light .
In any case , let us congratulate the interpreters if they succeeded in following you .
( FR ) Mr President , Ministers , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will not repeat all of the key points made by my fellow Members in relation to justice and immigration , but I did wish to point out that a European judicial area can only be established by enhancing mutual confidence among Member States , since that will improve the principle of mutual recognition , the cornerstone of the Europe of justice .
Considerable progress has been made over the last 15 years , but there are still many weaknesses .
I am delighted that the Treaty of Lisbon was finally ratified by all of the Member States during the negotiation of this text .
The European Parliament will be able to have an equal say with the Council on matters relating to justice and home affairs ; democratic legitimacy will be increased for the benefit of the citizens .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , I should like to stress that far too many complaints are referred to the Committee on Petitions concerning barriers to the freedom of movement of citizens within the European Union itself .
I would also mention the problems linked to the mutual recognition of qualifications and to the right to social welfare benefits , as well as discrimination problems .
The recognition of same-sex marriages , on the other hand , is an area that comes under the jurisdiction of the Member States .
The Union must respect this national competence .
I call on the European Commission to publish its guidelines as soon as possible so as to help the Member States ' authorities effectively combat breaches of the principle of free movement .
Citizens must be able to move freely and to make full use of their rights in this area without internal borders .
I am delighted to see that , in the resolution , the European Union 's anti-drug strategy has a place in the creation of this European judicial area .
However , I hope that the European Union will show more initiative in this regard .
Why does the Union not equip itself with new weapons for combating this growing trend , which affects our children at an increasingly early age ?
They are the future .
What are we doing to protect them ?
Let us finally show some sense of pragmatism in our institutions !
That is what our fellow citizens expect from us .
Mr President , this has been a long journey , from Tampere , where we saw just the outlines of an area of freedom , security and justice - and perhaps we talk too much - to this extraordinary position where we have Stockholm and Lisbon colliding .
I say respectfully to all of those who believe that we do not need a blueprint to fight our corner for the area of freedom and security and justice that we want : we do not take our players off the field when the game begins .
We fight our progressive corner and , for our group , we will fight for our progressive policies .
But we must have a Stockholm blueprint in the first place .
We have Lisbon , so we - all Members here , however they vote - will have to assume our responsibility to legislate after Christmas on the things that matter to us .
This is a serious responsibility and my group - as our hard-working rapporteurs Mr López Aguilar and Mr Berlinguer have set out - has its priorities .
We will then have an area of freedom , security and justice in a democracy that we win or we lose .
Regarding our priorities , on anti-discrimination , we send a message to the Council .
We want a horizontal directive .
We must fight for this progressive line .
On criminal justice , we say : mutual recognition is important so that the European arrest warrant will actually work .
On asylum , we say ' yes ' to solidarity between Member States but , for us , a progressive solution means that those asylum seekers who are vulnerable must have the best representation .
So these are our group 's priorities , this is our added value on the subject of hate crime , on amendments on migration policies , on violence against women , on a European protection order .
All of these issues illustrate how we as a political group - how all political groups - can add value to the Stockholm Programme and can create legislation which is meaningful .
Ultimately , we play the game because , for our citizens , this is not a game .
This is about delivering at last - at long last - the rights that they have asked for for so long : fundamental rights on data protection , on security and on anti-terrorism .
All of these things will mean something when we assume the responsibility in this House to legislate .
We will only do that when we vote through the Stockholm Programme .
We will then fight for a progressive Stockholm Programme and progressive legislation .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to give a warm welcome to Vice-President Barrot and the Swedish Presidency for the Stockholm Programme .
The Stockholm Programme is good news for those who support the idea of Europe as more than just a common market .
The building of a Europe of citizens means a real area of freedom , security and justice .
I welcome the equal weighting given to the three sides of this triangle .
Contrary to certain more radical views , I believe that all three are necessary .
Security without freedom is dictatorship , freedom without security is anarchy , and justice is impossible without freedom or security .
This five-year programme goes back to the aims of Tampere , seeking real progress in many areas .
Nevertheless , it is important to ensure that these targets are met .
The legislation and instruments that have been adopted must be implemented effectively .
The people of Europe will not take us seriously if we do not pass this test of our effectiveness .
It is , for instance , impossible to push for an entry / exit system , inviting the Commission to present a proposal for this system to begin operations in 2015 , when we do not know whether the Schengen Information System II or the Visa Information System will begin operations , as they are beset by problems and massive delays .
I am hoping for the creation of a common European asylum system before 2012 , and an immigration policy with a common approach , both with regard to the reception and integration of immigrants and the effective combating of illegal immigration .
Finally , much work remains to be done together towards creating a Europe of citizens .
There is no point in wasting time on matters that are not our responsibility .
Trying to interfere in family law , which is the preserve of the Member States , is not only legally useless , it is also politically perverse , because it draws us into meaningless conflicts and distracts us from really essential matters , namely the crucial Stockholm Programme .
( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency and the whole House on the report that we have drawn up .
I would , however , like to give three warnings that I think are important for the future .
The first is that if there is no legislative initiative , if the Council and the Commission do not bring legislative acts to fill up the programme , then obviously the programme cannot succeed .
The second warning , which my fellow Members have already rightly given , is that this House is going to have a new role .
It is not going to produce reports merely to be heard , as was the case until now .
It is going to colegislate , it is going to agree , it is going to have to exercise that balance , which is so difficult at times , between security and freedom .
This is a new task and a new responsibility for all Members of the European Parliament .
Finally , I would like to give a warning about fundamentalist application of the principle of subsidiarity .
I hear my fellow Members talking about the need for the national parliaments to be respected , and this is true , but I have to warn you that a rigid and fundamentalist interpretation of subsidiarity will not allow progress to be made in the Stockholm Programme .
If the Member States hold on to an exaggerated interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity , there will be no joint legislation on the Stockholm Programme .
Mr President , I wish to refer briefly to the section on economic crime and corruption in the Stockholm Programme .
The text has lost some of its teeth during the negotiations in Coreper .
For instance , today 's text refers to GRECO standards on anti-corruption , with GRECO being a Council of Europe body .
While cooperation with GRECO and the Council of Europe is essential , the European Union 's standards on anti-corruption are higher than those of the Council of Europe which , as we all know , has 47 Member States .
Consequently , I kindly ask , and at the same time urge , the Council to maintain a text with a strong commitment to anti-corruption .
We need an EU policy and an EU mechanism to combat corruption and fraud in a robust way within the EU , and the Stockholm Programme must reflect that need and commitment .
Mr President , congratulations to all of those concerned with this report and congratulations to the Swedish Presidency .
Societies are changed not by mediocrity but by courage , conviction and vision .
And that has been displayed here in Parliament this afternoon .
We are talking about freedom , security and justice : three fundamental principles .
Yet without equality and equality of treatment , you will never have freedom , you will never have security and you will certainly never have justice .
That applies most particularly to minorities , who are so often maligned and misrepresented .
Equality and equality of treatment are the only durable building blocks of any civilised society .
And that is why I am proud to promote and associate myself with a Europe where we are all equal , regardless of race , ethnicity , religion , belief , age , disability , gender or sexual orientation - a Europe of equals ; a Europe of fundamental values .
( PL ) Mr President , the Stockholm Programme is a response to the important matter of ensuring the security of EU citizens .
It is not always , however , a satisfactory response , for we do not need full standardisation of criminal and civil law .
We only need harmonisation of these areas of law , and only in clearly defined , limited areas .
Europe needs , most of all , good cooperation between police forces and judicial authorities , so that judicial sentences will be efficiently executed and criminals effectively prosecuted , irrespective of the EU 's internal borders .
The Stockholm Programme should , therefore , establish a number of incentives , and should concentrate on these areas .
I would like to draw attention , today , to three matters related to coordination of the action of Member States .
Firstly , in relation to freedom of movement , which is one of our great values , it is essential that we have cooperation on exchange of information about crimes which are a special threat to public order .
I am thinking , here , particularly about crimes of a sexual nature which endanger the weakest and most defenceless , I mean children , and the Stockholm document rightly draws attention to this .
It is necessary to start work , as quickly as possible , on the establishment of a European register of sex offenders , and especially of people who commit these aggressive and most dangerous crimes against children .
Interested parties and organisations should have the broadest possible access to this information .
Freedom of movement must go hand in hand with the movement of knowledge and information about possible dangers , in order to give adequate protection to society , including those most at risk , in this case children .
Secondly , we need to ensure the effective execution of rulings concerning confiscation of the assets of criminals .
This especially concerns making the fight against organised crime effective , and means that rulings made in one country would allow assets hidden by a criminal in another country to be traced and then confiscated effectively .
It also equally concerns profits made directly from crime as well as profits arising indirectly from crime at a later time .
Thirdly , while I agree that non-custodial sentences are an appropriate reaction to minor crimes , we must not lose sight of the fact that a custodial sentence , which isolates the offender from society , is , in some particularly justified cases , the only real and practical way to protect society from the most dangerous crimes .
Therefore , it is also necessary to bear in mind that this kind of penalty is also a just response to crimes of the greatest cruelty .
In closing , I would like to express my esteem for the document which has been prepared , and to stress that the aim of the programme should be to improve the cooperation of Member States while retaining the national character of their legal systems .
It is now time for the ' catch-the-eye ' period .
I am going to adhere absolutely strictly to the Rules of Procedure .
I would like to say that five Members are going to have the floor for one minute each , and we will cut off the microphone when the minute has ended .
As more than fifteen Members have asked for the floor , we are going to hear the first five .
Mr President , first I would like to welcome the Stockholm Programme as the best way forward to a citizen-centred Europe , and to thank both Minister Ask and Minister Billström for their vision .
Finally , we can go home and tell everybody , without distinction , that Europe is for them ; Europe is with them ; Europe is us .
Of course , the Stockholm Programme will be what we make it .
Let us give it a chance .
Let us support it as broadly as possible and get down to work to implement it .
I would like to say a special thank you for the focus on children , which means that we can finally work on enhanced action to protect children , including migrant children .
It is also very good that we have a greater possibility to combat cross-border criminality while respecting individual rights .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , I am pleased that the issues of children 's rights , violence against women and the prevention of people trafficking have been dealt with more thoroughly in the latest version of the Stockholm Programme from the Council .
I was a little concerned that the Presidency was going to abandon its priorities .
Now we also have the opportunity to make improvements in line with Parliament 's vote .
However , I am disappointed that nothing has been mentioned about developing a children 's rights strategy for Europe , as proposed by Parliament quite recently .
Just as Commissioner Barrot said , the European Union must continue to stand up for children 's rights .
As regards the wording concerning people trafficking , I am also disappointed that the Presidency has not stuck to its guns with regard to the link to the purchase of sex , the purchase of services and the possibility of legislating in this area .
The EU also needs a legal basis for combating violence against women .
Mr President , just two points that my group thinks are very crucial about the Stockholm Programme .
First , we believe that the method of balance very often used in this programme goes a bit in the wrong direction .
Security , to us , is only a tool for reaching freedom ; it is not its opponent .
When we are not free , we are not secure .
We find that balance a bit misleading .
Then secondly , on Frontex , Minister Wallström , what do you actually mean when you talk about strengthening Frontex ?
What do you mean by that ?
Because that has not been clarified in any of the versions of the Stockholm Programme I have seen .
And would you not think that it may be extremely important - more important even - to strengthen the parliamentary control over Frontex and stop Frontex from sending back people that might very well have a reason to ask for asylum as Frontex has been doing this year .
I would prefer to see a strengthening there .
I believe that the Stockholm Programme should serve all the residents of the EU , not just a few .
( ES ) Mr President , today there is no doubt about the European Union 's commitment to the fight against terrorism , and thanks to the Stockholm Programme , we will continue to make progress on this essential area of freedom , security and justice .
In my view , this fight has been based on mutual trust between the Member States , but now , with the possibilities opened up by the Treaty of Lisbon , it is high time to harmonise national legislation so that there is no time limit on prosecuting terrorist crimes , which should be considered as crimes against humanity .
When this happens , nobody in this Parliament or in any other will defend terrorists , as has happened , is happening and may continue to happen , to the detriment of victims of terrorism , who watch those who murdered their loved ones being treated like heroes , while they suffer in silence .
I therefore ask Parliament to drive forward or adopt a European charter for the rights of the victims of terrorism , based on defending the memory ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , from their comments today , many of the speakers believe that the Stockholm Programme is worthy of efforts to seek the broadest possible consensus and to devise an ambitious programme .
This will be the aim of tomorrow 's resolution , which will be put to the vote .
I regret that the reference to the right of non-EU nationals to vote and to the guarantee of access to health care for ill migrants has been left out of the resolution .
However , I would mention the adoption of some important points , such as the requirement for the directive on non-discrimination to be adopted ; freedom of movement for European citizens and families - I understand this to mean all families ; the request to remove obstacles to the exercise of the right to family reunification ; and the ban on placing unaccompanied minors in detention , to name but a few .
In my opinion , the success of the Stockholm Programme can be gauged by the respect shown for four issues : the existence of concrete achievements benefiting the citizens ; scrupulous respect for the new role of the European Parliament - codecision being an element of added value ; the quality of the application of the Stockholm Programme by the national parliaments ; and the awareness of its values among the citizens , and especially among Europe 's young people .
From now on , there must be as much momentum behind the adoption as there is behind the future implementation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
We have now finished the speeches under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
I regret that a further ten or twelve Members were not able to speak , but it is impossible given how late we are running and the Rules of Procedure we are bound by .
Mr President , thank you for all of your points of view .
In fact , I am not sorry that ten Members did not get the floor .
I am very pleased to see the commitment that you are showing in respect of these important issues .
Someone said that this programme is ambitious .
I am pleased to hear that , because the work has been ambitious , but also practical in that we wanted to combine the vision with a pragmatic approach to how to improve things from the perspective of the citizens .
As I was listening , it seemed that many of you share at least the main idea of the draft programme that we are dealing with today .
Allow me to comment on two areas .
The first one is the question of form .
Today 's debate has been a little bit confused - if I may say so - as some people have been referring to the Stockholm Programme but they were really talking about the interesting proposal for a resolution that you will debate and take a decision on in Parliament , in other words , your views on the draft that the Presidency has tabled .
Someone said at the start of the debate ' why are we discussing one draft when there is already a new one ? ' .
The truth is that the European Parliament is mid-way through the discussions and negotiations that are ongoing .
It is changing all the time and on Friday , or at the weekend , there will be another draft .
However , to the Member who thought that he had an old document , I can say that we have always presented the most recent draft on the Presidency 's website .
Those Members who wish to keep up to date and see what is happening with this and also how your debate affects the final result should , of course , ensure that they obtain the documents that we publish .
As far as the Presidency is concerned , it has been of the utmost importance to work with transparency and openness .
That is why we have very many discussions .
The ten of you who did not have the opportunity to present your views here are very welcome to email me or Mr Billström .
It is very simple ; the address is beatrice.ask @ justice.ministry.se and Mr Billström 's address follows the same format .
You can then send us your points of view so that they are taken into account .
We must start to work in a modern way , and openness is the modern way for the Swedish Presidency .
I look forward to the resolution and its outcome , as I detect a lot of support for some of the views , nuances and emphases that the resolution contains .
We will , of course , give these careful consideration .
There are also a few political issues that I would just like to mention .
Firstly , two Members , one of whom was Mr Batten , mentioned specific examples of how citizens are affected - perhaps in another country - and it is their opinion that conditions are not very good .
Those are typical examples of a lack of trust in one another 's legal systems .
In this case , we have two choices : the first is to tell our citizens to stay at home , because we always have the best legal systems at home .
However , if we believe that our citizens will continue to take advantage of the opportunity for free movement , then it is perhaps time to think about how we can improve procedural rights and other aspects across the Union as a whole .
That is precisely the aim of the Stockholm Programme .
That is why I am so very pleased that we have been able to take the first step in strengthening procedural rights in order to guarantee that anyone who is suspected of a crime or is a victim of a crime and is involved in a legal process in Europe will now actually receive help with translation and interpretation .
This fundamental right can be found in the conventions of the European Council and elsewhere , but is not found in practice .
Now we can make a difference and that is exactly what we should do .
Mrs Macovei raised the issue of corruption and financial crime and was of the opinion that the wording was too weak on this .
I would like to say that this is a very clear section , which makes high demands .
The fact that we mention the Group of States against Corruption ( GRECO ) has nothing to do with us intending to adopt a lower level of ambition on account of their views - nor is that what is stated in the Stockholm Programme .
What is stated is that , along with many other tasks , we aim to cooperate closely with this important body on these matters , as we need to go for the money if we are to combat organised crime .
I believe that this is important .
Many people mentioned subsidiarity .
I think that the proposal that is currently under discussion takes a very clear position in that EU cooperation in the areas of justice and home affairs should constitute an added value .
Anything that is dealt with just as well at national level should be allowed to remain there .
It is when we need cooperation that we must use the European institutions .
I do not think that we are taking away the rights of the nation states , but instead we are providing an added value that could benefit all citizens .
Lastly , I would like to talk about the issue of privacy and data protection , which is a major and important debate .
I believe it was Mr Borghezio who mentioned this and felt that there was a great deal of concern about the Stockholm Programme as it stands .
He expressed concern about monitoring and large databases , among other things .
He also compared what we are working on in this area with the situation in the former East Germany and in the communist states that used to exist in Europe .
I think that this type of argument is completely irrelevant .
In East Germany , there was no data protection , no democracy and there were no fundamental rights for citizens - three important factors that are fundamental to our cooperation .
As regards the Stockholm Programme , we are strengthening and tightening up the regulations for data protection and respect for the rights of individuals , and democracy , too , in a number of different respects .
The fact is that the information strategy that we want the EU to draw up balances a methodical and effective exchange of information with stringent requirements for the protection of privacy and secure data management , but also the requirement for information not to be retained for a long period .
Please feel free to read these sections again , as they are very clear .
This represents progress , for which we have also received praise from the EU ombudsman , who is working on this .
Finally , someone said that we should make the Stockholm Programme more tangible .
The programme contains a lot of very tangible and practical elements , but the real work starts now .
Some Members pointed out that the resolution had to be drawn up within a tight deadline and that it was very difficult to do it all in time .
I can say to you that it will get worse yet .
Once we have adopted the Stockholm Programme , you will be involved in the important work that needs to be done in implementing and dealing with the details of the various proposals .
This will involve a lot of time pressure and a lot of stress , but also great challenges and great opportunities to make a difference .
Thank you very much for your views and , as I said , please use the internet if you want to contact the Presidency in the coming days .
Mr President , honourable Members , naturally , I fully agree with what Mrs Ask has just said about the general conclusions regarding the programme .
Thank you for all of the constructive points of view that you have presented here today .
I would also like to thank the chairmen of the three committees , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , for their very constructive cooperation on these matters .
As I said in my introductory speech , this really indicates a major accepting of responsibility on the part of all parties involved , which I think is something we have reason to be very proud of .
I would like to emphasise the importance of cooperation in all significant areas within this programme .
In his speech , Mr Busuttil made comparisons with the magnitude of the internal market , which I think is not so far from the truth , as this is a similar project in terms of its size and importance .
One word that has , of course , come up time and again in the political talks on asylum and migration issues in recent years has been solidarity .
All the Member States agree that solidarity must be increased , and not only solidarity between Member States , but also solidarity between the EU and third countries .
That is the message that we want to send out through the Stockholm Programme .
As I said in my introduction , we believe that this complex issue needs very broad and sustainable solutions permeating the whole policy area .
That is one of the reasons why there is no specific section on solidarity in the Stockholm Programme .
Instead , all of the points contain a solidarity element .
The global approach to migration should be one of the important starting points in this connection .
The role of Frontex should be strengthened .
Mrs Keller mentioned this in her speech .
I would like to make it very clear that Frontex alone is not the answer to this problem .
Frontex is responsible for the coordination of the Member States ' border controls , but it has no mandate within sea rescue , for example .
The situation in the Mediterranean is not primarily a border control problem .
It is a problem that requires several different types of measure .
Increased cooperation between the countries of origin and transit is of the utmost importance .
We also need to invest in development cooperation in the form of aid .
I think it is important to emphasise that the European Parliament will be involved to the very highest degree in all of these aspects now that we have the Treaty of Lisbon in place , and democratic control will increase in these areas .
Based on everything that has been said here today , I also think that it is important to point out that the Treaty of Lisbon really will bring about a genuine and important change .
It is , of course , a major change that will see the ordinary legislative procedure being replaced by one that gives the European Parliament a stronger role in the legislative process in a number of areas .
Thus , I do not share any of the concern that Mrs Keller expressed here today with regard to these issues .
On the contrary , I think that we are seeing huge progress towards increased democratic control in this policy area .
Mr President , like my colleague Mrs Ask , I would like to finish by saying that you are more than welcome to send your opinions to us by e-mail if you did not have an opportunity to present them here today .

Mr President , I would like to emphasise the quality of the work carried out by your three committees : the Committee on Legal Affairs - Mr Casini is here ; the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - Mr López Aguilar is here ; and also the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Theirs is an extremely interesting piece of work and it will help us , and the Swedish Presidency , to provide a definitive version of this Stockholm Programme .
As Mr Busuttil said , it is true that the citizens have an internal market , but they do not really have an area of justice , security and freedom , even if , thanks to the Schengen area , freedom of movement has now been established .
We must retain the benefits of this .
I would add that the guidelines against misuse have been published .
I would like to say that this text seems fairly balanced to me .
Having heard the different aspirations of various people , this text strikes a certain balance .
I should also say that we are drafting the Stockholm Programme in a world in which organised crime , cybercrime and terrorism are spreading , and in which we obviously need to protect ourselves .
This is where Europe can bring added value .
I would also like to say that , increasingly in this judicial area , we have citizens , couples , who have dual nationality , and therefore , here too , they must be able to exercise their rights in the various Member States in which they find themselves .
I am also keen to stress that we have made progress in terms of procedural guarantees , as Mrs Ask explained very well , and this is a very important element of the Stockholm Programme .
You gave the example of a British citizen in Greece .
If there were minimum procedures , it would make things much easier .
Moreover , repeating a phrase used by Mr Coelho , I would say that a long road has been travelled since Tampere .
I would add that we cannot accept the term ' fortress Europe ' either .
Mr Billström has covered this .
This , too , is the guarantee of a balanced European migration policy .
If we are rejecting illegal , clandestine immigration , it is because of all the trafficking and all the organised crime behind it .
There is no denying that this is the case .
Furthermore , however , it is true that we have succeeded , I believe , in presenting an asylum policy that is in keeping with European values of generosity .
Obviously I cannot answer all of the questions , Mr President , because time is pressing .
I simply wish to say that this Stockholm Programme is , as Mrs Ask said , very pragmatic , that it will thus lend itself to an action plan that the Spanish Presidency is going to implement , and you , ladies and gentlemen , are henceforth going to be colegislators .
I certainly see this as a powerful means of driving forward this area of freedom , security and justice that the citizens so very much want .
I am grateful to Parliament for what it has already done and for what it will do in the future , now that it will colegislate on the area of justice and security .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The defence and promotion of human rights have seen a decline in their importance on the EU agenda in recent years , with Member States ' security becoming the political priority .
The EU 's area of freedom , security and justice is entering a decisive phase .
The Treaty of Maastricht introduced aspects relating to justice and internal affairs at Community level , which had been dealt with strictly at intergovernmental level until then .
The Tampere and the Hague Programmes provided major political impetus in consolidating these policies .
The Stockholm Multiannual Programme , in turn , sets out priorities for the next five years so that the benefits of an area of freedom , security and justice become a reality for citizens .
The programme will be implemented after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force .
By introducing the codecision procedures as an ordinary legislative procedure , Europe 's justice and internal affairs policies and the measures adopted to comply with them will be subject to parliamentary scrutiny .
in writing . - ( HU ) During the drafting of the Stockholm Programme , our aim was to make Europe 's citizens aware of the tangible benefits of an area of freedom , security and justice .
However , creating a Europe for its citizens goes far beyond simply drafting a programme .
The Treaty of Lisbon opens up a new dimension for citizens to assert their interests .
The rights , freedoms and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights are given binding force .
The European Union can now sign up to the Council of Europe 's agreement on the protection of human rights .
This legal act must come into force as soon as possible .
We need to have a clear implementation plan for fulfilling these commitments so that the new legal structures available are given proper substance .
This will be the task of Spain 's forthcoming EU presidency .
The process of human rights , including minority rights , under Community law has started with the Treaty of Lisbon coming into force .
The Stockholm Programme will convert this into political priorities to give substance to the specific action plans envisaged for the coming years .
As part of the whole process , not only will the European Union 's opportunities have increased after 1 December , but its responsibilities as well .
One of the priority areas of the Stockholm Programme will be the enforcement of basic rights .
With the Charter of Fundamental Rights becoming binding and the EU signing up to the European Convention on Human Rights , the European Union 's duty is to strengthen Europe 's commitment to human rights and to contribute to making Europe 's citizens as aware as possible of their rights .
These are certainly useful measures , since the basic principles of human rights require constant attention , and we still have a great deal to do in this area in the EU as well .
The growth in discrimination and intolerance are increasingly serious social problems .
National and ethnic minorities , especially the Roma , gays and people with disabilities , face some form of discrimination every day .
It is therefore important for every Member State to implement existing directives consistently and for the Council to extend protection to every group at risk by accepting the new , comprehensive draft directive .
As a consequence of the economic crisis , there is a rise in racism and xenophobia , as well as in the number of crimes caused by these problems .
According to the Fundamental Rights Agency , the statistics do not give a true picture of the real situation , as in most cases , the victims are not aware of their rights and do not go to the authorities .
It is the joint responsibility of the EU 's institutions and Member States to change this situation .
We must draft regulations at European level capable of ensuring that Europe and its Member States continue to protect diversity and do not leave any scope for violence .
The Stockholm Programme obliges the European Commission to present a proposal for accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights .
This is an important and significant step , which will allow us to develop a uniform , minimum level of protection of fundamental rights in Europe .
Thanks to accession to the convention , EU institutions will be subject to external , independent supervision in terms of conformity of the legislation and activities of the EU with the European Convention on Human Rights .
At the same time , the EU will be able to defend its position before the European Court of Human Rights .
This will eliminate the possibility of discrepancies arising between decisions of the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights .
In reference to point 16 of the motion for a resolution , I appeal for a prompt commencement of negotiations on accession of the EU to the European Convention on Human Rights .
In the context of the resolution under discussion , I call for the immediate withdrawal of Poland from the Protocol on the Application of the Charter of Fundamental Rights to Poland and to the United Kingdom .
With the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the Charter of Fundamental Rights will apply to all measures undertaken concerning the Common Space on Freedom , Security and Justice .
It is disgraceful that the right-wing authorities in the Republic of Poland , by succumbing to pressure from the hierarchy of the Catholic Church , are denying Poles rights to which they are entitled .
The citizens of Poland should be able to enjoy these rights in the same way that the citizens of other EU Member States enjoy them .
If we do not want Poles to be second-class citizens in the EU , the Charter of Fundamental Rights must be adopted in its entirety .
An important part of the Stockholm Programme concerns the increased protection of disadvantaged groups at risk .
The creation of an area of freedom , security and justice is inconceivable without a ban on all forms of discrimination .
However , a ban does not go far enough .
The European Union must take specific action against any discriminatory measures , as this is the only possible way of properly serving all Europe 's citizens in this area .
I would like to mention just one of these discriminatory measures , which affects traditional national minorities .
Linguistic genocide is going on in two EU countries as well at the moment .
This is why I am asking the European Council and the future Spanish Presidency to devote greater attention to preventing discriminatory measures during the implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
Otherwise , this programme will not serve the interests of every EU citizen , but only those of the members of the majority peoples .
Joint removals of irregular migrants to Afghanistan and other third countries ( debate )
The next item is the statements from the Council and Commission on the joint removals of irregular migrants to Afghanistan and other third countries .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to begin by thanking you for the opportunity to come here today to debate this important issue .
Judging by the questions that have been raised by some Members , it is clear that this is an issue that gives rise to a certain amount of concern .
I hope that I can clarify the Council 's view on this matter today and answer your questions .
The rule of law and respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms are fundamental principles for cooperation within the European Union .
They must be the guiding principles for the Member States ' cooperation within the Union .
These principles are , and must also continue to be , the starting point for cooperation in the area of asylum and migration .
The EU 's cooperation in the area of migration has developed quickly over the last few years and includes a number of different legislative acts and other types of measures .
With regard to the rights of asylum seekers , I would like to draw your attention to the basic aim of cooperation on asylum .
The goal of this work is to create a common European asylum system that will provide people with protection in accordance with the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees and other international treaties relating to people in need of protection .
Within the framework of this cooperation , there are provisions for being able to offer subsidiary protection and provisions relating to the asylum procedure , reception and return .
The provisions cover the whole asylum area and form the basis of the common European asylum system .
The key legislative acts in the area of asylum are the Dublin Regulation establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection , the Reception Directive , which lays down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers , the Qualification Directive , which concerns minimum standards for when a third country national should be regarded as in need of international protection , and the Asylum Procedure Directive on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing international protection .
All of these legislative acts are currently under review with a view to further approximating the Member States ' legislation in this area in order to make it more complete and efficient .
The proposed amendments will be decided on by means of the codecision procedure , which means that we will have a broad political basis for the development of the common European asylum system .
Well-managed migration involves both creating opportunities for people to lawfully enter the European Union and being able to send back those who do not fulfil the conditions for entry to , and presence in , the territory or who have no grounds for asylum .
With regard to the fundamental rights of those who do not have the right to stay within the Union , I would like to refer , firstly , to the general legal principles that must form the basis for all of the EU 's activities and , secondly and more specifically , to the rules that apply to the return of third-country nationals who do not have the right to enter and stay legally in a Member State .
These rules are laid down in the Return Directive , which was adopted by the European Parliament and the Council in 2008 .
The directive is the first important step towards legislation that aims to provide justice and transparent procedures to achieve a more effective policy on return at European level .
One fundamental principle for the work relating to return is that it must have legal certainty and be humane and efficient .
The work relating to return also includes provisions on joint removal flights .
The Council Decision on the organisation of joint flights for removals of third-country nationals who have not been granted a residence permit or asylum was adopted in 2002 within the framework of the return action programme .
The arrangement of joint flights is an efficient use of resources and helps to improve the operational cooperation between Member States .
However , I would like to emphasise that it is not about enforcing collective deportation decisions .
It is a cooperative measure designed to utilise the capacity of the Member States more efficiently .
The common guidelines that accompanied the Council Decision state that joint flights can be organised for persons who do not or no longer fulfil the conditions for entry to , presence in or residence on the territory of a Member State of the European Union .
The organising Member State and each participating Member State shall ensure that the legal situation of each and every one of the returnees for which they are responsible allows for removal .
The Regulation establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union also permits this authority , namely Frontex , to provide the Member States with the necessary support in organising joint measures for removal .
In October of this year , the European Council also called on Frontex to examine the possibility of financing joint flights for removals .
All of these measures are intended to ensure that international protection is available for those who need it and that the return of third-country nationals who are unlawfully present within the EU is carried out in a legally certain and lawful manner .
The use of joint flights for removals does not entail the violation of the principle of non-refoulement or the circumvention of the requirement for cases to be examined on an individual basis .
The Member States are expected to take account of the particular circumstances of each person who is the subject of removal , including any application for international protection .
This , of course , also applies to people who have come from Afghanistan .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Community policy for removal is , of course , important , but it is only one aspect of a comprehensive migration policy .
The European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which was adopted by the European Council in September of last year , confirms the Union 's commitments to the global approach to migration .
This means that migration issues should be an integrated part of the EU 's external relations and that efficient management of migration must be uniform .
This also requires a close partnership between the countries of origin , transit and destination .
The Stockholm Programme that we debated earlier this afternoon will , of course , confirm and further develop this overarching strategy .
Mr President , I am going to try to mention the main principles governing our approach to these migration and return problems .
European legislation obliges the Member States to ensure that third-country nationals present on their territory can request international protection if they so desire .
With regard to the possibility of these nationals , Afghans in this case , being granted one form or another of international protection , the Member States must examine each asylum application by applying the criteria laid down by European legislation to the specific individual circumstances of each asylum seeker .
The Member States must decide whether the asylum seeker can claim refugee status and , if he does not meet the criteria required to be considered a refugee , they must verify whether he can receive so-called subsidiary protection .
I am going to run through the principles .
Firstly , third-country nationals must not be sent back to their country if they are at risk of serious attacks .
European Union legislation and , more specifically , the Asylum Qualification Directive , states that the Member States must respect the principle of non-refoulement , in accordance with their international obligations .
Therefore , Member States cannot send back to Afghanistan persons who are refugees within the meaning of the Geneva Convention or who have been granted subsidiary protection .
Moreover , the Member States are bound to ensure that no return operations are carried out in violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which obliges the Member States to guarantee that a person will not be sent back to his country if he is liable to suffer persecution or serious attack upon his return .
The second point is that one cannot generalise the applications as far as the appropriateness of return operations to Afghanistan is concerned .
Afghanistan is one of the main countries of origin of the asylum seekers present in the European Union .
I should add that the Union accommodates only a small fraction of the total number of Afghan refugees , most of whom are residing in neighbouring countries , primarily Iran and Pakistan .
One cannot draw general conclusions about whether the forced return of Afghans to their country of origin would infringe Community law , the European Convention on Human Rights or the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
It is up to the Member States in which the applications are made to decide on each application in the light of its individual circumstances .
When examining the applications , the Member States must look at the relevant specific individual circumstances so as to determine each applicant 's need for protection , if any .
This involves examining the political and humanitarian security conditions and the human rights conditions in Afghanistan .
It also involves examining the specific situation of the part of the country that the applicant comes from , as well as the individual circumstances of that person , such as his family situation , his activities in the country of origin or any other specific characteristic that may make him more vulnerable .
One cannot draw general conclusions about Afghan asylum seekers ' need for protection , but statistics show that the recognition rate for this group has increased over the last few months .
In the first half of 2009 , almost 50 % of Afghan asylum seekers received international protection in the European Union , compared with less than 30 % in the last quarter of 2008 .
I come now to another question : which conditions have to be met before the decision is taken to conduct a return operation ?
In my recent statement on the operation to return Afghans to Kabul , conducted jointly by the United Kingdom and France , I indicated that the Member States had to take three precautions before returning an individual to a third country such as Afghanistan .
They had to ensure , firstly , that the migrant concerned did not wish to apply for international protection ; secondly , if an application for international protection was made , that that application had been the subject of a thorough , individual examination and had been rejected following an appropriate evaluation procedure ; and , thirdly , that the life of the migrant returned to his country of origin would not be in danger there .
The Commission has sought to obtain greater clarification regarding the circumstances of this Afghan return operation conducted by France and the United Kingdom .
However , the Commission does not , at present , have any information to suggest that these three conditions were not met by the persons concerned .
What about these return operations involving several repatriated persons , insofar as each person 's file was assessed individually ?
Protocol 4 to the European Convention on Human Rights and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union prohibit collective expulsions , but there is neither a legal obstacle nor , moreover , an objection in principle to several return measures that have been taken individually being carried out jointly , each on the basis of a separate decision , for example , using the same flight , nor is there a legal obstacle to these operations being organised jointly by several Member States .
Frontex 's current mandate already provides for operational cooperation in the field of joint return operations .
The European Council has asked for Frontex 's operational powers to be strengthened and , in particular , for consideration to be given to the possibility of regularly chartering flights in order to carry out these operations .
These joint operations should make return operations more efficient from a logistical point of view and may also derive a number of very desirable benefits with regard to repatriations , which are always distressing .
It should also be noted that , although the Return Directive has not yet been transposed by the majority of the Member States , the Commission encourages them to ensure , at this time , that their return decisions comply with the rules laid down by this directive .
This means , in particular , that priority must be given to voluntary returns , that the right to appeal against return decisions must be provided for and that the individual needs of vulnerable persons must be taken into account .
This Return Directive is not yet in force .
It will be soon , and it will enable some additional guarantees to be given to the persons concerned .
That being said , those are the answers , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that I wished to provide , in line with European law .
Of course , Mr Billström also explained that , with regard to all of these problems , we are trying to strike the right balance between the desire to accommodate those who are persecuted for political reasons and who genuinely deserve to be protected , and then , at the same time , the need to recognise also that some applications have no reason to be accepted .
So there is a difficult balance there , which the Commission is monitoring closely .
That is what I have to say to Parliament , and I will , of course , listen to the speeches that follow this statement .
Mr President , the Union has a duty to provide dignified reception conditions to people fleeing war and persecution and to offer them international protection systems that are in keeping with its values .
However , for several years the European Union has had to cope with mixed migratory flows and with networks of traffickers who abuse national asylum systems in order to gain entry for persons who do not meet the conditions required to take advantage of those systems .
So what can we do ?
This question has been asked within each of our Member States .
The fact is , there is a limit to the Member States ' absorption capacity .
Protection systems must be offered to people who meet objective criteria , and if we want to maintain our tradition of receiving asylum seekers , then we must be firm when it comes to the abuse of these asylum procedures for economic migration purposes .
It is also important to stress that all of the countries that are targeted by illegal immigration networks originating in Afghanistan or Iraq implement forced return measures .
They are obliged to do so .
I need only mention a number of EU Member States that put such measures into practice , and that do so regardless of their political persuasion .
There is no longer any political disagreement within the Union on these issues , and it is this consensus that will make it possible , in the near future , to carry out joint return operations funded by Frontex .
This initiative , as a common tool for managing migratory flows , must be welcomed .
Therefore , I should like to point out that group return operations are something totally different from collective expulsions according to the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights .
The Strasbourg Court prohibits any measure obliging foreigners to leave a country in groups , but it does authorise cases in which such a measure is taken at the end of a reasonable and objective examination of the individual circumstances of each of the foreigners .
International and European refugee law is quite complex so as to ensure that these expulsion procedures are strictly controlled and are carried out in line with the fundamental principle of human dignity .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the speakers , but I would nevertheless like to share a number of queries and concerns regarding the matter before us and , to do so , I will inevitably draw on two recent examples .
The first concerns the deportation of 27 Afghans to Kabul , as part of the group deportation organised by France and the United Kingdom .
I would like to know whether the Commission and the Council believe that Afghanistan is a country in which the physical integrity of deported persons is guaranteed .
The Commission has just told us that it was unable to guarantee that these deportations were carried out upon verification that the persons concerned had not submitted an application for international protection , or indeed in compliance with each stage of this procedure of examining their application , if it exists .
The second example concerns the deportation by Germany , Belgium and Austria of Roma to Kosovo , with which these countries have concluded readmission agreements even though the UNHCR , in its guidelines of 9 November , considers that , and I quote , ' the Roma , inhabiting any part of Kosovo , continue to face serious restrictions to their freedom of movement and the exercise of fundamental human rights [ ... ] and there are reports of threats and physical violence perpetrated against these communities ' .
With this in mind , I would ask for clarification on three points .
Why is Article 15 ( c ) of the 2004 Qualification Directive , which grants the right to subsidiary protection to persons who are subject to , and I quote , ' serious and individual threat [ ... ] by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict ' so poorly implemented ?
Question two : can the idea that it is legitimate to deport persons who are residing illegally on EU soil because they have not submitted an application for international protection - even though we know that , due to the Dublin II regulation , many potential asylum seekers do not submit these applications in the State in which they first arrive because their chances of seeing the procedure succeed are slim and the reception conditions are appalling - be deemed sufficient ?
Lastly , question three : should the Member States confirm the decision of the Council of 29 and 30 October to examine the possibility of chartering regular common return flights financed by the Frontex agency , do they intend , at the same time , to agree on a European list of safe countries and to take swift action in regard to a common asylum system that will enable the conditions for examining , granting and exercising refugee status to be harmonised at a higher level ?
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I wish to inform you of the sadness felt by many Europeans when , on 20 October , two EU Member States organised the forced return of Afghan immigrants : three from France , and 24 from the United Kingdom .
Those men , who left a country at war in order to come to Europe , thinking that they could seek asylum and protection here , have thus been sent back to a country that is still at war , in which their safety cannot by any means be guaranteed .
This turns our idea of human rights on its head .
And imagine my surprise , a few days later , when I saw - obviously there is a link - the European summit make provision not only for the organisation of common charter flights but also for their financing - which is a new development - out of the European budget !
Commissioner , this is not the Europe that we love .
Europe is not there to legitimise national practices that violate fundamental rights .
It is too easy to put the blame on Europe .
When I hear , for example , the French immigration minister declare that forced returns should be carried out under the banner of Europe , I tell you now that the founding fathers did not invent Europe for that purpose .
You asked Paris and London to ensure that the deported Afghans did indeed have an opportunity to seek asylum , that this request was rejected and that their lives were not in danger in the region to which they were returned .
I would therefore like explicit confirmation from you that an individual examination of each of the asylum applications was indeed carried out .
I would also like to know whether the Commission regards Afghanistan as a safe country , and if it does not , I would like to know whether the Commission agrees that this forced return was carried out in violation of Article 3 of the Geneva Convention .
I am very grateful for any explanations you can give us .
Mr President , firstly I would like to say how pleased I am that we are having a debate today on this issue because it is clear that the Heads of State or Government had expected the deportation of irregular migrants from the European Union to Afghanistan to be carried out without any fuss , and that is not the case .
It is not the case for two reasons : firstly , because the European Commission has requested information from the United Kingdom Government and the French Government , which is a good thing , and , secondly , because we are having a debate on this subject today .
Questions have already been asked .
Is Afghanistan a safe country ?
Well , we should ask Mr Obama that , as he has just decided to send 34 000 soldiers there .
No army is able to guarantee the survival of its men in Afghanistan , and are we supposed to be able to guarantee that the lives of the migrants that we send back to that country will not be endangered ?
This situation is a joke , and the UNHCR is not putting up with it either , as it has warmly recommended to the Member States that they do not proceed with deportations of this kind .
Secondly , there is ambiguity surrounding collective expulsions .
Everyone - and I most of all - welcomes the future binding character of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Article 19 ( 1 ) : ' Collective expulsions are prohibited ' .
You tell us that this is not a collective expulsion .
Mr Billström has a charming way of putting it , since he tells us that this is a reasonable mobilisation of resources .
Soon , common charter flights are going to be sold to us in the same way as car pooling to combat global warming is .
There are limits !
And what are those limits ?
Well , I can tell you , as an elected representative from Pas-de-Calais , where there are many Afghans - who have given rise , moreover , to these deportations organised by Mr Besson in France - that , when the French Government decides , for communication purposes , to organise a collective return operation and to turn it into a media event , there are arrests in Pas-de-Calais : collective arrests , which are therefore illegal because they are discriminatory .
Therefore , we absolutely cannot guarantee what you are saying , Mr Barrot , namely , that this is a joint operation for people who , following individual assessments , have been found to be irregular migrants .
This is indeed a case of collective expulsion because there was a collective arrest .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one could be pleased that this debate has been held .
I , however , am appalled by the waffle that we have been fed .
Let us stop playing with words .
Yes , collective expulsions were indeed organised .
The European Union takes great pride in defending human rights .
The right of asylum is one of those fundamental rights .
However , today , it is Afghans who have been deported to a country at war , a war in which many European countries are taking part .
I am sorry , Mr Barrot , but the legislation in question is as much European legislation as it is national legislation , and please do not refer us to every single one of the national situations .
A large proportion of the situations thus brought about are due to the Return Directive , which I prefer to call the ' Shame ' Directive , because it is a directive of shame as far as all human rights defenders are concerned .
You know that asylum seekers are treated very differently in each of the European countries and , precisely because of these differences , Afghans are unable to seek asylum in good conditions .
I therefore add my voice to all of the questions that have been asked by my fellow Members and I would ask you to ensure that the results of all of these policies are assessed on a case-by-case basis , if possible .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to offer my support to the joint initiative of the UK Labour Government and the French Government to deport illegal Afghan immigrants to their own country .
Indeed , contrary to what some people have said , these people had had their political asylum applications rejected , and this bilateral initiative must now be extended at European level .
The pressure of migration is a challenge that we must take up collectively , and that is the logic behind the Pact on Immigration and Asylum adopted a few months ago during the French Presidency .
We need to go further now by pooling our resources and organising common return flights financed by Frontex .
The decision of the 27 to ask the Commission for a study on this issue is a first step , and , Commissioner , I hope that the Commission will give its support to this proposal , since our combating illegal immigration is what the public and , in particular , legal immigrant populations , expect .
( FI ) Mr President , within the context of the definition of refugee in the Geneva Convention , the prerequisites for receiving asylum have to be examined separately for each individual .
As we heard in the previous speech , applications for asylum were processed properly and combined operations to return these people have been possible , provided that these prerequisites have been examined separately for each person .
What is worrying this House and me is that the situation regarding security in Afghanistan is such that we do not know whether anyone can be returned there .
In Finland , for example , this situation has been resolved by issuing temporary residence permits , even though the personal definitions for refugee status have not been met - so asylum has not been granted - because we do not want to return people to a country at war .
The security situation in Afghanistan is too dangerous to return anyone there at present , but afterwards , when things have quietened down , these people will be returned .

( PL ) Mr President , I want to begin with the following matter - I worked for several years in the Ministry of National Defence of the Republic of Poland , and in connection with this , I have been to Afghanistan many times , because 2 000 soldiers from Poland are serving there .
The drama of the situation concerns the fact that , on the one hand , there are people there who are desperate , who cannot cope in such a difficult situation , because all the time there is a war going on around them .
On the other hand , there are people there who , and I do not hesitate to say this , are playing on two sides .
During the day they support those who are , today , in power , and at night they help the Taliban .
In relation to this , my basic question is as follows : do we have the instruments and the capability to evaluate the real intentions and situations of those who come to Europe ?
I think that some come simply because they do not see another way out , and because they are desperate , but there may also be individual cases of people playing on several sides .
Mr President , I found part of the discussion a bit strange .
Why are the people here illegally ?
They are here illegally because there is no way that they can get out of their country , which is at war , in a legal way .
There is no way they can get here legally , so it is not really surprising that we find them coming here illegally .
We all know how difficult it is to apply for and to get asylum since the Geneva Convention is pretty strict on this and you have to prove that you are personally persecuted which , of course , is difficult when you are fleeing from war .
Now you are saying that just because they did not get their asylum claim through , we should send them back to Afghanistan , where there is war and where people cannot live , where they cannot survive , where there is no way of earning a living and where there is , by the way , also a strong war against women .
So , just on this last ground , all the women fleeing from there should be given asylum .
I would urge all the Member States and the Commission to fight against sending these people back to Afghanistan .
Mr President , honourable Members , thank you for your many interesting contributions to this debate .
I would like to start by attempting to sum up some of the most important principles in this matter . I will begin with what Mrs Mathieu said in her first point about the issue of mixed migration flows .
It is indeed the case that we have mixed flows coming to the European Union and as the Union does not have unlimited capacity to accept these people , as Mrs Mathieu pointed out , it is important to carry out an individual , legally certain assessment in order to be able to determine who should receive protection in accordance with European legislation and international conventions .
The Commission monitors this by means of the directives that have been adopted unanimously within the Union .
That leads me nicely on to the views expressed earlier by Mrs Guillaume and Mrs de Sarnez , namely whether Afghanistan is a country in which it is possible to guarantee an individual 's safety .
Well , yes , that is precisely what this entire debate is about !
That is exactly what an individual review aims to clarify and ensure .
The purpose of the establishment of a common European asylum system is to achieve this aim .
I think that several of the speakers completely overlooked this fact in their speeches , in other words , that a legally certain review , with the purpose of clarifying that ' yes ' means ' yes ' and ' no ' means ' no ' , is what we must endeavour to achieve .
In the case of a ' no ' , the person must be returned , irrespective - and I will repeat this so that everyone understands precisely what the Presidency 's intentions are - of the country concerned .
If we have clarified and ensured that a person is not in need of special protection , we can send them back to their country of origin with a clear conscience .
Whether this is done , as Commissioner Barrot said , in a coordinated way on a flight with several different people on board whose cases have all been reviewed individually , or whether they travel separately , is actually of secondary importance .
It is merely a question of logistics in this context .
I will now turn to Mrs Keller , who always brings interesting arguments to these matters .
Yes , I share your view that the question of access is a complicated one .
It is difficult when we currently have a system which , in principle , requires someone to be present within the European Union in order to submit an application for asylum , while at the same time , it is perhaps not always particularly easy for them to get to the European Union in order to do this .
However , this is precisely why , during the Swedish Presidency , we have pressed on with the work to set up a common European resettlement system , which will make it possible to offer an alternative route , a passage , within the European Union for those who are perhaps the most in need of protection , the most vulnerable and the people who do not have the financial resources to travel to the European Union .
Let me say that if all of the EU Member States could provide as many places as Sweden is currently doing - we have 1 900 places annually - in relation to the size of their populations , the European Union would be able to provide 100 000 places annually to UNHCR , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
It is a major strategic step to be able to close the worst refugee camps around the world and stand up and show the solidarity that we in the Presidency believe that the European Union should be showing to the countries outside our borders which , in fact , contain most of the world 's refugees .
Mr President , my thanks to all of the speakers .
The major difficulty that we are encountering comes from what Mrs Mathieu called mixed flows , where we have immigrants who come for economic or environmental reasons and , at the same time , people who are persecuted and who are entitled to international protection or subsidiary protection .
That is the difficulty , and that is what needs to be understood clearly if these problems are to be managed .
It is very , very difficult .
What I want to do firstly is respond .
I am going to read some elements of the French response - I cannot respond to everything - since you have questioned me on this issue .
I shall read the following , from the French response .
' The interested parties who did not submit an asylum application of their own accord have been questioned as illegal immigrants and placed in administrative detention under the control of the magistrate for custody and release .
Each person was informed in his language of origin of his right to appeal , before the administrative magistrate , the decision to deport him to Afghanistan and his right to seek asylum at the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons ( OFPRA ) , or to benefit from a voluntary return measure implemented in association with the International Organisation for Migration .
Of those foreigners , only one lodged neither an asylum application nor an appeal before the administrative magistrate , and two others had their applications examined by OFPRA , where they were heard in the presence of an interpreter .
They had the opportunity , during a hearing before the administrative court , with the assistance of a lawyer and in the presence of an interpreter , to explain the risks to which they felt they would be exposed if they returned to their country of origin .
Although OFPRA has granted refugee status or subsidiary protection to several Afghan nationals who have sought protection under similar circumstances , OFPRA considered that , in the case in point , there was no serious or known reason to believe that these persons would be exposed to a genuine risk of suffering persecution or serious threats to their lives or their person if they were deported . '
We also received a response from the UK Government .
I have genuinely done what my conscience and my duty demanded ; we have made a point of questioning the Member States .
What I would also like to say to you is that , regarding this idea of a safe country , there is Court of Justice and European Court of Human Rights case-law that says that the simple fact of coming from a country or a region in which there is unrest is not reason enough to justify absolute protection against deportation or the right to subsidiary protection , except in exceptional cases in which the level of general violence is so high that anyone is in real danger of suffering threats to their life or their person simply as a result of being in the country or the region concerned .
Moreover , it is true that these exceptional circumstances were not cited in the case in point .
That being said , I would also like to respond on the matter of group flights .
It must be said that Frontex has already organised group flights and has partly financed those flights .
I believe that this must indeed be said .
There were such flights in 2008 and in 2009 , so they are nothing new .
What Frontex is trying to do - and I believe that the director of Frontex is succeeding in this - is to ensure that group repatriations are carried out in decent conditions , where people are respected .
The director of Frontex was even telling me recently that he had observed that , in Austria , there was an ombudsman who was specifically monitoring the conditions in which these returns were conducted .
What we also hope to develop is expertise in terms of ensuring that , when these people are deported - after it has been verified that they do not correspond to the definition of persons eligible for international protection or subsidiary protection - they are admitted to their country of origin in decent conditions .
It is this point that we are also currently examining at the request of the European Council .
Indeed , we have not just thought up the idea of forced return flights without providing any guarantees that people will be respected .
Above all , I would like to remind you - and here I thank Mr Billström and the Swedish Presidency , which has helped us greatly - that , in spring , we began to table texts that are going to help us move towards a Europe of asylum .
We have a text on reception conditions , we have reviewed - and Mrs De Sarnez rightly raised this point - the Dublin problem , we have , in fact , raised the issue of adapting the Dublin regulation precisely in order to prevent it from undermining , at times , the interests of vulnerable persons and particularly of children , and we have endorsed the principle of introducing certain derogations from the Dublin regulation .
On 21 October , the Commission adopted two other important texts : one on the Qualification Directive and the other on the Directive on asylum procedures .
It is in this new draft Directive on asylum procedures that we are trying to lay down criteria that are genuinely objective , that are the same everywhere .
We will need the Support Office to verify specifically that the practices are more or less the same throughout Europe , so that this Europe of asylum can finally come about .
I wish to thank the Swedish Presidency .
It has , I believe , done a good job of presenting these various texts to the Council , but they are still a long way away from being adopted .
And we have some problems .
I am doing everything in my power to try to get this Europe of asylum up and running , with the help of the Swedish Presidency , which has set an example - Mr Billström pointed out , moreover , just how much of an example his country had set in Europe .
With regard to this problem , too , the Member States are showing more solidarity when it comes to receiving these refugees and guaranteeing their protection .
All of the countries need to starting doing this .
We are not there yet , and there are still some countries that do not receive refugees .
That is what I wished to say .
I am well aware that I have not responded to every single question .
What I can say to you is that , in spite of everything , we in the Commission have done everything we can to enforce respect for European law and , I would say , even more to enforce respect for the values of Europe .
That concludes the item .
2007 discharge : EU general budget - Council ( debate )
The next item is the second report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2007 , Section II - Council ( C6-0417 / 2008 - - Committee on Budgetary Control . Rapporteur : Søren Bo Søndergaard
Thank you , Mr President .
Seven months ago - on 23 April to be precise - a large majority in this House refused to grant discharge to the Council 's budget for 2007 .
Why ?
It was because the Council 's behaviour in respect of Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control was completely unacceptable .
The Council refused to answer written questions that we put to it about its budget and refused to meet with the Committee on Budgetary Control and answer questions .
The situation was so absurd that representatives of the Council immediately left any meeting at which questions concerning the Council 's budget were asked .
In reality , this was nothing new .
It had , in fact , been going on for many years .
What was new was that in April , Parliament put a stop to it .
I think that in April , most Members asked themselves a simple question : how can I , as a Member of the European Parliament , be responsible to my voters for the Council 's budget if the Council will not even answer the questions put to it by Parliament ?
I believe that this was the question that resulted in a large majority of Members of this House refusing to grant discharge for the Council 's budget .
Perhaps some people thought that Parliament would become more amenable after the elections in June , or that Parliament 's demands for openness and transparency smacked of election promises rather than a real change of attitude .
If so , they will have been disappointed .
Even after the election , we on the Committee on Budgetary Control have been united in our very simple stance : if the Council wishes us to grant discharge for its budget , then it must meet with us and answer our questions .
At the end of September , something finally happened .
On 24 September , a meeting was held between the Council and the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , the committee 's rapporteurs and the coordinators .
At the same time , the Council answered the committee 's questions - albeit indirectly - and these answers were also published on the Council 's website .
Let me make myself clear : that was a smart move by the Council - a very smart move .
It is the reason why we on the Committee on Budgetary Control are today able to recommend that Parliament grants discharge for the Council 's budget for 2007 .
However , let me also clearly state that we both expect and require that this step expresses a change of attitude on the part of the Council with respect to Parliament .
Where the Council 's budget for 2008 is concerned , we do not expect the absurd theatre of 2007 to be repeated .
On the contrary , we assume that we will be starting from the point that we have finally reached .
In other words , we expect the Council to provide , without undue delay , written answers to questions put by the competent committees and rapporteurs within Parliament .
We expect a willingness on the part of the Council to meet with the competent committees and to answer questions .
To ensure that there is no doubt concerning this , it is stated clearly in the report that we are discussing today , and which I hope Parliament will adopt tomorrow - if not unanimously , then with a very large majority .
In granting discharge for the Council 's budget for 2007 , we have demonstrated our positive attitude .
The ball is now in the Council 's court .
Mr President , honourable Members , the issues that we are debating are extremely important .
Openness and transparency are the democratic tools we have available .
What promotes the trust of the citizens is whether they are able to have an insight into the process , and that is good for the Union 's activities .
In this regard , Parliament and the Council have the same objectives , and this , of course , applies everywhere , in all areas and to all institutions .
Today we are talking about discharge for 2007 .
In this connection , I would , of course , like to emphasise the importance of external auditing in general and of the implementation of the budget in particular and , in this context , also highlight the role of the Court of Auditors and the very good work that forms the basis for the annual determination of accountability .
As regards the specific issue of this particular report on discharge in respect of the 2007 budget , I would like to express my satisfaction that you are now recommending that the Council be granted discharge .
If we look closer at the main issues , there is actually no reason not to grant discharge .
The Council has always endeavoured to follow the rules and to apply openness with regard to economic management .
This will be the case in future , too .
I understood that the informal meeting in September between the delegation from the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Council delegation enabled a number of points to be clarified and that this was what made it possible - as the rapporteur also mentioned - to grant discharge to the Council for the 2007 budget .
This quite simply highlights the importance of dialogue between our institutions in future , too .
I am therefore very pleased that we have found a way to move forward on these issues , with the result that discharge can be granted , and I look forward to this being confirmed in the vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Mr Barrot , a miracle has occurred .
For the first time in five years , I am witnessing the Council taking part in this debate , and I would like to offer my sincere thanks to the Swedish Presidency of the Council for this major signal .
( Applause )
A warm welcome to you to the plenary session , the first time the Council has been represented at the debate on its discharge .
All 's well that ends well , as we say in Germany ?
No , not this time .
The discharge procedure with the Council has shown itself to be ineffable and in urgent need of a place on the interinstitutional agenda , which , incidentally , needs to be extended to include the President of the European Council .
We have a new player on the European stage , and the existing procedure cannot , and must not , continue as it is .
The way that Parliament has to beg for information and dialogue partners in order to get answers for its outstanding questions is unworthy of a parliamentary democracy .
The Council styles itself as the ultimate and absolutist body and I , as a citizen of the European Union , stand before the voters of my constituency ashamed of this behaviour .
The procedure that we have had so far is simply absurd and it must not be allowed to carry on in future .
I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency once again .
We have made interesting beginnings .
Firstly , there was this conversation , a new and unprecedented milestone , and the fact that you are present here today is a fantastic signal .
The Presidency of the Council , like all the other EU institutions , must put itself forward for discharge by Parliament , and the same applies , now more than ever , of course , to the new High Representative , as head of the new External Action Service .
We MEPs must now show that this issue is important to us and that we have to drive it forwards together .
This issue must be on every agenda , and I would like to ask the Commission to put it on the agenda .
We do not like how the debate has been going so far .
The fact that we have nothing , not one single proposal , for how things should be in the future , disturbs us .
Lisbon must not become a synonym for an opaque European Union in which parliamentary supervision has been steamrollered .
It is an opportunity for a new beginning with strong participation on the part of the elected representatives of the people , and the granting of discharge for the future President of the European Council is the first acid test .

Mr President , I would like , at the outset , to express my gratitude to the rapporteur , Mr Søndergaard , who began his work in difficult circumstances , has shown great patience , and who has also demonstrated a tendency to be very balanced in his evaluations and opinions .
Mrs Malmström , I agree with you that it is good that the principles of transparency are being observed , including financial transparency , but I agree with those remarks which speak about something more .
We have , today , reached a crucial moment in the way we operate .
On the eve of the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the Council is acknowledging , as it were , that Parliament is the only body which is elected because Parliament works openly .
For Parliament and the Council to be compatible bodies , the Council , too , should , to a great extent , work more openly , and that is exactly what is happening at the moment .
We are overcoming the Council 's aversion to working with Parliament .
I think this is going to happen not only in this area of our work , but that it is also going to happen in other areas of our work , including the parliamentary committees .
My political group will therefore definitely support the proposal for a decision on discharge of the budget , as indeed the honourable Council has the opportunity to see in today 's debate .
We are not going back to the numbers , we are not pointing to the left-hand column , the right-hand column , incomes , expenditures or sound management .
We do not have significant reservations here .
However , we are glad that this debate is taking place and about the way it is being conducted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I must acknowledge the very important work accomplished by the committee and the excellent job done by the rapporteur , as well as the political solidarity that has been on show .
This is because , from the outset , we wished to send a very clear message : we intend to work with great rigour to ensure transparency , accuracy and legality in the management of public funds and , therefore , in auditing the budgets .
Very significant progress has been made with the Council , which at first did not want to respond .
I would like to personally congratulate the Swedish Presidency on this .
It has always set out to act to promote transparency and accuracy .
From that point of view , we therefore expect further progress , because obviously it is absolutely unacceptable , particularly with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , that Parliament should not have the information and details required to monitor budgets and public funds , in the interest not only of the European Union but also of all European citizens .

Let us be honest , this remains a difficult exercise , and I am delighted that the President-in-Office of the Council is present .
This represents a breakthrough .
Indeed , it is the first time that the Presidency has attended this kind of debate , and I welcome this .
Yet we must admit that this remains a difficult exercise .
The Council is actually continuing to hide behind a kind of gentlemen 's agreement concluded at some point in the early 1970s - forty years ago - whereby Parliament and the Council agreed not to interfere in each other 's budgets , not to look into each other 's books and to let everything pass , like respectable gentlemen .
This is a thing of the past , as the Council budget has changed fundamentally .
Forty years ago , it consisted of nothing but administrative expenditure , whereas now operational expenditure has been added .
Therefore , we must strive towards a breakthrough .
We have broken the deadlock provisionally .
We are prepared to grant discharge , but now we really must go a step further .
After all , the problems have not been solved .
We have the task of ensuring that transparency and democratic control apply to the Council 's budget and also to the budget of our own Parliament .
Therefore , I agree with all those - speakers , rapporteur , speakers from the political groups - who have said clearly : look , this is a warning shot , we must go a step further in the next Council discharge exercise .
The Annual Report of the Court of Auditors contains suggestions in this regard , and once again mentions matters concerning the SESAME Programme .
Mrs Malmström , you may soon no longer be involved , but we are going to continue pushing for transparency .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , may I firstly take this opportunity to give credit to Commissioner Kallas for the real progress which has been made in addressing the issues and reservations expressed by the Court of Auditors .
In my view , this outgoing Commission has made more positive progress than any preceding Commission in recent times and I thank him for his efforts .
It is widely accepted that the adoption of accrual-based accounting systems has been a success and that that installation has been responsible for much marked improvement .
I also want to acknowledge good progress made with the common agricultural policy and , in particular , the IAC system , which has given great benefit as well .
However , I do have two areas of concern which I must mention .
Firstly , the Court of Auditors , in its annual report , makes repeated criticism of ' the accuracy and reliability of underlying transactions ' .
I agree , and in this respect , 2007 was no different from previous years .
Their message is perfectly clear : there is still a great deal of work to be done .
Secondly , I want to mention that the Court of Auditors was critical of the lack of controls in joint managed programmes .
This Parliament has repeatedly called on the Member States to devote far greater urgency to addressing the auditors ' concerns , and in particular , we have called on the Member States to meet the terms of the 2006 interinstitutional agreement .
For the sake of fiscal integrity and for public accountability , they must now show more resolve and so , for those reasons , and until we see real progress being made by Council in this matter , I and my colleagues in the British Conservative delegation will vote against discharge of the 2007 general budget .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , we are elected Members of the European Parliament , but our voters do not know what is going on behind the scenes .
In April 2009 , the Budgetary Control Committee decided to postpone discharge to the Council .
Even if the Court of Auditors had not criticised the accounts , the Committee claimed to have enough reasons to proceed that way .
However , after this Committee met with the Swedish Presidency in September , and some written answers were given to Parliament 's questions , Mr Søndergaard , the rapporteur on the Council discharge for 2007 , still issued a report which , even with much goodwill , would not have allowed discharge to be given .
However , a political decision was taken to give discharge and the compromising paragraphs were watered down .
The Committee intends to recommend discharge on expectations for the future .
If the people who bothered to vote for us in June knew the following : that there is a consensus not to rock the boat on the basis of a gentleman 's agreement from 1970 ; that the internal auditor of the Council would not be invited to the Budgetary Control Committee because then , the Council would be able to invite the internal auditor of the European Parliament , with uncertain consequences ; and that the politically appointed Court of Auditors did not have any comments on the Council 's internal auditor 's report of April 2008 , what would they say ?
Back in 2002 , when I was Chief Accountant of the European Commission , the then Director-General for Budgets stated , in a letter to the then internal auditor of the Commission , that the discharge procedure was an interinstitutional game and nothing more .
Are we going to continue to avoid talking about the gorilla in the middle of the room because we are afraid to lose privileges obtained after years of silence ?
We can choose to expose and end hypocrisy when we vote for the 2007 Council discharge .
I think you know what I choose , and I hope that you will join me in refusing discharge to the Council .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Security and Defence Policy is not , at present , a navy , but it is a ship of war in international politics .
Every year , when it comes to discharging this budgetary warship of the Council , it suddenly disappears into the Bermuda triangle and the European Parliament seems happy to apply the motto ' everything that is not on our radar screen does not exist in reality , either ' .
Last spring , extra-budgetary accounts suddenly emerged and the Council was not granted discharge .
Four reasons were cited for this .
The first was that the Council refused to accept any kind of official , formal meeting with Parliament .
The second was that the Council refused to provide any comprehensive written answers .
The third was that the Council failed to supply either an activity report or a complete list of budgetary transfers .
The fourth reason was that it is impossible to determine whether the expenditure items in the Council budget are of an operational nature .
Now , suddenly , tomorrow - a few months later - there is a will to grant the Council discharge , all of a sudden . Yet not one of these four grounds for refusing to grant discharge has really been cleared up or satisfied .
The representatives of the Council still refuse to have any kind of formal meeting with Parliament .
Likewise , no activity report has been forthcoming and the extra-budgetary accounts have not been closed or got rid of , as we demanded .
I would remind the rapporteur that his initial report put a total of twenty queries and questions to the Council .
Yet where are the precise answers to these questions ?
Can you tell me that ?
No , you cannot .
Instead of increasing the pressure on the Council at this point , what do we do ?
We turn ourselves into supplicants , and these demands become requests in the new report .
Anyone who votes in favour of granting discharge to the Council now will be giving their support to precisely this situation , where Parliament stands before the Council making meek requests .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorse the draft decision of the European Parliament granting discharge to the Secretary-General of the Council in respect of implementation of the budget for the financial year 2007 .
I am pleased that the Swedish Presidency and Mr Kallas have demonstrated they have the commitment to resolve this problem .
I would like to draw attention to several matters , which are still , however , outstanding , and which are something which we must tackle in the next few years .
The difficult and laborious process of granting discharge to the Council shows what the European Parliament wants .
The European Parliament wants transparency , and open but also formal dialogue with the Council .
These demands of the European Parliament are persistent and stubborn , but they are not an expression of malice on the part of MEPs , they are an expression of concern for public money and are , as indeed they should be , an expression of concern for transparency in spending taxpayers ' money .
I would like to stress that the procedure of granting the Council discharge also shows the way in which Parliament finds out about new areas of the Council 's work , and that Parliament does not want to be excluded from monitoring and supervising the Council 's spending in any area of its activity .
In my opinion , granting the Council discharge for 2007 is a step in the right direction , but we should also say clearly that there are still certain matters which have not yet been fully explained , and we should continue to remind the Council of this .
I hope there will be constructive dialogue here , with increasing transparency and openness , so that public money can be monitored in the best way .

( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank Mr Søndergaard for his successful work , as a result of which the Council ultimately accommodated Parliament in the discharge procedure .
The Council refused , for a long while , to provide pertinent answers to Parliament 's questions , citing the Gentlemen 's Agreement - an agreement of an informal nature which is now , in any case , 40 years old .
This seems downright bizarre when Council officials , after 40 years , clearly no longer know what exactly the Gentlemen 's Agreement states , since the version provided by the European Parliament contains precisely the opposite of what the Council claimed again and again in the negotiations .
The first resolution of the Gentleman 's Agreement stated that the Council would not attempt to make any changes to the European Parliament 's expenditure .
The third resolution states that there should be close cooperation between the two institutions on budget issues .
The Council takes this to mean that each institution will leave the budgetary activity of the other alone .
At this point , I will refrain from commenting on the seriousness of this line of argument .
Instead , I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency of the Council for having begun the process of bringing an end to this ignoble state of affairs .
The solution is an addendum to the interinstitutional agreement that clearly regulates the procedure for the granting of discharge to the Council by Parliament , as the proposed motion for a resolution demands .
I therefore ask the House to support the motion .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kallas , first of all , I very much welcome the fact that the Swedish Presidency of the Council is present , and I would also like to personally thank Mrs Malmström for having made the procedure more transparent .
Everything that my fellow Members have said is true - the procedure is more transparent , and even if she expressed herself in a somewhat more cautious manner today , we can still say that we will be granting discharge .
There is still a very long way to go .
We ask the Council to follow this first step with further steps , especially given that the Council 's competences in the field of foreign and security policy have been much more clearly defined under the Treaty of Lisbon .
In future , this policy will also have a face , in the shape of Baroness Ashton .
The citizens , however , did not previously know Baroness Ashton , and they , the European taxpayers , will still not know , in future , exactly how much money she has at her disposal and what she does with it .
We must change this state of affairs .
This , indeed , is an absolute must in a time where we are actually fighting for a transparent , democratic Europe .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Søndergaard for having applied pressure in our - Parliament 's - name , and we will maintain that pressure .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to thank the rapporteur , who has done a tremendously good job .
When we are discussing discharge in respect of common funds for 2007 , we are not talking about the Council 's money , or the Commission 's money , or Parliament 's money , but the taxpayer 's money .
It is money that belongs to our citizens , and they must have a right to know what it is being spent on .
More than anything , Parliament represents the people , and Parliament must have the right to receive all the information it needs when it asks for it .
We cannot have a situation where Parliament actually has to beg for it .
That is why openness and transparency are the only way in which the institutions of the EU can win the trust of the people .
I want to join those who have praised the excellent progress that has been made in this matter and the splendid work that the Swedish Presidency has done , on account of which we can now grant discharge .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Kallas , who has done such excellent work in the last five years .
Progress has been made in these areas .
This is the right step in the right direction .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 23 April , this House postponed its decision relating to the Council 's accounts because the Council had refused to supply Parliament with its annual activity report , preventing its expenditure being scrutinised in the same ways as are applicable to the other institutions .
It is , in fact , our duty to intensify efforts to promote transparency within the Community institutions by increasing awareness regarding the use of the Community budget and by making the European institutions and , first and foremost , the Council , more answerable to the public .
I believe that since Parliament 's refusal to give discharge to the Council , many efforts have been made .
In particular , we have welcomed the publication on the Council 's website of its annual activity report and the increased level of transparency in the common foreign and security policy sector .
We also welcomed the meeting in September at which , finally , there was a constructive discussion between the representatives of the Committee on Budgets and those of the Swedish Presidency .
The efforts made by the Council to supply appropriate replies to the requests made by Parliament in April are equally welcome .
Mr President , to conclude , the text that we will be voting on constitutes a significant step in the dialogue between Parliament and the Council , and a strong signal that this House wished to send in order to protect taxpayers through clear , transparent and timely reporting on the Council 's expenditure .
Mr President , thank you for debating this extremely important matter .
I am pleased that we agree on the importance of openness and transparency .
These things are , of course , the foundation not only of constructive cooperation between us , but also for enabling citizens to have confidence in the European institutions .
Like Parliament , the Council is keen to accept its responsibility for guaranteeing the greatest possible transparency when it comes to taxpayers ' money , and these issues become even more relevant , of course , with the new treaty , which will enter into force in just one week 's time .
The broader discussion of the form that the auditing of the Union 's financial management is to take should be carried out in connection with the review of the regulations and the annual procedure for the EU 's budget that will be necessary on account of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , the Council endeavours , and will continue to endeavour , to follow the rules and to apply openness with regard to its economic management .
In relation to the European Parliament , we will continue to apply the practice established over the years and also next year hold talks with Parliament on an informal basis to clear up any questions there may be about the implementation of the budget .
In this connection , I look forward to continuing the dialogue with the European Parliament on the question of discharge and I am certain that we will also have a constructive , informal dialogue next year on the Court of Auditors ' report for 2008 .
Thank you very much for this debate .
Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have contributed to this debate .
I would particularly like to touch on what was said by Mrs Andreasen and Mr Ehrenhauser , and point out that when we began this process there was no agreement whatsoever .
When we began this process , we got no response when we put questions to the Commission and requested written answers .
When we began this process , the Commission left meetings whenever we started asking questions .
That was the position we started from .
Our task today is to decide whether we have moved a step closer or whether we are still in the same situation .
The question is not whether we have achieved everything we wanted to .
I agree that we have not achieved everything we wanted to .
You only have to read my report , and now the committee 's report , to see that we are still unhappy .
I would also ask the Council to read the report very thoroughly , because it contains many good points that could be useful for next year .
We have come a step closer , however .
When we start on the 2008 discharge - and we are doing that even now - we will not be starting from a blank sheet .
We will be starting from the point we have reached this year .
I therefore believe it is right to defend what we have achieved by voting in favour , thereby continuing this struggle - which is , after all , what it is .
Time will tell - when we see how things go this year and next year and the year after that - whether we made the right decision .
That is why it is crucial that we as a committee , and as Parliament , are capable of standing together and sticking to what we set out to do all along .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the secretariat , the shadow rapporteurs and the entire committee , including its chairman , for enabling us to show a united front .
If we can maintain this solidarity - including when it comes to the 2008 discharge - then in 2008 , we will be able to move a step further , beyond what we achieved in 2007 .
Then we will be in a position to achieve what we all want to achieve .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 25 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , who has done an exceptional job , directly raised crucial questions and insisted on the need for us to obtain clear answers before proceeding to recommend discharge .
Congratulations also to the Committee on Budgetary Control , which stood by its position and supported the rapporteur and , despite initial difficulties , managed to persuade the Council to give us answers to the most important questions .
For how can we recommend discharge for a budget , how can we responsibly argue that the budget in question is correct , without knowing what is behind the numbers ?
That would be completely absurd .
Following the Council 's replies , we are now ready to recommend discharge but , at the same time , we have included substantial comments in the accompanying resolution , which the Committee on Budgetary Control approved with a very large majority .
We want and believe in open procedures , we want and believe in transparency and we want to have full knowledge of how European taxpayers ' money is spent .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.25 until the start of Question Time and resumed at 19.30 )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0223 / 2009 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Subject : Commission action to foster an environment that spurs corporate investment in research and encourages banks to finance that investment
2009 is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
The Lisbon Strategy , which was adopted in 2000 , aims to make the European economy ' the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy ' by 2010 .
That aim has given rise to two other objectives : raising the employment rate to a minimum of 70 % of the labour force and increasing the level of investment in research to at least 3 % of GDP , with two-thirds of that amount coming from the private sector .
Unfortunately , 2009 has been marked by an economic and financial crisis affecting all the EU Member States and restricting private companies ' access to financing instruments .
Overall research investment is no greater than 1.85 % of GDP , and only five Member States have invested over 2 % of GDP in research .
Member States will only recover economically if the EU manages to remain competitive , and that is dependent on there being investment in research and education .
What action does the Commission have in mind to foster an environment that spurs private companies to invest in research , and particularly in applied research , and encourages banks to finance investment in research and innovation ?
Europe 's policy on research and innovation is essentially based on the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , which runs from 2007 to 2013 , the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , which runs for the same period , and the cohesion funds , which likewise run over the same period .
In preparation for these three major programmes , the Commission put forward a long-term strategy and an action plan in 2005 and 2006 .
The action plan was put forward in 2005 , while the broadly-framed innovation strategy dates from 2006 .
The results of these different programmes are set out in comprehensive documentation from the Commission and have often been discussed here in Parliament .
I would be happy , Mrs Ţicău , to provide you with all these documents once again .
Within the confines of Question Time , it is not possible to spell out their contents to you , but I do want to attempt to highlight the key points .
Through the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , we did experience a truly remarkable rise in European expenditure on research and development whilst a series of new instruments , in particular , the joint technology initiatives , were also created and these have proven their worth extremely well .
The cohesion funds are new and better suited to the aim of promoting research and innovation and it is really remarkable if you look at the figures - the provision for these areas in the cohesion and structural funds for the stated period is EUR 86 billion , which , in any case , is 25 % of the total structural and cohesion funds .
A new instrument has been created within the scope of European structural policy , the JEREMIE support initiative , which , above all , is about providing easier access to capital for small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is being done in collaboration with the European Investment Fund .
The programme to promote innovation and competitiveness , which I am responsible for , is also essentially a programme that creates funding instruments .
The major share of the money is actually spent on facilitating access for small and medium-sized enterprises to funding instruments that are designed to improve their capacity to innovate .
I am sure you know that our European growth and employment policy does not have very many quantitative targets .
We do have one quantitative target , however , which has been unchanged since the year 2000 .
That target is to spend 3 % of gross domestic product on research and development .
We can already say , today , that this target will not be achieved .
Just looking at the percentages , however , is a little misleading , since , after all , the absolute figures for spending on research and development in the European Union from 2000 to 2006 rose by 14.8 % .
That is a greater rate of increase than , for example , the United States .
Despite that , we have to say that the results are not satisfactory , for which reason the Council adopted a document entitled ' Vision 2020 ' for the European Research Area as far back as December of last year , which was concerned with the issue of whether we could mobilise greater funding for European research and development policy .
I do not want to hide from you my concern that the current economic recession threatens the long-term strategy of driving forward research and development .
The Commission reacted very quickly to this threat in November 2008 .
The European Economic Recovery Plan , which complements the Member States ' measures to combat the economic crisis and aims to provide impetus and counter the difficult situation in the financial sector , is heavily focused on the areas of investment in research and development and promoting investment .
I will give you three examples : the Factories of the Future initiative , which relates to the modernisation of Europe 's industrial base , with EUR 1.2 billion in funding ; the Energy-efficient Buildings initiative , for which EUR 1 billion has been allocated ; and the Partnership for Building Green Cars , which has also been allocated EUR 1 billion in the field of research , topped up with expenditure amounting to EUR 4 billion from other economic measures .



The Commission has already begun preparations for the next growth and employment strategy .
Without giving away any secrets - as President Barroso has already discussed this in his guidelines - I can also say that research , development and innovation will play an absolutely key role in the next growth and employment strategy .
I have another comment to make on innovation .
Europe is actually in a pretty good position when it comes to research policy .
We have good , and in some cases outstanding , research capacities .
We also have very good results when it comes to technological development .
We could certainly be better , though , when it comes to innovation .
If we understand innovation to be the practical application of research and development work for products , services , design and methods - in other words , anything where a practical application is possible - we still see a huge potential to create additional growth and additional employment in Europe .
The Commission therefore announced this year that it is to bring forward an ' innovation act ' .
An ' act ' in this sense is a new political instrument that we developed for the first time in connection with small and medium-sized enterprises - you will remember the Small Business Act - and we will be bringing forward an innovation act that brings together legislative measures , policy initiatives and politically-binding guidelines in a major package .
I have endeavoured to direct this work in such a way that the new Commission will be free to decide when it wants to bring forward this innovation act .
You will understand that I cannot pre-empt that - it will be for the new Commission to decide .
The preparatory work , however , has already made good progress and I think I can say with certainty that Parliament will be dealing with the subject of this innovation act within the next year .
Allow me , in concluding , to say that we have seen good progress overall on a broad front over the last few years , although it has been very erratic .
It is necessary , in this regard , however , to take an even-handed view .
We cannot , for example , expect the new Member States to match the spending proportion of gross domestic product of the older Member States on research , development and innovation straight away .
I am very pleased to see , however , that the new Member States - especially those that are in greatest need of catching up - are also making up ground the quickest , so that I see developments overall as positive .
( RO ) Thank you for the information and answer you have provided .
I would like to ask the Commission whether it is intending to hold discussions with Europe 's banking institutions about the possibility of providing guarantees and loans at a preferential rate of interest for the research and innovation companies and projects which are currently considered to be a major risk .
In addition , European research programmes such as the Seventh Framework Programme , which apply for up to 50 % cofinancing , are not very suitable for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I would like to ask the Commission whether it is intending to modify these programmes to increase the involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mrs Ţicău , that is a very worthwhile point , and I am pleased to be able to tell you that this is exactly what the Commission thinks and is therefore exactly how it has acted .
I want to reiterate that the crucial problem for our small and medium-sized enterprises is attaining the necessary venture capital in order to be able to pay for research and development .
Two important instruments have been created in this area , namely the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme and the JEREMIE programme .
In both cases , the issue at hand is the same , namely the ability to mobilise cut-rate credit via the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund , respectively , with the aid of venture capital - in other words , the direct participation of business capital - and with the aid of guarantees , in order to facilitate access for small and medium-sized enterprises to this credit .
These are major investment programmes in which many hundreds of thousands of European businesses take part .
I am sure you understand that the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund are not able to manage the details of each individual granting of credit .
That is why this takes place via intermediaries , usually banks in the Member States .
According to the most recent information I have , the situation is that we have reached a position in all the Member States whereby the national banking system is integrated into this policy and businesses that are seeking access to the funds provided from the Community budget are able to get said funds via the national banking system in question .
( DE ) My question relates to the concept of eurostars , something that we implemented in EUREKA , which , in particular , facilitated quick and efficient allocation for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Do you believe that the said programme can be extended ?
Furthermore , how do you see the challenge for the Eighth Framework Programme for Research , where the idea of us providing EUR 50 billion in future for research into energy efficiency , in particular , in relation to SMEs , is being discussed .
Mr Rübig , you know my answer , of course , but I am grateful for your question .
Yes , I do believe that all the programmes that we have that facilitate access to funds for small and medium-sized enterprises can be extended .
These programmes are creating very positive experiences and we should extend them for that reason .
I have to ask for your understanding for the fact that I do not want to make any comments about the priorities for the Eighth Framework Programme for Research .
For one thing , it is not my responsibility , as you know , but for another thing , it would be inappropriate for me to pre-empt the new Commission which is about to be formed .
I can only say , as a view from the current Commission on the fundamental premise of your question , that there will have to be a focus in our research , development and innovation policy over the next ten years on the fields of energy efficiency , renewable energies and , in a broader sense , on the field of technologies that pave the way for a sustainable lifestyle and economy .
You know me well enough to know that I have always pointed out that increasing energy efficiency is probably the cheapest and most effective kind of sustainability programme , as it enables us to achieve a lot with relatively little expenditure .
If , therefore , the new Commission tables specific proposals moving in this direction , it will , in fact , be able to draw upon the preparatory work carried out by the current Commission and its policies .
( DE ) Mr President , particularly in the pharmaceuticals industry , of course , research and development are key when it comes to innovation and fighting diseases , which in turn , benefit EU citizens .
What action will the Commission take against pharmaceuticals companies that attempt to curtail parallel trading in the medicines sector ?
Will it categorise such measures as anti-competitive ?
Mr Mölzer , this question simply does not arise , as it was comprehensively examined and decided upon in connection with the pharmaceuticals package that the Commission proposed last year .
We have clear and unambiguous case-law on this matter from the European Court of Justice , which includes parallel trade in medicines in the freedom of the internal market , and there is therefore no legal scope to counter this .
The pharmaceuticals package proposed by the Commission over the last year does not set out any specific rules that negatively affect parallel trade in any way .
In the very important and far-reaching proposals that relate to protection against counterfeit medicines in the legal supply chain , exactly the same rules apply to the manufacturers of medicines as to those carrying out parallel trading .
There is no discrimination at all .
I am not aware of there being anyone in the Commission with the intention of dealing with this subject .
Subject : Information on energy prices for consumers
The Commission recently opened the second meeting of the ' Citizens ' Energy Forum ' in London .
In her statement , the Commissioner for consumer protection emphasised how important it is for energy consumers to have gas or electricity bills - the best indicator of energy consumption - that are simple and accurate and that allow comparisons between providers .
Going beyond these major annual public events , can the Commission indicate specifically how it intends to compel energy producers and distributors to meet this objective , which is essential for citizens , despite having refused to adopt the Energy Consumers ' Charter proposed by Parliament ?
Member of the Commission . - In response to the first question , from Mr Tarabella , on energy prices , I can state that with the adoption of the third internal energy market package , the importance of the citizen in the internal energy market has been elevated considerably .
The new measures are intended to improve the operation of the retail energy market and provide additional consumer protection .
These topics are discussed and followed up at the Citizens ' Energy Forum , established with the aim of improving the functioning of the retail market to the benefit of individual consumers .
The Forum , involving the representatives of consumers , industry , national energy regulators and national administrations , seeks to improve implementation of energy legislation and may develop elements for codes of conduct with self-regulating and even quasi-binding effects on the industry .
In this context , a working group on billing was established at the first meeting of the Forum in 2008 .
The working group 's recommendations are examples of good billing practice and were presented and endorsed at the second meeting of the Forum in 2009 .
Energy regulators and industry will report on the implementation of the billing recommendations in the next Forum , which is expected to be in the autumn of 2010 .
The third internal energy market package also brought a new instrument intended to inform consumers - the European energy consumer checklist .
The checklist is a tool that will help inform consumers in the Member States of their rights - notably on billing - and assist with the implementation and enforcement of energy legislation .
It aims to provide consumers with simplified , accurate and practical information on local energy markets .
The harmonisation of the competences of energy regulators in relation to consumer protection , which will result in active market monitoring , will further enhance their protection .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , in your response , you are actually talking about the outcome of a second report in autumn 2010 , of a third energy package , which will be monitored closely .
In the meantime , you know full well that thousands of complaints lodged with consumer organisations and national regulators concern the total lack of transparency of gas and electricity bills , in terms of both prices and of real consumption .
This , at a time when the Commission and the Member States alike are emphasising in their energy plans the need to reduce consumption and the possibility of comparing prices with the aim of potentially changing supplier .
This was the main objective of liberalisation .
Therefore , Commissioner , I will get straight to the point by asking you what measures - and I use the plural here - the Commission intends to take in the short term to deal with these shortcomings .
I would also point out that the Commission has rejected an energy consumers ' charter proposed by Parliament - it was Mrs De Vits who proposed it - which you yourself had previously recommended .
Member of the Commission . - Mr Tarabella , your question is very much concentrated on why the Charter was dropped .
The public consultation entitled Towards a Charter on the European Energy Consumers was launched in July 2007 .
The results of the consultation showed that there was little knowledge of existing energy consumer rights .
The idea of a charter that would create a single piece of legislation covering consumer rights that are currently included in a number of European directives and numerous national implementation instruments was rejected for legal reasons .
The energy consumer rights that are in the existing European legislation are already legally binding .
You ask why there cannot be a standard bill for all consumers .
Our working group on billing , set up by the first Citizens ' Energy Forum , confirmed that industry 's right to self-regulation , promoting innovation in billing , should be preserved .
At the same time , greater transparency and comparability of offered prices and services to consumers should be ensured .
Billing accuracy is closely related to metering frequency .
Meter-reading frequency is not defined by EU legislation .
However , this is indirectly addressed by smart metering .
I would like also to stress that during the Citizens ' Energy Forum , we endorsed the recommendations for good practice in billing , which aims to provide consumers with simple and clear information on gas and electricity bills .
Through the consumer market scoreboard , where we investigated different consumer markets , we spotted that the markets from where we had most complaints is the electricity market . The second is financial markets , and the third is local transport .
That is why the Commission has launched a major study on the retail electricity market and will present the results to the Forum in 2010 .
This is the second layer of implementing the results of the consumer markets scoreboard and I believe that in the future , this one will remain as one of the strongest instruments to make our diagnosis on how the retail market is functioning , especially in this case , which is of such an important and basic interest and also very much related to services .
If I can follow up the question : we know there is huge potential for energy saving in domestic households .
I look at my electricity bill , I look at it with interest because I want to make these savings , and frankly I find it confusing .
If I find it confusing , then I suspect many of my constituents do .
Self-regulation is not sufficient .
Clarification is an area in which the European Commission could make a genuine difference which I think would be welcomed by people everywhere and would provide some significant assistance to us in trying to reduce our global warming emissions .
Please take this back to the Commission and think again .
( DE ) In the first half of this year , gas suppliers ' fuel oil prices fell by up to 40 % .
Yet this development had only a marginally positive impact for consumers , something that is particularly important in the colder parts of the year .
What steps will the Commission take to ensure that consumers , too , are able to benefit from these positive price movements ?
Member of the Commission . - We are aware that the Commission is not a price setter .
What we can do and what we are committed to doing is to make prices transparent .
In one of the recent directives - the 2007 Consumer Credit Directive - we asked the banks to establish a common methodology to calculate the interest rate , on the basis of which consumers could compare the offers and find the best solution for them .
We have several tools to work with ; this is about unfair commercial practices and it is precisely the transparency of prices that is core to that directive .
We also have another horizontal directive , on unfair commercial terms , which concerns whether the terms relate to undue and unjust enrichment .
That is what I believe you hinted at when you asked the question about prices .
This matter is in our hands and we also need to do everything possible to ensure that enforcement in all Member States across Europe is equally well implemented , because all these directives depend very much on how they are implemented .
That is why I am proposing to the European Commission a communication on enforcement .
Here we are breaking new ground , because enforcement is normally in the hands of the Member States , but we need to compare the results and to have benchmarks , which , by the way - concerning the previous question on metering and on understanding - is why we are strongly encouraging the project on smart metering .
This may not be a pan-European initiative , but countries like Sweden , which is holding the Presidency , are among the pioneers in this area .
I can only encourage everyone to look at this example and make maximum use of it .
This could also lead on to other questions , such as how to calculate the carbon footprint all of us leave through energy consumption .
Turning to other areas , the Commission has recently been doing much more on labelling in respect of energy efficiency and more price comparison , encouraging the use of consumer indexes , such as has been the case in Italy and other countries , because this is also a very good service , provided through the internet , which helps consumers to fight for a better price .
However , in order to make this happen , we need to have cross-border shopping and availability .
Cross-border trade via the internet currently stands at only nine per cent in the European Union , so we really have a call of duty to complete the second phase of the internal market , which is the retail market .
This area is one of the missing links in the internal market , and I very much hope that Parliament and the Commission will speed up one of the important directives proposed under the Consumer Rights Directive , which aims to have a set of rules that will bring more certainty and more confidence - from the point of view of consumers and of businesses - to improve this really very poor level of cross-border trade in Europe .
Subject : Food labelling for consumers
Could the Commission outline what investigations or reports it has carried out regarding food products which claim health benefits ? Has a range of these foods been investigated or tested to verify whether the claims they are making are valid , in order to protect consumers ?
Member of the Commission . - Following the request of Member States and stakeholders , the Commission proposed the Regulation on Nutrition and Health Claims , which was adopted in December 2006 by Parliament and the Council .
The aim of the Regulation is precisely to ensure that nutrition and health claims made on foods are truthful , clear and based on generally accepted scientific evidence , so that the consumer is adequately protected .
The Commission therefore aims to establish lists of permitted health claims as well as to update permitted nutrition claims .
The regulation sets authorisation procedures to ensure that only scientifically substantiated health claims are made .
These procedures involve firstly the European Food Safety Authority , which assesses the substantiation of health claims ; secondly , the Commission , which proposes draft measures authorising or rejecting health claims accordingly ; and thirdly , the Member States , which give their opinion on the measures in the regulatory committee .
The Commission has so far adopted four regulations authorising or rejecting health claims .
Similar measures will continue to be adopted according to the evaluation of the health claims from the European Food Safety Authority , thereby ensuring that consumers are not misled .
( GA ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for her answer .
I welcome the study and the inquiry into food manufacturing that is being carried out by the European Food Safety Authority as it has now been proven that shoppers are happy to pay more money for food which has related health benefits .
At the end of the day , the most important thing is that we comply with the new rules and put pressure on the different companies to be completely honest as regards the amount of information they provide so that they will not be telling any falsehoods to the people who purchase these items .
Member of the Commission . - I can only agree with the honourable Member .
This is exactly the reason why we put forward this regulation .
I must say we were amazed by the number of applications received .
We were expecting a few hundred and we received 44 000 claims .
We consolidated this 44 000 into a group of 4 000 , which we submitted to the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) for an opinion .
That is the reason why EFSA is not in a position to complete the examination of all 4 000 claims within the time limit of December 2010 .
But I think it is very important for the consumers that we finish this process and that they know exactly when they see a claim , and they see some food in the supermarket with a claim , they will know for sure that this is based on science and is not misleading .
( PL ) I would like to thank the Commissioner for this information - what you are doing is , indeed , very important .
Over 40 000 firms have applied for a decision confirming that their products comply with the highest requirements and criteria .
However , what will happen if they receive this confirmation , whereas in practice , the products , after a certain time , do not comply with all the requirements or all the parameters described on the labels ?
What will be done , especially in the case of large , international concerns ?
They have obtained consent and approval , and they say this on the label , but the reality is completely different .
What will happen then ?
( DE ) I would be interested to hear how , in future , you intend regional products offered for sale on site to be labelled and placed on the market with the corresponding freshness and high quality ?
Member of the Commission . - My answer to the last question is no , this is a completely different thing .
It is about the origin of the product .
We are talking now about health claims .
When a producer makes a claim that a product is good for your health , for this or that reason , then it has to be scientifically substantiated that this really is so .
As regards the other question , of course EFSA examines health claims made at the time of application , on the basis of the scientific evidence given at the time of application .
Obviously , if a claim is made on the basis of certain scientific evidence and the producer then alters the product , this is clearly a question of fraud , and action will be taken against that producer , because they are not only misleading the public but also defrauding the public .
Subject : Varying consumer rights
It is very often the case that constituents come to their MEPs with problems regarding their consumer rights while living or travelling in another Member State .
What is the Commissioner doing to promote knowledge and understanding of consumer rights , which vary across the Member States of the European Union ?
Member of the Commission . - The question is about varying consumer rights and is very timely .
In all Member States , there are institutions and organisations that have the task of promoting knowledge and understanding of consumer rights for their citizens .
An overview of these national institutions and organisations is available on the website .
I could of course provide you with the website . It is http : / / ec.europa.eu / consumers / empowerment / cons _ networks _ en.htm , and it is really very interesting to browse around .
The Commission promotes awareness of consumer rights through various instruments .
We sponsor an EU-wide network of consumer centres that provides consumers with information on their rights when shopping across borders and supports them with seeking redress when something goes wrong .
The centres ' websites , leaflets and brochures explain to consumers what their rights are , for example , when shopping online , renting a car or booking holidays in another Member State .
The Commission would therefore recommend that Members of the European Parliament refer their constituents to the European consumer centre located in their respective country .
Moreover , the Commission conducts information campaigns in Member States who newly joined the EU to raise awareness of consumer rights and promote national organisations and institutions where consumers can find further help and assistance .
The Commission also promotes knowledge of rights through its consumer education initiatives such as the ' Europe diary ' that targets students aged between 15 and 18 and Dolceta - a website targeting adults and teachers .
Last but not least , in October 2008 , the Commission presented its proposal for a directive on consumer rights , which is currently the subject of negotiations in Parliament and Council .
This directive , if adopted , will reduce the current fragmentation of the consumer acquis and ensure that all consumers in the EU will benefit from a single simple set of consumer rights , and this would make it easier to conduct pan-European education campaigns on consumer rights .
The Commission is currently carrying out research and fact-finding on information to consumers at the point of sale , and it intends to consult retail experts , consumer organisations and other stakeholders on the ground before proposing concrete measures .
I also have some news which is very important for us .
We have two new extensions to the Dolceta information website .
We have added two more areas to it : one is sustainable consumption , and the other is services of general interest , so we are expanding .
I thank the Commissioner for her response .
Can I ask the Commissioner whether she is aware that people who , as she mentions , purchase on the internet , say , loyalty cards for hotels , or whatever it happens to be , have real difficulty finding someone to actually take a complaint ?
There might be some sort of a box number , but rarely a telephone number or proper email address .
Commissioner , will you require anybody selling goods to have a direct contact number where people who have difficulties can make direct contact with those who have sold them defective goods or services ?
Member of the Commission . - This is very much in the domain of the public authorities in the Member States .
The Commission could ask to see that there are public authorities engaged with this .
We have a network of such authorities .
We gather information from time to time , but our focus is , on the subsidiarity level , on what we could do at cross-border or pan-European level .
Otherwise , it is very much divided from country to country .
This is part of education , and as we know , education is very much in the hands of Member States .
Regarding complaints , what I do is gather together all the complaints and , within the framework of the Consumer Market Scoreboard , see what level those complaints are at , compare them with consumer satisfaction , and then draw the necessary conclusions as to how consumers are treated .
You are absolutely right that we need to compare how many complaints are coming in different domains .
That is why we propose - and are working on - a common complaint form in Europe , because the information which currently comes to the public authorities in country ' X ' is not filed in the same way as it is filed in country ' Z ' .
If we have this common complaint form , it is not so that the Commission will become a kind of ombudsman on consumer affairs , but to develop our policy from these complaints and be more relevant to citizens .
I believe that this really is an important project for the future .
We do really have quite limited rights to intervene in how the Member States deal with national complaints and how they respond .
We could make a scoreboard and we can set a benchmark , but we cannot substitute the presence of the particular Member State .
I am very eager to continue in the European Commission , together with Parliament , to benchmark and measure how consumers are treated and how much Member States invest in this policy .
I think it is a very good investment , especially now in difficult economic times , to see how consumers are treated , because this gives good information about the market .
Mr President , I particularly wanted to be here this evening because I think that this is Mrs Kuneva 's last opportunity to speak to us as Commissioner , and I wanted to pose two questions .
First of all , would she agree with me that consumer information and sweeps and her work have been dramatically increased during her tenure as the first Commissioner whose responsibility focused specifically on consumers ?
Secondly , would she also agree with me that it is absolutely crucial that in the next Commission , we continue to have a Commissioner who is dedicated to consumer affairs ?
We have heard disturbing rumours that this might not be the case in the new Commission , and I wanted to give her the opportunity to give us her views this evening .
Member of the Commission . - I had the privilege of working with Mr Harbour , which I very much enjoyed , so please let me thank you specifically and personally for this opportunity over the last three years .
Believe me , I will remain a very dedicated market economy politician because the market is not simple , but a kind of laboratory for civil rights .
I am very glad that we are so close to the same rights that are now so important for the whole of mankind , these being environmental rights .
The consumer portfolio is really very important .
It is about the market and the retail market , but there is something more , something in addition , which is the issue of rights , enforcement , consumer complaints , and how to devise a more relevant policy .
I am absolutely certain that President Barroso will find the right balance , because in his speech , he said that we need to find the missing links in the internal market .
I think that one of these missing links is the retail market .
I am absolutely certain that the President will pay full attention to consumer issues one way or another , and I am convinced the policy will remain very stable .
I shall , however , certainly pass on the message .
Subject : Car rental companies
Does the Commission approve of the practice by car rental companies that require consumers to pay for a full tank of fuel prior to rental , irrespective of the fact that the consumer may return the car to the rental company with , for example , half a tank of fuel remaining , and the consumer will not be reimbursed ?
Is this practice in compliance with the Package Travel Directive ( 90 / 314 / EEC ) ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is well aware of this practice by car hire companies and has responded to a number of other parliamentary questions and citizens ' complaints about it .
I personally receive many of them .
I have said before that such a practice is unacceptable if it results in consumers paying for fuel they have not used without their being clearly informed in advance .
The Package Travel Directive would only apply if car rentals are included in a holiday package .
However , the Package Travel Directive does not regulate this particular issue .
On the other hand , these practices could be contrary to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive and the Unfair Contract Terms Directive .
First of all , under the Unfair Contract Terms Directive , standard terms and conditions must not be significantly unbalanced to the detriment of consumers .
Moreover , contract terms should be drafted in plain and intelligible language .
It may be argued that a clause resulting in consumers paying in practice for something they have not consumed is unfair .
Secondly , the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive obliges traders to live up to the standard of professional diligence .
Traders must be open and up-front about the main characteristics of the service provided .
Car hire companies who do not inform customers that unconsumed fuel will not be reimbursed may be in breach of this directive .
This practice might also be considered as contrary to the standard of professional diligence which this directive requires traders to live up to .
However , the honourable Member should be aware that it is up to national enforcement authorities to determine whether such practices are unfair and to pursue the offending companies .
The Commission does not have any enforcement powers ; consumers who have purchased cross-border services can , however , complain to the European consumer centre in their home country , which should be able to help them receive redress from traders in other EU countries .
But I believe that we need to do everything possible to ensure that there are no loopholes in the legislation and that consumers are not left with a sense of unfairness , hopelessness or helplessness .
Let me thank the Commissioner for her response and wish her well in whatever she decides to do after this Commission .
This practice is prevalent throughout the Union , that consumers hiring a car feel they have got a reasonable deal - we understand the issue about insurance , which is all important - but are then told that they must return the car empty .
There must be some directive which the companies are breaching .
I believe it is not sufficient for the Commission to say that this can be dealt with by communicating with the consumer centre in various countries .
I think this is a major problem .
A very clear message should go out that this is extortionist .
People who go on holiday often just take a car to their destination and return ; I know many of my constituents have used EUR 15 worth of petrol but it costs them EUR 60 .
EUR 45 is the difference since , for the average car , it costs EUR 60 to fill the petrol tank .
This is something I believe we should deal with and I would hope that an incoming Commission and Commissioner will take responsibility for this and do something practical about it .
Member of the Commission . - As stated , it is up to the national authorities to enforce the relevant law and , however critical we might be vis-à-vis our European institutions , I think that we need also to bear in mind that we are acting under the principle of subsidiarity and there are certain areas where the Commission cannot take direct action .
I think it would be very proper if we also stressed the responsibility of the Member States ; otherwise I think that we have a good story coming from Parliament , because the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection ( IMCO ) is presently involved in an own-initiative report on consumer protection , for which the rapporteur is Ms Anna Hedh .
As agreed during the last IMCO Committee meeting , this own-initiative report will cover both the consumer-market scoreboard and the legislation enforcement which we are talking about , for which the Commission had issued a communication on 2 July 2009 .
We are tackling enforcement , but without the Member States it will be very difficult to succeed .
But I fully recognise the seriousness of the problem - believe me , I share the same anxiety , receiving lots of complaints and not being able to have one practical line and solve the issue instead of a Member State .
I hired a car in Frankfurt for my first day in Parliament here .
The tank was full and was paid for by the company .
I had to return it full again .
That is straightforward best practice .
Can the Commission ensure or recommend that that practice will be applied right throughout the European Union ?
It is fair , it is transparent and it is proper .
This is an area that I personally have had discussions with the car rental companies about .
There are other issues apart from this : for example , damage claims of an unexpectedly high nature and cars not inspected .
I wonder , therefore , if the Commissioner would agree with me that , under the provisions of the Services Directive for the cross-border supply of services , Member States are explicitly encouraged to promote proper codes of conduct for cross-border service supply .
This seems to be exactly the sort of area where we should be encouraging Member States , perhaps facilitated by the Commission , to get the car rental operators together to produce a code of conduct that reputable operators would have to sign up to , which would cover the issues that my colleagues are talking about , plus other serious consumer issues as well .
Member of the Commission . - I think that this is one of the most important ideas which we need to develop in the future .
First of all , the Services Directive because , clearly , our economy and our lives depend so much on services , and we cannot just leave companies with a bad reputation to spoil an entire sector of industry .
We need to fight against bad practices and we need to always protect consumers .
But , est modus in rebus , we really need to find the responsibility of the Member State and that of the Commission .
We have a network of public authorities through which we are making our sweeps around the Member States .
If we have some kind of a code of conduct , to which Mr Harbour referred , or we detect a breach of legislation of unfair commercial practices , the centres and the different public authorities might be advised to check all the rental car services in the Member States and clean up the market .
We did it with airlines , whose websites were offering tickets , we did it with ring tones , we did it with electronic goods .
Why not step up our efforts and do some kind of enforcement sweep in the car rental industry also ?
Subject : Action programme for reducing administrative burdens in the EU
In January 2007 , the Commission launched the Action Programme for reducing administrative burdens in the European Union , in order to measure administrative costs arising from legislation in the EU and reduce administrative burdens by 25 % by 2012 .
This programme is financed under the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) .
What is the Commission 's assessment of the progress of implementation of the above Action Programme to date , and its impact on the competitiveness of European enterprises ?
Mr Papastamkos , this question gives me the opportunity to relate to you a very pleasing tale of success .
The Action Programme for reducing administrative burdens in the European Union is one of the pillars of the better lawmaking programme .
I first mentioned back in the spring of 2006 that I intended to cut European businesses ' bureaucracy costs arising from European rules by 25 % by 2012 and that it would be necessary , in that regard , for the Commission to put forward proposals to that effect by the end of 2009 .
The Commission has not only put forward the relevant proposals , it has gone beyond that .
It has done this on the basis of a quantification that we have carried out across Europe .
Anyone can say that they are cutting costs by 25 % when no one knows how high the bureaucracy costs actually are in Europe .
That is why we organised the largest ever quantification , through which we wanted to determine what the actual costs arising from European legal acts and their implementation are for European businesses , insofar as relates to documentation , statistics , information and the like .
The results were roughly what we had expected .
European businesses spend EUR 124 billion a year on this bureaucracy , which is approximately half of total bureaucracy costs for European businesses .
In other words , we produce 50 % of those costs here in Strasbourg or in Brussels .
With regard to the British press and British Members of this Chamber , I want to add , specifically , that it would be completely wrong to draw the conclusion from this that the internal market itself causes bureaucratic costs amounting to EUR 124 billion .
If we did not have these European rules , there would be 27 sets of different national rules in all these areas , and the burden on European businesses - insofar as they participate in the internal market - would be much greater .
I want to make that point very clearly , strongly even , because I am really tired of hearing downright calumnious comments about the costs of the internal market via certain media outlets in Europe .
Nonetheless , we believe that EUR 124 billion is too high a figure and that , through better lawmaking , we can both fully achieve the goals of our legislation and reduce the costs involved .
The Commission has therefore made the appropriate proposals , and the result is as follows - I would just like to give you the figures .
The measures that legislators have already adopted - and that are therefore already in force - are cutting the costs of bureaucracy for European businesses by EUR 7 billion a year .
The potential savings from those measures that the Commission has proposed and that legislators have not yet adopted amount to EUR 31 billion per annum .
The Commission is currently working on further proposals that it will be putting forward shortly and that will offer potential savings of a further EUR 2 billion , meaning that we will have total potential savings of more than EUR 40 billion a year .
That would more than meet the target of a 25 % cut in these costs , provided that the measures are actually adopted by legislators .
I have one final comment to make , and that is that the programme is being complemented by corresponding national programmes in all the Member States .
I am pleased to be able to report to you that all 27 Member States now have comparable programmes in force .
It will not surprise you , however , when I say that not one Member State has so far managed to attain the highly successful figures I have been able to relate to you today for the EU 's measures .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the Commission 's action programme dated 22 October , you refer , among other things , to the exception for micro entities from accounting requirements .
In my opinion , Commissioner , there are other more important obstacles of a legislative , administrative and fiscal nature .
Few micro entities have any business with a cross-border reference ; there are far more micro entities which need the certainty of an accountant 's stamp in order to obtain access to funding from bank accounts and transparency in their transactions .
I should like a reply from you to this particular but specific question .
Mr Papastamkos , you probably know my personal opinion , which is , in fact , even a little bit more radical than your own .
My own , very settled opinion is that micro-businesses that do not operate in the internal market are absolutely no concern of ours - no concern of either European legislators or the Commission .
You will be aware , however , Mr Papastamkos , that you and I are in a minority in this regard .
Every time this House sits - and especially during Question Time - I hear a number of proposals that relate to the business conduct of small and micro-sized businesses .
In other words , Mr Papastamkos , you have a lot of convincing to do .
However , by introducing the special SME test - in other words the test for small and medium-sized enterprises - for impact assessments , the Commission has taken care to ensure that very specific consideration is given to what the impact will be on small , medium and micro-sized enterprises and , where possible , the principle is that micro-businesses are excluded from the rules .
I will mention a topical example in this regard .
The Commission has proposed the exemption of micro-businesses from the European regulations on financial statements .
This measure will save such businesses EUR 7 billion a year in costs .
I am sorry to report to you that the European Parliament 's competent committee has rejected the Commission 's proposal , and I regret to have to tell you that there is organised opposition to this proposal - I am sure you can imagine who it is that is organising that opposition .
Despite this , the Commission still stands by its proposal .
It is an absolutely key element of our policy for small and medium-sized enterprises and on scaling back the costs of bureaucracy for micro-businesses .
Subject : Tourism under Lisbon
Can the Commission outline what plans it has developed , in terms of preparatory actions and other initiatives , to prepare the ground for the development of the tourism competence under Lisbon ( Article 195 TFEU ) , assuming Lisbon comes into effect ?
Can the Commission comment on the possibility of developing synergies between tourism and regional development policies , with specific reference to geographically and economically marginalised regions of the EU ?
Mr Kelly , from a strictly legal point of view , the Treaty of Lisbon brings with it a change , in that it deems tourism to be a third-level competence of the Community , in other words , the Community may act to supplement the activities of the Member States but cannot put forward any harmonising legislation in this field .
In practice , the Treaty of Lisbon represents no change from the status quo , since we achieved everything that the Treaty of Lisbon now provides a legal basis for in this regard a few years ago via a form of voluntary collaboration with the Member States .
This means that the Member States agreed to the Commission playing a part in tourism policy a few years ago .
We have , in fact , been able to take a whole range of specific decisions together with the Member States .
The fact that tourism is now to occupy its own place in Europe 's Treaties , however , will mean that tourism will gain in significance within our overall growth and employment policy .
If I could have the incoming Commission inherit , so to speak , one thing from me , it would be this .
There is an enormous potential for growth in this area , and it could be better unlocked through adroit and intelligent collaboration between the Member States and the Community institutions . It is absolutely clear that Europe is still the most attractive destination for tourists from all over the world .
We do have immense structural changes to deal with , however .
We have enormous amounts of competition to deal with , especially from Asia .
We must pull out all the stops to ensure that Europe remains the number one tourist destination worldwide .
If you were to ask me what , in my opinion , is the top priority requirement , I would say that all tourism providers - the regions , the Member States and the Community institutions - must do more overall to make Europe better known around the world as a tourism brand and a mark of quality .
We have taken the first steps in that direction and I take the view that there is much more that can be done in this regard .
I hope that , on the basis of the clear political signal that the Treaty of Lisbon and its inclusion of tourism policy provide , we will , over the next few years , see greater exploitation here in Parliament , in the Council and in the Commission of the opportunities that exist to promote European tourism and boost its visibility .
I am absolutely convinced that this is an area in which there is considerable scope for us to provide greater growth and in which , above all , we can provide jobs in regions of Europe where there are no practical alternatives , where only tourism can provide really good jobs .
Initially , I was a bit taken aback by the opening remarks of the Commissioner , but then he clarified the situation .
I am quite happy , as he says that the new Commission can look at it .
There are great opportunities there to develop tourism right throughout the European Union , and I am quite happy to work with the Commission and to do anything we can because it is an opportunity .
It is very important to show that the Lisbon Treaty works for people and that it creates jobs , particularly in tourism , so I am quite happy with the answer and there is no need for a further answer .
( DE ) Every time we discuss tourism at the European level - I do now know that there will continue to be no legislative options in this regard in future - we run across a major problem that relates to tourism , transport and environmental protection , namely European holiday times , which have not been harmonised , integrated or aligned .
I now have a question that I would like to ask you , with your great experience of many years as a Commissioner , and that is whether you see any opportunities in future for European holidays to be coordinated - perhaps not on a statutory basis initially - but for some sort of start to be made on an attempt to coordinate them in such a way that this chaos that we currently have of holidays always suddenly starting on a Saturday everywhere and at the same time , and in such a way that we could become more flexible in this regard and that the overall picture could be coordinated to some extent ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , my supplementary question will give you the opportunity to give me a reply , because the questions which I want to ask have also been reinforced by the replies you have given so far .
The global economic crisis has also had a negative effect on tourism .
Taking account , therefore , of the importance of the tourist product to Europe and to certain countries such as Greece , where I come from , I should like to ask you the following : firstly , what measures does the Commission intend to take in order to strengthen and safeguard jobs in the tourist industry in the European Union ?
Secondly , what initiatives will the Commission take in order to strengthen internal tourism in Europe ?
And thirdly , what measures will you take to attract tourists from other countries outside the European Union ?
Mr Leichtfried , in relation to the first question , I would say that we can always try .
During the Austrian Presidency , there were a number of attempts to coordinate the start of the holiday period , although these met with no success .
I would argue in favour of a further attempt being made , but I would also caution against over inflated expectations .
The notion that prevails in certain tourist areas that it is possible to coordinate holiday periods in Europe in such a way that these tourist areas can be at full capacity all year round is an illusion , and incidentally it would not have my support in any case .
Everyone has a right to have a holiday at the time of year that best suits them and when the recuperation value is at its greatest .
You are absolutely right , however , to say that neighbouring countries should make arrangements so that their holidays do not always have to begin on the same day everywhere .
These are things that I believe are achievable and not only from the point of view of tourism policy , but which should be seriously tackled purely and simply in the light of environmental and transport policy .
As for the question from Mr Chountis , we have comprehensively researched the impact of the economic crisis on tourism and we have determined from 50 000 concerned parties across Europe that people are still going away on holiday - they are not doing without their holiday trips - but they are travelling less far , spending less money and are more likely to holiday in their own country .
They are still demanding the same standards , though , which means that the ones who will gain at the moment are those who are able to offer a special price / service ratio .
Any measures that the Commission takes in this area can only be complementary to the Member States ' measures .
We have no autonomous European tourism policy per se , and it would be too much , at this point , to itemise the great number of initiatives that aim to spread awareness across the world , and also within Europe , of how attractive Europe is as a tourist destination .
I want to mention just one example , as it has recently been very successful .
Three years ago , we launched the European Destinations of Excellence ( EDEN ) competition .
The competition encouraged tourist regions in Europe to demonstrate their achievements in certain areas and three years of experience have shown that we have outstanding tourism products in almost every aspect all over Europe .
The crucial thing is actually to also generate awareness of these tourism products .
That is why we have created a web portal that provides for worldwide access with a single click to all tourist-relevant information from all the Member States .
Subject : Participation by the social partners in devising and implementing employment policies at national and European level
As is well known , the intensity and extent of the economic crisis has added to the severe organisational and operational problems of labour markets in the EU Member States ; management of these problems exceeds the powers of national central governments .
One of the worst consequences facing the Member States is the reduction in employment and the corresponding rise in unemployment rates and the extreme difficulty of creating new jobs that are stable and of good quality .
Moreover , the current restructuring in the way that national labour markets operate is having an unfortunate impact on workers , as collective agreements are circumvented in practice , jobs are becoming less secure , and industrial relations are damaged by the trend towards flexible forms of work without any corresponding reinforcement of the concepts of security and protection at work .
What is the Commission 's position and does it envisage more active participation and involvement of social partner organisations in drawing up policies to ensure smooth organisation and functioning of labour markets , combat unemployment and boost employment at national and European level ?
Mr President , gentlemen , as you know , it is the Member States that are primarily responsible for creating and implementing political measures in response to the crisis and , more specifically , its impact on employment .
Despite this , the Commission has , since the crisis erupted last autumn , undertaken a series of initiatives aimed at alleviating the impact of the financial and economic crisis on the labour market .
The European economic recovery plan submitted by the Commission in November 2008 and approved by the Council is concerned with solving urgent questions and also calls for investments which should bring long-term benefits to the Union .
The recovery plan emphasises the importance of implementing the integrated policies summarised under the concept of flexicurity and aimed at protecting European citizens from the worst effects of the crisis .
In this context , it emphasises stronger activation regimes , retraining and improving qualifications and better links between skills offered and the needs of the labour market and stresses the need to support the most vulnerable .
The aim is to protect employment and particularly long-term employment rather than specific jobs .
Experience shows that the basic aims of flexicurity - that is , an ability to adapt to changes and the facilitation of movement between jobs - are supremely important in times of economic downturn and mounting instability on the labour market .
The integrated approach provides a unified policy framework which makes it possible to coordinate efforts aimed at solving the impacts of the crisis on employment and the social area and may help to establish a balance between short-term measures aimed at solving short-term needs , for example , temporary reductions in working hours , and long-term reforms involving , for example , better qualifications and active policies on the labour market .
Following the recovery plan , we had the employment summit in May this year .
On this occasion , the key participants displayed a common will to alleviate the impact of the economic crisis on employment in the EU .
In connection with the employment summit , the Commission adopted on 3 June a communication entitled ' A Shared Commitment for Employment ' which set out three key priorities for action : maintaining employment , creating jobs and supporting mobility , improving qualifications and improving the link between the skills offered and the needs of the labour market and improving access to the labour market .
These three key priorities were approved at the June meeting of the European Council .
The Commission firmly believes that cooperation with the social partners and between the social partners is highly important , especially at a time of crisis and where restructuring is involved .
The social partners have a vital role in creating and implementing economic recovery measures .
At the domestic level , this role arises from the traditions and experience connected with the involvement of the social partners in defining and implementing policies for the labour market .
At the EU level , consultations are continuing over the proposed policies , especially within the framework of the tripartite social summit .
Cooperation with the social partners of the EU has intensified this year in connection with the preparations for the previously-mentioned employment summit and the communication of 3 June .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am delighted that you too , or so it would appear from your speech , consider active participation by the social partners to be exceptionally important to the democratic nature and effectiveness of social dialogue , especially at this critical time of escalating economic crisis , with reducing employment , unemployment , insecure work and so much else .
However , knowing the formal nature of that participation to date , we should like to know if the Commission intends to take specific institutional measures to safeguard fundamental participation as a prerequisite both at European level and at national level , with specific guidelines from the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have to say that Article 138 of the treaty clearly establishes the position of the social partners and the share of the social partners in negotiating all of the important social questions .
The Commission makes full use of this framework and there have therefore also been agreements between the social partners in some areas , which have been transposed or are in the process of being transposed into European directives .
As far as the institutional or legislative changes are concerned , you will be well aware that the Commission has proposed an amendment to the Directive on the European Works Council which has been approved within the framework of these negotiations and which strengthens the position of the European social partners especially in negotiations over restructuring at a trans-national level .
You will similarly be aware that the Commission supports the use of all of these ways of effectively intervening in the labour market .
I would similarly like to emphasise that the Commission is being very active within the framework of international organisations , making intense efforts and supporting the application of the main treaties and conventions of the ILO , both on a global level and , of course , on a European level .
In any case , over the course of the mandate of this Commission , there has been progress over cooperation with the social partners and I am sure that this will continue because , as I have already stated , debate with the social partners forms part of the treaty and it is a specific feature of European law and , in my view , it constitutes undeniable progress .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the EU strategy on employment marks a new package of capitalist restructurings to safeguard and increase the profits of capital by stepping up the exploitation of the workers .
Fear and obstacles to hope for the unemployed , women and young people , on the one hand , and profits for capital on the other .
What do you have to say , Commissioner , to the unemployed , to workers in flexible , temporary , insecure work who , for over 4-5 years , have worked in the public and private sector , on much-vaunted internships , and have already been given notice of dismissal ?
What do you have to say to women who , on the pretext of equality between men and women , have been told that their retirement age is to be increased by 5 to 17 years , as is happening in Greece ?
As far as European employment policy is concerned , I would like to say that in the period before the crisis , the number of people in employment reached the highest ever level in Europe .
This shows , to some extent , the influence of European employment policies on the labour market .
As far as your questions relating to a system of social insurance and social security under the treaty are concerned , these systems are a Member State responsibility .
( DE ) I would just like to thank the Commissioner , in his last appearance before us , for the work that he has done .
I regret the fact that he will not be coming back again and I just wanted to say so on the record here .
We have often held opposing views , but he has been a good Commissioner .
Thank you for that remark , Mr Posselt .
I resisted making those same comments to other Commissioners tonight .
We are not entirely sure : they may well be back for a few more weeks yet !
I apologise to colleagues who have had the courtesy to attend but whose questions were not taken .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Belgium - textile industry ; Ireland - Dell - Relocation of undertakings in the EU and the role of EU financial instruments ( debate )
The next item is a joint debate on
the report drafted by Reimer Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , in accordance with point 28 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management
the oral question to the Commission on the relocation of undertakings in the EU and the role of EU financial instruments by Pervenche Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs - B7-0226 / 2009 )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , I am today presenting the proposal on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in relation to two specific cases , one based on applications from Belgium and one on applications from Ireland .
I would , however , like to start by pointing out , once again , that it is the job of the Committee on Budgets to examine whether the conditions for mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund have been met , and I would like , at this point , to emphasise that , over recent months , there has always been excellent cooperation , including in similar cases , between the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We have also been at pains to take due account of comments and critical suggestions from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and , with that in mind , it is also right to deal with the oral question from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , given the urgency of enquiries on this subject .
You will be aware that the Globalisation Adjustment Fund has a maximum funding amount of EUR 500 million per annum and that it is exclusively for the purpose of providing additional support for those employees affected by globalisation who have lost their jobs and have been affected by the consequences of far-reaching structural changes in world trade patterns .
We have made it clear in the resolution , once again , that we continue to challenge the repeated use of funds from the European Social Fund to finance the Globalisation Adjustment Fund and I insist , Commissioner , that you confirm today , once again , that this will not ultimately be at the expense of payments from the European Social Fund .
I would very much like , once again , to call on the Commission to reiterate today the undertaking given to us in the Committee on Budgets - namely to refrain , in future , from tabling applications for the mobilisation of the Fund together , but instead to table them separately , as each case has a slightly different basis and the possibility of a complicated case delaying the approval of another case should be avoided .
I hope that you can confirm this again today .
When it comes to the circumstances of the two cases , even on the basis of the altered rules - given that these two applications were submitted after 1 May 2009 - we are talking about the mobilisation of a total of around EUR 24 million .
This is intended to provide some cover for the loss of jobs in the textile industry in Belgium and in computer manufacturing in Ireland .
In Belgium , there have been a total of 2 199 job losses in 46 companies in the textile industry , all of which were based in two neighbouring NUTS 2 regions , namely East and West Flanders , and in a single NUTS 2 region , Limburg .
The Belgian authorities have requested EUR 9.2 million from the Fund in this regard .
In respect of Ireland 's application , there were , quite properly , a few further follow-up questions from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that are being discussed or have already been partially cleared up through additional information .
The application relates to 2 840 job losses in the company Dell in the counties of Limerick , Clare and North Tipperary and in the city of Limerick , of which 2 400 were targeted for assistance .
A total of EUR 14.8 million is envisaged for this .
Following an intensive debate in the Committee on Budgets , we gave the green light to the mobilisation of the Fund in both cases .
I would , however , like to remind you of my introductory comment where I requested that the Commission once again take up a clear position on this and I very much welcome the fact that the very fundamental issues of the mobilisation of the financial instruments from the European budget were put on today 's agenda by the Committee on Budgets .
I would then ask the plenary session to support this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs wished to combine an oral question on the issue of relocations , notably of multinationals , with the examination of these two requests for mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund because , in the Irish case , we recognised the difficulties and the contradictions that could arise as a result of using such a fund .
At no time did any of the members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs seek to hold hostage or to threaten not to help the Irish workers who are today in a critical situation due to the industrial strategy and the relocation of Dell .
We have simply observed that , in the case in point , even though President Barroso announced , on 19 September , the granting of a EUR 19 million aid package - which we are debating this evening - to Dell , or rather to the workers made redundant from Dell , in order to help them come to grips with the period of retraining ahead of them , the same day , in New York , Dell bought out Perot Systems , which enabled it to increase its share price .
A few days later , on 23 September , Commissioner Kroes approved more than EUR 54 million in State aid for the creation of a Dell factory in Poland .
We have questioned both Commissioner Špidla and Commissioner Kroes on this matter .
In a long letter , they tell us that they themselves envisaged Dell having two production sites to supply the European market .
However , the way I see it , once Dell gave up one of these production sites , we changed nothing as regards the overall evaluation of the company 's strategy .
What conclusion can be reached ?
That , within Dell , none of the European laws that we talk about every day , concerning the rights of workers or of trade unions , is respected .
It is therefore genuinely difficult to see the European Union 's budget ultimately being used - at a time when we realise the difficulty involved in the budgetary procedure , the difficulty involved in financing the recovery plan - to end up in this paradoxical situation in which we help to increase US shareholders ' rate of return on investment but put Irish workers , within the European Union , in Polish workers ' shoes .
This is certainly not the philosophy that we supported when we supported the implementation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Commissioner Špidla is certainly not the only one at fault here , but I do believe that this case obliges us to look very closely at the conditions in which the Community budget is mobilised to support the strategies of large companies .
This is all the more true since , in the recovery plan that was drafted under the current President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , one of the key measures announced in relation to employment was that of ensuring , as a matter of priority , that workers who had jobs kept those jobs .
Since the Commission was informed of Dell 's strategy concerning the existence of two sites , when the prospect of choosing between them presented itself , I believe that a more proactive strategy by the Commission should have led to a negotiation with Dell aimed at the transformation of the Irish site , given that the company 's strategy has been to turn a site manufacturing desktop computers , such as existed in Ireland , into a site manufacturing laptop computers , such as currently exists in Poland .
It is our view that , if the Commission comes to the aid of multinationals in a scenario of this kind , we should have a more consistent right to speak .
I believe that , taken as a whole , these considerations should lead the next Commission - and particularly Mr Monti , in the mission entrusted to him - to draw up much more proactive proposals on the way in which we use Community funds at a time when we have to deal with relocations which , once again , pit workers , employees of one Member State against those of another Member State , and all of that as part of a multinational strategy that fails to respect the spirit of social legislation as we wish to implement it , around the concept of the social market economy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur for supporting the Commission 's proposal to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in response to the layoffs in the textile sector in Belgium and the computer manufacturing sector in Ireland .
The support of the rapporteur is accompanied by a number of comments and I would like to restrict myself here to questions of a budgetary nature since we will have an opportunity later to discuss the other points you raise in the report .
The first budgetary point you raise relates to funding sources .
You tell us that the European Social Fund cannot be the only source of funding .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is , from a budgetary perspective , a special instrument , as it does not have its own resources .
It is mobilised across accounting periods , although it chiefly involves the designation of available budgetary items and , subordinate to that , the task of proposing to the budgetary authority the mobilisation of sums of money through revisions to the budget .
The work is performed on a case-by-case basis , according to need .
It is true that the European Social Fund has technically been the main source of funding so far .
Here , I would like to state with clear emphasis the word ' technically ' , for the European Social Fund will not be reduced in any way at the end of the accounting period .
That is the principle issue .
The second point you raise is not exclusively budget-related , but relates rather to decision making , since you ask that the Commission submit its proposals for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in individual documents .
The Commission is well aware of the advantages of this individual approach which completely eliminates the risk of conflict or of the fund being used as a guarantor .
However , it is necessary to take account of the new criteria for eligibility which we discussed this year and which you approved .
With these new criteria , it will be necessary in the months ahead to expect a significant increase in the number of applications and it is not certain that the negotiation of the relevant documents will be faster if they are submitted individually .
In any case , however , the Commission would like to state that the more advantageous approach , thereby circumventing the risk of certain technical complications in the work , is the case-by-case approach which offers better quality .
The Commission therefore notes your interest and fully agrees to adapt its procedures in future accounting periods .
In both of these cases , I have therefore provided a clear statement , I believe .
As far as the second question is concerned , the Commission is delighted that Parliament has adopted the decision mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in support of workers who have been made redundant due to over-capacity in the textile sector in Belgium and the computer sector in Ireland .
In connection with this , a question was raised about a possible link between the relocation of companies within the EU , the role of EU financial instruments and controls exercised by the Commission over State support .
Firstly , it should be said that the Commission is aware and takes careful notice of the negative consequences of company relocations for workers , their families and regions .
It is not up to the Commission , however , to intervene in the decision making of companies where there has been no breach of Community law .
The Commission also notes that it does not have the power to obstruct individual companies in their decisions , or to delay them , and companies do not have any general obligation to inform the Commission concerning the legitimacy of their decisions .
In this context , the Commission is also aware of the unease surrounding the fact that regional State support , including possible contributions from the structural funds , might be used as a means of luring away commercial investments from other regions .
The Commission notes that the aim of the Community regulations relating to State support is , among other things , to ensure that aid aimed at influencing the decisions of companies concerning the location of investments should be provided only to disadvantaged regions and that such aid should not be used to the detriment of other regions .
This problem is also dealt with in the Regulation establishing the general provisions for the structural funds and the cohesion fund and in the guidelines for regional support in the 2007-2013 period aimed at ensuring that these investments make a real and sustainable contribution to regional development .
According to Article 57 of the general regulation on structural funds , Member States must ensure that projects maintain the investment for which a grant is provided for a period of five years after its completion and for a period of three years in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In the event that a project is altered as a result of changes to the ownership of infrastructure or the ending of production activities and this change influences the nature of the project or the conditions under which it is implemented , or where the changes provide the firm or the public body with an unfair advantage , the grant must be returned .
Member States are required to inform the Commission every year of such fundamental changes in their reports on the implementation of operational programmes .
The Commission must notify the other Member States .
Moreover , in the 2007-2013 programme period , a special legal provision was introduced which is supposed to ensure that companies to which the procedure applies for returning sums of money paid out wrongfully after a relocation of production activities in a Member State or to another Member State cannot receive contributions from the funds .
Similarly , point 40 of the guidelines on regional support specifies that support must be conditional on the maintenance of a given investment in the relevant region for a period of at least five years from its completion date .
Moreover , if support is calculated on the basis of wage costs , the jobs must continue for a period of three years from the project completion date .
All jobs created through the investment must be maintained within the region in question for a period of five years from the date on which the job was first created .
In the case of small and medium-sized enterprises , Member States can limit this period to three years .
This provision has the aim of avoiding a scramble for subsidies and the closure of factories exclusively on the basis of higher levels of public support somewhere else , taking account of the fact that State support represents only one of the factors influencing the decisions of companies regarding relocations and that the other factors such as , for example , wages , skills , taxes and geographical location , often play a more significant role .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , it is clearly correct and natural to discuss issues relating to the use of European funds at a strategic level : there can be no doubt about that .
In conclusion , I would like to state that funds that were or will be used within the framework of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund go to benefit persons who have been adversely affected or to individual workers such as those in Belgium or Ireland or any other European country , and absolutely not to companies .
These are resources designated for supporting persons , individual persons and not companies .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to come back to the cases that we are having to deal with under the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In this regard , we are , of course , working in the interests of workers so as to make them more employable when they are hit by unemployment in their economic sector .
However , let us come back to the Dell case , which Mrs Berès was compelled to talk about .
The factory in Ireland focuses on producing desktop computers .
The moment that the Commission supported the creation , in Poland , of a factory of the same company focused on producing laptop computers , was the moment - because the market is made that way and because there is a much higher demand for laptop computers - that signalled the collapse of the Irish production plant .
The choice of which of the two sites to produce in was an indication of the difficulties that we were going to have to face on behalf of the Irish workers .
Therefore , studying each of the individual cases , we in our working group on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund have called for the Commission to keep a close eye on all of the aid granted to each of the plants , be it at European or at regional aid level , because the European support policies that we are developing must not be used in an unbalanced way and must not backfire on workers .
Thus , we want greater attention to be paid to these problems early on , so that workers do not have to cope with them .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , on 8 January 2009 , the mid-west of Ireland , and especially Limerick , Tipperary and North Kerry , experienced an economic trauma they had never seen before .
The announcement of over 2 000 jobs leaving the region from Dell , together with thousands of ancillary jobs , represented a loss of historic proportions .
The EU , through the Globalisation Fund , has allocated a fund that will directly help the economically vulnerable in the area .
When we vote tomorrow , the EUR 14.8 million will represent a hand-up and not a hand-out to over 2 400 people to help them restart their lives .
This will be very welcome .
The money will be used to re-train workers , help start businesses and provide people with job placements , which are very necessary .
The very fact that we have Dell workers ' committee representatives here tonight watching this shows just how deeply this fund has reached the workers of Dell and how they welcome it so much .
I must , however , stress that we are only halfway there .
We now have 18 months in which to spend it , and I am calling tonight on our local Minister in Ireland , the Minister for Enterprise Coughlan , to personally intervene and see that there is a plan in place to spend the money .
It is a one-off fund for ordinary working people and they will never get this chance again .
Minister Coughlan , please , please get organised and leverage this unique opportunity for the mid-west of Ireland .
I would like to thank the Members , and especially my own colleagues , for their support for the Dell application and ask as well that they will support further applications in similar circumstances coming down the road from Waterford Crystal and SR Technics .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , my first comment is that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a real expression of solidarity between EU citizens and States .
Secondly , as an Irish Member , I am indeed very pleased that the workers in Dell who have been made redundant at least now have an opportunity to look forward and to plan for the future .
However , as Alan Kelly has said , it is very important to ensure that any programmes or training courses that are put in place are tailor-made to respond to the needs of workers and that the possibility of re-entering the labour market , or setting up one 's own business , is the clear objective of any assistance .
Finally , I want to acknowledge the role of Parliament in approving the fund for Dell workers .
Despite some of the very serious issues that have been raised here this evening , we did not hold the workers hostage and we approved the EUR 14.8 million application .
However , the Commission must ensure that there is coherence in EU industrial policy and that the EU budget is not used to increase shareholder value in some companies , while EU workers pay a price .
Ireland 's application for European funds for those left unemployed after the company Dell closed its Irish plant has thrown up a number of questions that need answering .
The fact of a company such as Dell closing a plant in one country and opening one in another is , in principle , the result of normal market forces .
However , the various kinds of State aid involved changes things .
Dell established itself in Ireland a number of years ago with the help of State aid .
Now it is shutting up shop there and opening a plant in Poland , yet again with the help of State aid .
In the meanwhile , instead of a social plan paid for by Dell for the Irish workers it has left unemployed , these people are resorting to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In my opinion , this exposes a serious inconsistency in industrial and employment policy .
After all , when all is said and done , how many jobs have been created with all the State aid that Ireland , Poland and the European Union have pumped into Dell ?
Therefore , the question is how will the Commission and the Member States together ensure consistency in their policy ?
In addition , how can we ensure that the Globalisation Fund supports the efforts a company makes for the benefit of its workers instead of largely replacing them ?
Mr President , we have always advocated that the EU policy on the relocation of businesses should be reviewed , and we have always believed that the Globalisation Fund is a mere palliative for workers who are the victims of the strategies of multinationals or the lack of an appropriate industrial policy which targets production and good jobs with rights .
We therefore advocate new policies on social development and progress .
We also believe , however , that Irish workers should not be doubly hit by the profit and social dumping strategy of the multinational company Dell , which closed in Ireland and received support to establish itself in Poland .
We therefore support this report .
However , we want some answers from the European Commission about the future .
We want a radical change in policies , effective monitoring of the support given to multinational companies , a real industrial policy , and a firm investment in the creation of jobs with rights .
( GA ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Commission for providing this generous fund for Dell 's unemployed workers .
In particular , I would like to welcome Gerry and Denis who are with us this evening .
Without doubt , great credit is due to the European Union and particularly to the Commission for helping the workers in Dell and I would like to pay tribute to them . Also to former colleagues , two of whom are here tonight , Marian Harkin and Brian Crowley , and also my immediate predecessor , Colm Burke , for initiating this fund back in May .
The Commission made two major changes which were very important to us : reducing the 50 / 50 funding from 35 for the national government and 65 for the Commission and also reducing the numbers from 1 000 to 500 , which will hopefully make funding available to people in Waterford Crystal and SR Technics in due course .
There are two caveats I would add .
One is that the two-year extension of the time-span should be extended to three , because many people will be doing third-level degree courses which normally take three years ; and the second is that the commencement date should not be the date of application but the date of signing-off here in Parliament and Council .
Having said that , there are just two points I want to make .
People are very grateful for what has happened .
You have given hope where there was despair .
You have shown solidarity instead of isolation , and this fund will be well used and I have no doubt it may well be the best fund and the best funding ever given by the European Commission .
Thank you very much indeed .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , several points have been raised , but the use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund inspires two feelings in me .
Firstly , I am glad that it exists .
European workers need to know that Europe is there for them in difficult times such as we are going through right now .
Secondly , I am pleased that Belgium has been commended for the quality of the cooperation between its social partners in the preparation of this matter .
Unfortunately , I also have some regrets about the way in which the EGAF works .
Firstly , its success reflects a difficult economic situation in Europe , with all too familiar consequences for society .
Secondly , the Fund 's consistency with other aid instruments has been called into question in the case of Dell .
In this respect , I fully support the comments made previously by my colleague , Mrs Berès .
Finally , in terms of the budget , the payment appropriations for executing the allocations from this fund must be transferred from other budget items and , as far as I know , must be transferred systematically from the European Social Fund .
Although this is made possible by the rate of payment of the Structural Funds , which is not as high as one would like , the Structural Funds must be used for their intended purpose .
To conclude , I call for careful thought to be given to EGAF funding and I sense that the Commission is making a concession , if not directly to allocate the EGAF a full financial basis on a par with the other funds , then at least to ensure that it is no longer financed solely at the expense of the social structural funds .
( NL ) I should like to make a brief structural remark on the structural effects of the fund .
Naturally , we are delighted with the projects that are on the table today and that await approval tomorrow .
Yet there is room for improvement in all of them , of course , which is the reason for my brief remark .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fund sometimes overshoots the mark , the simple reason being that the procedure is too cumbersome , Commissioner .
After all , the core objective of the fund is for workers who are affected and lose their jobs to receive rapid support and help in finding a new job .
This is not always working at present , as we are unable to act quickly enough , and that is very annoying , particularly for older workers .
Indeed , outplacement and relief require a rapid , firm approach , which is totally lacking at the moment .
In addition , the Globalisation Fund suffers from a lack of flexibility , and if you are a worker who is made redundant and is unfortunate enough to come from a company that is not on the list , you will simply not be eligible for support .
Every day , we are faced with stories like this from workers who have been affected but who are not eligible , and we struggle to explain - since it is so complicated - why it is no go .
It is my view that a practical solution must be found to this as soon as possible , Commissioner , and that we need a much quicker approach and also , if possible , a formula that will enable us to adopt an ' envelope-oriented ' way of working .
In my opinion , action must be taken on this in the next few weeks and months .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund helps people to attain further education and qualification .
That is the social side of Europe , and it is a good side .
The Commission , however , has also examined the subsidies given to Dell in Poland in terms of their compliance with State aid rules .
It has approved EUR 54 million in Polish State aid for Dell as this aid supposedly serves to benefit regional economic aid .
This raises the initial question of whether we really have to have competition between ourselves in Europe when it comes to public money .
The answer is ' no ' !
We should change State aid rules so that relocation subsidies are no longer paid , including by the Member States .
I have another question to ask the Commission directly : does Poland 's EUR 54 million for Dell also include money from Europe 's structural funds ?
Why , Commissioner , has the Commission not expressed a clear opinion on this ?
I call on the Commission to truly take its monitoring duty under the Structural Funds Regulations seriously .
No European money should be paid out for company relocations within the European Union .
What you gave us today , Commissioner , was an evasive answer .
You are hiding behind the Polish Government 's reports .
You have not examined directly , however , whether the European Structural Funds Regulation has really been complied with .
Let us finally obtain transparency and publish every individual subsidy under the structural fund , as happens with agricultural policy .
That is the only way that we can truly obtain trust in Europe 's structural policy .
( HU ) I remember very well when we set up this Globalisation Fund , and even back then , there was a great deal of debate about how it would not be a good idea if , instead of mitigating the losses , the aid paid from the fund helped workers who had been made redundant to re-integrate into the labour market , thereby encouraging , as it were , companies to conveniently take advantage of the relocation facility so that the fund covers the losing parties ' costs .
The Dell case is symptomatic of this because our experience shows that , instead of being about mitigating losses and showing solidarity , it seems to act as an incentive , as Dell is receiving assistance both for making redundancies and for relocating .
Therefore , what we have here is simply a lack of proper coordination of European funds .
The Globalisation Fund is part of competition policy and the Structural Funds .
There is no point and no benefit to be gained at all , not to mention that it is contrary to the purposes of the fund , if we use these resources in a contradictory fashion , without any kind of coordination , Therefore , I would draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that it needs to reflect on using Europe 's public funds in a coordinated manner in this type of case so as to avoid such confusion in the future .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , the economic and financial crisis has affected and will continue to seriously affect both the iron and steel and shipbuilding industries .
Galaţi , the city I come from , has been hit by the loss of thousands of jobs from the metallurgy industry and shipyards .
Using the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a short- and medium-term solution for supporting workers who are in a tough situation after losing their jobs .
I would like to highlight the need for investment in modernising companies from the heavy industry sector so that they can reduce their level of pollution in the future .
This will allow us to preserve jobs and therefore protect workers in the long term .
Mr President , like my colleagues , I want to thank the Commissioner and the rapporteur for their work on this .
Indeed , the Commission will remember back in January when I and one of my former colleagues , Colm Burke , met him to try and kick-start the globalisation fund for the workers in Dell .
I think it is a clear indication of how much we , at European Union level , put in with regard to treating people first , ensuring that the people are at the core of what the policies are , trying to ensure that their lives are protected and , when there is trouble or difficulty , that the European Union can respond quickly .
On a personal level , I want to thank the Commissioner personally for his active involvement in this , not just here in Parliament or with me personally , but also for going to Limerick and meeting the workers .
And if I could say to other colleagues , who occasionally try to raise red herrings with regard to other issues , that the Globalisation Fund , for all its faults , is a positive from the European Union and one that we should be encouraging to grow and to prosper and , most importantly of all , to go back to the old saying : give a man a fish , you feed him for a day ; teach a man to fish , he can feed himself for life .
That is what the Globalisation Fund allows us to do .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to return to Commissioner Špidla 's second statement .
He said that we cannot influence business decisions .
That is simply not true .
Of course we do influence business decisions by paying subsidies , making European structural fund payments and paying aid .
That is why , when negotiating the regulation , Parliament debated this very issue of relocation .
Ultimately , however , Parliament gave way , with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) regrettably also voting in favour , Mr Pieper , and laid down only five years in the Structural Funds Regulation , which is clearly nothing like adequate given the scale of the subsidies .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance was the only group to say , at the time , that we need at least 10 years for the part of the regulation that the Commissioner cited , which relates to repayment on the part of companies that leave .
All I can say here is that this case shows that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance was right .
( PL ) Mr President , by mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the European Union is once again jointly facing up to economic difficulties .
This time it is difficulties resulting from structural changes in world trade .
As is the case with the financial crisis , only integrated action can be effective in combating the effects of globalisation .
Thanks to financial means obtained for people who have lost their jobs , both Belgian textile workers and workers from the Dell factory in Ireland have been given an immediate opportunity to retrain and find new work .
The fund is also intended to promote entrepreneurship and self-employment .
This help for particular sectors in different countries is an appropriate expression of social solidarity within the EU .
It is a fact that Dell , which justified moving its production from Ireland by the need to find a country with lower production costs , has found such a country which is still within the boundaries of the EU , for Dell has found a location in Poland , in the city of Łódź .
The Łódź area is in a difficult situation in terms of employment levels , and the Dell factory has created around 2 000 new jobs .
This investment will have a noticeable effect on improving the situation in and around Łódź , and will increase the pace of development in the entire voivodeship .
Mr President , I would like to reassure my fellow Member , Mr Crowley .
No member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has questioned the effectiveness , the usefulness of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We simply feel that better use can be made of it .
I would also like to come back to one of the comments made by the commissioner , when he said to us just now that fund shopping had to be prevented .
This is precisely the problem that we are facing today .
When , I imagine , you prepare to hand over responsibility for this matter , what will you say to the next commissioner in charge of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund ?
Since , in the case of Dell , we can clearly see that there is a danger of the procedure being distorted and of misuse of Community funds and of the authorisations granted within the context of competition policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the discussion can , in principle , be divided into two parallel lines .
The first of these states that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund does function but that there are reasons for optimising its deployment .
The issue of time was mentioned , although in my opinion , this issue has been exaggerated to some extent by the fact that the Member States can react immediately and get the costs back .
Nonetheless , I believe that it is a matter that needs debating and that there is also a need to look for a solution in this direction .
The issue of individual budget items was also raised .
It is true that at the time the fund was created , this was not actually possible .
Nonetheless , the fund can operate in this way .
In my opinion , it is therefore necessary to submit all of the questions that can be submitted and , where appropriate , to find a better solution for them than we have found so far .
However , none of this puts into doubt the fundamental principle that in times of crisis , the fund functions and provides real assistance .
The second issue raised in the debate is a far more complex issue .
This is the issue of delocalisation , the issue of potentially competing subsidies and a series of other issues which are related to this and which are extremely complex .
In my opinion , it is correct to address these issues and it is correct to do so based on an in-depth understanding of the facts and I would like to mention a few facts relating to the case of Dell and also relating to some of our thoughts on the overall problem .
The first fact is that , contrary to overwhelming opinion , wage costs per unit of production are markedly higher in Poland than in Ireland , according to the OECD .
Wage costs in Poland are thus not lower but higher than in Ireland .
This is a point well worth bearing in mind , because drawing conclusions from direct comparisons in complex situations is not a reliable method .
I would like to emphasise that if we want to debate these issues , it is necessary to deepen some of our insights considerably , at least with regard to some of the points .
The second issue is that of the Dell case itself .
It is true that Dell began its activities in Limerick in 1991 , in other words , 18 years ago .
It is also true that there is no record of it having received support from any European funds for this operation .
There is no information on this , although I cannot exclude the possibility that the firm received support from the regional funds because at that time , in 1990 , there were no obligations or methods that would enable us to obtain this information .
It is also a fact that the decision to relocate to Łódź was taken by Dell in 2007 .
It is also a fact that the money used as State aid is Polish money and that this aid was notified in December 2007 .
It therefore does not involve resources from the European structural funds .
In this case - and it does not apply in all cases but in cases that are over EUR 50 million , which was the case here - a very detailed assessment takes place which also takes account of labour market issues .
The conclusion of the Commission was that these two operations , which are so far apart in time , are not linked .
However , this does not mean anything and does not in any way call into question the fact that issues involving the use of European resources must be discussed in depth repeatedly on the basis of our new information and that it is undoubtedly right to secure a higher level of coherence .
In my opinion , the Dell case has served as a good springboard and it is surely right to continue with this debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for this debate and for the opportunity to consider with you some aspects relating to the use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In conclusion , I would simply like to state that within the scope of our policies , there is certainly a risk of resources being used in ways that are inappropriate or not entirely optimal , and that this inherent risk will always be present in our policies as they develop .
It is therefore up to us to bear this in mind and to have the courage to examine some long-established principles with new eyes and to change these old , long-established and perhaps outdated methods where we find intellectual and technical solutions and a political consensus .
Mr President , I would like to reiterate that we were at pains , in the collaboration between the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs over recent months , to get the procedures up and running as soon as possible on the basis of an opinion from the latter committee - which even set up a special working group for the purpose - in order to make the funds available as quickly as possible , after meticulous examination , in the interests of the affected workers and their close families .
I would like to say , secondly , that , in the course of examining the multiannual financial framework and the new instruments , in the course of the budgetary review and the revision , we also have to examine the functioning and the added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , like all the other instruments , and specifically with regard to the effect on the management and on the interaction of the institutions at the national and European level .
We need to contemplate how this interaction with the European Social Fund ( ESF ) could possibly be better shaped .
We should therefore be open to all possible discussions that could lead to an improvement .
As far as the sources of funding are concerned , Commissioner , you were , of course , absolutely correct , from a purely technical standpoint , in what you said about the payment appropriations from the ESF .
Ultimately , however , I would like the overall picture for the obligations and the payments under the multiannual financial framework , both for the structural funds and for the ESF , to be as we agreed in the overall figures .
It must not be the case that , due to deficient implementation , problems in control and management systems and late implementation of these funds , money potentially remains unused and that we then take a slice of that money every year to pay for additional programmes like this .
That is not in the interests of the originator .
We will , for the time being , take on board what you said about matters of State aid rules .
We did , of course , ask similar questions in another place in relation to Nokia in Bochum and its relocation to Romania .
Despite that , I have to say that there is a need , here , to look very closely at the interaction between the Commission and the reporting duties of the Member States .
Sometimes I get the impression that , when it comes to these issues , things happen in a similar way to the monitoring of the fishing quotas : each side pushes a little towards the other and there is not , in the end , an efficient system .
In this regard , we will stay on the ball and we will also intensively monitor these issues in similar situations and insist that the Commission act in accordance with the regulations and rules that we decided on in 2007 .
Finally , my request to you all : please vote in favour of this mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 25 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )

in writing . - ( RO ) Mr President , I support the report submitted by my colleague , Mr Böge , as I believe that many European workers who have lost their jobs require assistance , including from the EU funds .

More than EUR 37 million has been given to 10 275 workers in 2009 , which is nowhere near the maximum ceiling of EUR 500 million provided annually for this European fund .
I must emphasise that these finances are intended for redundant employees and not companies .
The EU must not support financially the strategy of companies which relocate and make workers redundant , especially if the company moves outside the EU or receives aid from another Member State at the same time .
It is vital for us to monitor very closely the way in which company relocations take place .
The burden of the social costs involved in the closure or relocation of factories must not be shifted to European taxpayers .
Let us not forget that the fund was created to provide additional support to workers made redundant as a result of major structural changes in the global business sector , and after 1 May 2009 , also to those made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I believe that access to European funds can also provide new Member States with considerable assistance , enabling them to overcome difficulties caused by the economic crisis and in adapting to the single European market 's competitive structure .
The state of play of the Euromed Free Trade Area ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the state of play of the Euromed 2010 Free Trade Area ( FTA ) by Vital Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B7-0222 / 2009 )
Mr President , Commissioner , this question was drafted and proposed before we knew that Mrs Ashton would cease to be Trade Commissioner .
We nevertheless hope that the Commission will be in a position to respond to our question .
Her remit , as previously mentioned , is the current situation of the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area , initially planned for 2010 .
In fact , one of the projects which came out of the Barcelona Process , launched in 1955 , was the creation of a free trade area in the Mediterranean region in 2010 , which was supposed to be established on a regional basis , and include a North-South network and a South-South network .
Nevertheless , this objective remains very distant , and I have the following questions :
Does the Commission believe that the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area in 2010 was a realistic prospect from the very beginning ?
Can the Commission back up its response with sound reasons ?
Secondly , Parliament is aware that a new Euro-Mediterranean road map will be adopted in the near future , possibly along with a new mechanism to facilitate trade and investment in the region .
Can the Commission provide further details about the practical aspects and implications of such a mechanism ?
Thirdly , can the Commission explain the current status of the Agadir Agreement , the EU 's contribution to the rewording of this agreement and , in more general terms , the South-South dimension of the Barcelona Process : Union for the Mediterranean ?
Fourthly , can the Commission tell us how it incorporated the recommendations contained in the sustainability impact assessment carried out by the University of Manchester , with a view to considering social cohesion and sustainable development in the negotiations , as recommended in that study ?
Fifthly , can the Commission explain to Parliament what was at issue in the renegotiation of the EU-Syria Association Agreement after it was put on hold in 2004 ?
Sixthly , can the Commission tell us about its negotiations with Libya , the purpose of these negotiations and their current status ?
Seventhly , several Mediterranean countries have expressed an interest in increasing and / or extending their trade agreements with the European Union .
Can the Commission , first and foremost , tell Parliament about this new generation of association agreements ?
Can the Commission , secondly , inform Parliament whether , in the light of the new powers on trade matters granted to Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , the Commission will take any prior resolution by Parliament into account when negotiating these new agreements ?
Those are my questions , Mr President , Commissioner .
Given the current relevance of the Barcelona Process and the area south of the EU , we believe that an answer to these questions is extremely pertinent and timely .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Moreira , I am answering on behalf of Commissioner Ashton .
With regard to the Euromed Free Trade Area , its creation by 2010 was a realistic objective , and within the next year we will have made considerable progress towards this , although there clearly still remains much to be done to fully realise the potential of economic integration in the Euromed area .
In particular , progress has been made in the North-South dimension .
The European Union has concluded bilateral association agreements with all of our Mediterranean partners apart from Syria , and these focus essentially on trade in goods .
Other bilateral negotiations are nevertheless under way to further promote trade in agricultural products , services and the freedom of establishment , and to create a binding dispute settlement mechanism .
Some of these negotiations have already ended and others are set to conclude by 2010 .
With regard to the fresh negotiations between the European Union and our Mediterranean partners and the role of the European Parliament , I can tell you that , again with reference to the North-South dimension , we expect to reach an agreement at the Euro-Mediterranean Trade Ministerial Conference on 9 December on a Euro-Mediterranean trade road map beyond 2010 , reflecting the objective of gradually transforming the current Euromed association agreements into comprehensive , wide-ranging free trade agreements .
We are not talking about negotiating new association agreements , but instead extending and strengthening current ones in order to tackle issues such as trade facilitation , technical barriers and sanitary and phytosanitary matters , as well as public procurement , competition , intellectual property rights , trade and issues relating to sustainable development and transparency .
Bilateral negotiations will be tailored to the situation of each Southern Mediterranean partner .
Morocco might be the first Mediterranean country with which we launch negotiations next year .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament will obviously have an enhanced role in matters of trade .
The Commission is ready to work closely with you on the future negotiations which I have just mentioned .
The Euromed Free Trade Area also has a South-South dimension .
Our Mediterranean partners are creating a network of free trade agreements among themselves , and the Agadir Agreement , in force since 2007 , is also open to other Mediterranean countries .
Israel and Turkey have also signed free trade agreements with the Mediterranean partners , while other agreements are still on the table .
It is too early for a full assessment of the current Agadir Agreement .
Trade between the four partners has increased , although to a lesser degree than was initially expected .
This may be for several reasons , such as the existence of non-tariff barriers , lack of complementarity between the different markets , lack of a regional market capable of attracting investors and last , but not least , the fact that businesses are not sufficiently aware of the opportunities that these agreements offer .
The Euromed Trade road map beyond 2010 should help solve this problem .
It also contains a series of practical short-term proposals , one of which is the Euro-Mediterranean trade and investment facilitation mechanism .
The creation of this mechanism will provide free , up to date , comprehensive and easily accessible information on trade , investment conditions and regulation in the Euromed region , with the aim of helping businesses , particularly SMEs , operate in Euro-Mediterranean markets .
With regard to sustainability , as with all of our free trade areas , the Commission carried out a sustainability impact assessment , which was completed in December 2007 and which is , and will be , used in both current and future negotiations .
In particular , regarding questions of trade , the Stability Pact highlighted the importance of the long transition periods which were set out in the association agreements for the elimination of industrial tariffs by Southern Mediterranean countries , and the need to lay down similar transition periods in current negotiations on agricultural projects .
It is also evident that we need to take into account the level of development of our Southern Mediterranean partners in ongoing talks on services and establishment .
In addition , in a large number of these countries , the Commission supports fiscal reform programmes which can help lessen the negative effects of the fall in tariff revenue reported in the sustainability impact assessment .
As for the agreement with Syria which I referred to earlier , in 2008 , the Commission launched a review of the draft association agreement in order to determine whether , prior to its conclusion , technical amendments or updates were required .
One round of talks sufficed , and we agreed with Syria the amendments necessary to take account of the accession to the European Union of Romania and Bulgaria and the tariff changes introduced in both Syria and the Union since talks were suspended in 2004 .
The deal was sealed in December 2008 . Last month , we announced that the Union is now ready to sign .
Syria has postponed the conclusion of the agreement in order to analyse its economic implications .
On the other hand , as far as negotiations with Libya are concerned , they were launched in November 2008 in Brussels to conclude a framework agreement centring on an ambitious free trade agreement regarding goods , services and freedom of establishment , as well as regulatory cooperation .
Concluding this agreement with Libya will be the final piece of the puzzle .
At that point , in fact , the Union will have concluded free trade agreements with all of our Mediterranean neighbours , even though Libya is not covered by the European neighbourhood policy .
The conclusion of this trade agreement will provide EU exporters with new export opportunities in Libya and a more favourable regulatory environment , in particular , in the service sectors and in the oil and natural gas markets .
Naturally , negotiations with Tripoli are still at an early stage and we need more time before we can reach an agreement .
During this process , the Commission will pay particular attention to capacity-building in trade and related issues within the Libyan administration .
A sustainability impact assessment is currently being finalised for Libya as well .
Mr President , we support the strategically important Euromed partnership and the consolidation of political , economic and cultural cooperation and peace , security and stability in the area in general .
We call on the ministers to adopt a road map for implementing the Euromed Free Trade Area at the forthcoming conference .
The bilateral approach must be accompanied by a regional approach .
Similarly , over and above the North-South dimension , I consider the South-South economic regional integration to which both the Chairman of the Committee on International Trade , Mr Moreira , and Commissioner Tajani referred , to be especially important .
I would particularly emphasise the need to incorporate social and environmental privileges and plant health standards which need to accompany the opening of the markets .
We must also address certain serious matters relating to imports of agricultural products into the European Union .
I personally am in favour of strengthening the Barcelona Process : union for the Mediterranean and of the programmes announced within its framework in strategic sectors , such as cooperation between small and medium-sized enterprises and exploitation of renewable energy sources .
Finally , I should like to place particular emphasis on the development of sea corridors and on the proposal submitted by Greece last summer about setting up a transport observatory in the eastern Mediterranean based in Greece .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mr Moreira for his speech .

On 9 December , the Euro-Mediterranean trade ministers will meet to debate the revival of our economic and trade cooperation .
Firstly , I would like us all to be clear about something : if the aim of the free trade area was indeed to benefit all of the partners , from the North and from the South , setting 2010 as the date on which it will be introduced was neither realistic nor even desirable , given that there are still huge disparities in development terms between the north and the south sides of the Mediterranean .
Moreover , some people are still advocating the fact that , to make progress with the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership - which I would remind you is made up of three pillars : politics , economics , and society and culture - we simply need to brush aside the political difficulties in order to make headway with the economic and trade aspect .
As you will have gathered , I do not believe in this magical and pernicious view that trade alone can help us progress towards harmonious integration , peace and stability .
I believe in it even less since the facts speak for themselves .
For example , the Union for the Mediterranean , in brushing aside the political conflicts , was supposed to revive stagnant Euro-Mediterranean cooperation with so-called concrete and visible projects .
Today , it is the Union for the Mediterranean that is stagnating , and the political disputes that have gone unmentioned have come back to haunt it .
I am among those who are fiercely attached to the spirit of the Barcelona Process , who believe that progress is not measured solely by trade statistics , which are , incidentally , still too unfavourable to our partners from the South , to their populations .
Trade for trade 's sake - no , I definitely do not believe in it .
On the other hand , trade that is focused on development and aimed at reducing the gap between rich and poor , at ensuring that prosperity really is shared and that regional integration exists - yes , I can conceive of that .
However , the negotiations still need to be steered in this direction .
That is why , at this next meeting , I ask that we all be ambitious , that we not just discuss technical matters to do with the removal of barriers to trade , as though that were the aim .
It is unacceptable to go on thinking that way .
Regional integration , particularly in terms of the South-South network , the solutions to be adopted for the economic crisis - which is having a severe impact with its associated job losses - human , social and environmental considerations , and the human rights issue must sustain the discussions and become our main concerns once again .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the time of day , I hope you will permit me to begin with a quotation from ' A Thousand and One Nights ' , since we are discussing the Arab world .
In these fables , we read : ' Nor gain nor honour comes to him who idly stays at home .
Oft have I seen a stagnant pool corrupt with standing still : if water run , ' tis sweet , but else grows quickly putrefied ' .
This gives a feel of the heritage of the great Arab tradition , which invites us to rouse ourselves from a certain inertia and to relaunch the Euro-Mediterranean integration process in the best way possible , taking two factors into account .
The first factor is time .
Today , 50 % of the southern Mediterranean population is under 18 , and in less than 30 years , we will have a free trade area that will be made up of nearly a billion consumers and citizens .
Therefore , we do not have much time .
The second factor is the nature of the trade agreements that we wish to offer these countries .
As liberal democrats , we want to see trade agreements without bureaucratic structures or centralism , and we want them to remove control of resources and wealth from some oligarchic structures currently holding sway in the partner countries .
Mr President , after 15 years of negotiating the trade aspect of the Barcelona Process , we have very serious doubts about whether the negotiation of a Euromed-type free trade agreement is the right solution to the social , political and economic problems in the region .
The impact assessment , as has been said , above all revealed that there were some potentially very serious negative impacts , whether social , environmental or in terms of regional integration .
In this context , Mr President , Commissioner , we believe that the proposal being made by the Commission - the road map for 2010 and beyond - is too one-sided , with its bilateral free trade agreement aspect , to be along the right lines .
We support the draft resolution that is being debated today , not least because it asks all these questions relating to social impacts , environmental impacts and impacts on regional integration , and above all because , in paragraph 10 , it calls for the aims of the trade agreements to be revisited , particularly in view of these social and environmental issues , and then above all because , by revisiting these agreements , we could perhaps think about reintegrating the trade aspect into the overall Barcelona Process .
Mr President , my group considers that it is impossible to separate the part of the Euromed project that is concerned with trade , immigration or funding from the political part .
Our group is therefore against the European Union giving Israel and the Kingdom of Morocco this elevated status , because they are both turbulent areas that are incompatible with a union for peace based on international law .
We think that the European Union and the European Commission should be much more exacting with regard to the values that can lead us towards a project for shared peace and security .
For example , a Saharan leader is currently on hunger strike on the Spanish island of Lanzarote because the Kingdom of Morocco will not allow her to enter the occupied territories .
This is an important point , which will require the European institutions to adopt a firm stance in relation to the Kingdom of Morocco .
I believe that the Union for the Mediterranean is not only about trade , but also about defending international law and human rights .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the UK Independence Party opposes the Euromed agreement , and this is why : the Euromed agreement will offer significant trade concessions , and even subsidies , to non-Member States .
This is bound to be at the direct or indirect cost of the British taxpayer .
Moreover , when the Commissioner 's representative spoke on Euromed to the Committee on International Trade , of which I am honoured to be a member amongst other people here , he said - and I quote here directly - ' there is no question of implementing all the EU regulations ' .
He went on to say the application of the EU regulations will be intelligent and selective .
By contrast , we in the UK put up with , and indeed our economy suffers from , all the EU regulations being applied and , moreover , being applied to us in a way which is both unintelligent and universal .
We are not even permitted to have the kind of light bulbs that we would like .
But it is not just light bulbs .
After Lisbon , we in the UK will be ruled to a greater or lesser extent by the three amigos : the President of the Commission , the newly appointed President of the Council - who must surely be Tintin 's grandfather - and , more crucially , the High Representative , Mrs Cathy Ashton , who , in her mature 30s , was one of four paid officials of the far left CND .
This is a serious matter , and these are the people we are stuck with , but the Euromed countries will not have to put up with the three amigos at all .
There is also the matter of human rights .
In this instance , I have to ask what is going on here .
Syria and Libya , of all countries , have been offered trade concessions and even subsidies to be paid for by us , but where are the safeguards on human rights ?
Nowhere to be seen for these two countries , both of which have a long and frankly despicable record .
As someone who was a teenager in the 1960s , I have to say that the proposers of this part of the resolution must have been smoking something , so we are opposed to this resolution in all its parts .
( DE ) Mr President , free trade can be a good thing , where it does not simply stop at free trade .
Agreements like this one are about much more than that , and they need to be .
They must not just be about setting up a free trade area , but they must also be about lasting effects .
They must be about bringing about development .
They must be about providing security .
They must be about creating prosperity for all .
That is much more important than ensuring that pure liberalisation takes place , that markets are opened up and that a few people benefit at the end of the process .
If we want to make trade freer , the aim of all these efforts - both here and in our neighbouring countries to the south - must be to combat unemployment .
These efforts must aim to create more opportunities , in particular for women , young people and the rural population .
If that is our aim , then we are on the right track .
If our aim is just to liberalise , open up , and enable a few people to make profits , we are on the wrong track .
( PL ) Mr President , the fundamental objective of the Mediterranean Association Agreements is principally for the European Union to enter into closer cooperation , chiefly in the area of trade , with Mediterranean states , and also to restructure the economies of these states .
In this way , the EU can help the Arab world transform itself into a region of prosperity , and that will create the conditions for closer cooperation and the opportunity to achieve stability in the region .
We must make every effort to accelerate the process which was begun in Barcelona , paying particular attention to questions concerning democracy , maintenance of the rule of law , values , human dignity and economic and social development .
Strengthening intercultural dialogue will also play an important role in this context .
In my opinion , liberalising the trade of agricultural products in the Euro-Mediterranean area can contribute to beneficial trade exchange , on condition that the EU concentrates mainly on the export of cereals , meat and milk , and on the import of fruit and vegetables from Mediterranean states .
Realisation of such an exceptionally ambitious plan of action as the Euro-Mediterranean partnership will require great effort and many compromises from the states which participate in the process .
Mr President , a few weeks ago , I was at the meeting of the Delegation for relations with Canada .
They were discussing a free trade agreement which the European Union was conducting with Canada .
Prior to that , we here in Parliament were discussing a free trade agreement with South Korea .
Tonight we are discussing a free trade agreement in the Euromed .
Could the Commission answer how many free trade agreements we are negotiating or have negotiated up to now ?
Secondly , where is the net benefit to the European Union countries ?
Thirdly , where are the opportunities for businesses and entrepreneurs from a job creation and economic point of view ?
Finally , I am not necessarily agreeing with the points made by the Earl of Dartmouth , but I would like to hear his core question answered , leaving aside the personalities .
Mr President , this debate has been about the liberalisation of trade , and I stand before this House tonight as a European who believes in the cooperation of nations , but not as one who believes in the federalism of the current project .
For the United Kingdom , Lisbon will decrease our powers to control trade and exercise trade with whomsoever we will .
Furthermore , the diminution of our democracy , both in the United Kingdom and in Europe , is apparent with the events of last week where we had the appointment of a President and the anointing of a High Representative of Foreign Affairs who has never held elected office , but who will speak for the people of Europe on foreign affairs .
Surely this is not a situation that the Commission can stand over , and it would be interesting to hear its views .
( PT ) Mr President , when considering the establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area , we should remember to bear two things in mind .
One is a general point which applies to countries in the southern and eastern Mediterranean , as well as most developing countries with which the European Union wishes to establish similar agreements , particularly the countries bound by the common agricultural policy .
The words of the Dominican Lacordaire are apt here : ' Between the weak and the strong , between the rich and the poor , between the lord and the slave , it is freedom which oppresses and the law which sets free . '
We simply cannot ignore the obvious and important socio-economic parallels at play here , nor the vast differences in the stage of development in production systems between countries north and south of the Mediterranean .
The liberalisation of trade , particularly in vulnerable sectors such as agriculture and fishing , has certainly been an exacerbating factor in the current economic and social crisis , due to the pressure which it has placed on weaker production systems , employment and social rights , due to the increase in dependency , which is especially severe when it comes to food , compromising the free development and sovereignty of every country .
As already mentioned , we can still remember the situation in Palestine and the Western Sahara , and it is one that we should not ignore in this debate .
( DE ) Mr President , I think I can say my piece in even less than a minute .
I , too , have a question for the Commissioner .
We are agreed that free trade agreements and trade agreements should not be limited to trade , but also have other objectives that ultimately benefit us all .
To what extent does this process mean that both we and our partners will enjoy more democracy , more human rights and a more equitable distribution of wealth ?
Is there already some of this to be seen , or will it take some time yet ?
If so , how long will it take ?
( FR ) Mr President , I had not anticipated having to respond to Mrs Dodds but I would just like to tell her that she should read the Treaty of Lisbon because , if there is one committee that will be strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon , it is the Committee on International Trade .
Therefore I can say that , when that time comes , the European Parliament will have slightly more influence in the months or years ahead .
Mr Moreira put some very precise questions to the commissioner .
I heard Mr Tajani answer : Libya and Syria .
There was one issue that was , all the same , disposed of very quickly , and that was the whole human rights issue , on which there has been no precise response .
I very much want there to be progress in the negotiations with Libya and Syria but , at the same time , precise answers must be given to the EU 's questions , enquiries and requests regarding human rights .
My second point is that I feel it is impossible to talk about the Euro-Mediterranean area without raising the Israel-Palestine issue , when we see products being imported today from the occupied territories .
I would therefore also like to know where the Commission stands on this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to stress that Commissioner Ashton 's absence is not due to the post that she will take up from 1 December , but to other institutional commitments relating to her current post .
I will attempt to answer your questions , where possible .
Any answers that I am unable to provide will be supplied to all Members in writing , as I will forward your questions to Commissioner Ashton and her staff .
I would emphasise that the European Commission 's commitment to human rights has always been at the heart of its every action .
With regard to my department too , namely transport , we have always made every effort in all of our initiatives in Africa to give priority to ensuring political stability and respect for human rights and the rules .
This commitment is part of the European Commission 's political project .
Furthermore , the free trade agreements always contain cooperation clauses .
I would therefore reassure all Members that the Commission never underestimates the importance of respect for human rights and its obligation to remind countries with which negotiations are under way of this issue .
Situations are continuously monitored , and if this is the case for countries which have requested membership of the European Union , there is all the more reason for it to be continued for the negotiating countries .
As for Syria , the association agreement broadly follows the pattern of the other Euro-Mediterranean agreements insofar as it requires regular political , economic and social dialogue and cooperation in many sectors .
It lays down the progressive creation of a free trade area over a maximum of 12 years and , at the same time , it contains more wide-ranging and substantive provisions in a vast number of sectors , such as trade-related provisions not covered in other Euro-Mediterranean association agreements .
I am thinking of the abolition of the global tariff on agricultural products , the provisions concerning technical barriers to trade , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , trade facilitation , the right of establishment and services , public procurement and , lastly , the trade dispute settlement mechanism .
With regard to Libya , following a difficult period of relations with the international community , this country has taken steps to normalise political and economic relations with its foreign partners .
Even during a trip to Libya as Commissioner for Transport , I noticed the desire to reverse a trend which had always existed in the past .
I would say that Libya always agrees to the objectives and the general content of the draft legal texts on trade in goods , services and the right of establishment , trade rules , including rules concerning public procurement , and regulatory cooperation in a range of sectors of the Community acquis .
Libya has also agreed to uphold other clauses , but I repeat that the Commission will , in any case , continue to be vigilant .
I hope to have been as thorough as possible in answering your questions .
On the other hand , as for the exact number of free trade agreements being negotiated by the Commission , we will provide clearer and more complete answers in writing via Commissioner Ashton 's staff .
I have received five motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 25 November 2009 .
Safety and interoperability of the community railroad system ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the safety and interoperability of the Community railway system by Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism - B7-0227 / 2009 )
author . - Mr President , I rise on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism to introduce this oral question which has been prompted by recent accidents in Italy and the Netherlands , both of which , sadly , had fatalities .
I think it right , however , to point out that rail is still one of the safest modes of transport and certainly it is the intention of my committee to do all that we can to ensure that this remains the case .
Hence this oral question .
We here in the European Parliament have always taken rail safety very seriously .
This has culminated in the recent Rail Safety Directive and follows on from a long line of railway initiatives and reports taken by Parliament over many years .
Yet we have a frustration born out of the inability over the years of both railway companies and national governments to act in key areas .
This manifests itself when you examine key legislation and , in particular , the implementation of such legislation in international law , which has been at best patchy and at worst downright protectionist .
The Commission 's own progress report on the implementation of the Rail Safety Directive says that national standards and rules are creating a barrier to a fully integrated rail system .
This then poses the question as to whether those national rules are also compromising safety .
And what about interoperability in the rail sector ?
Are national barriers preventing progress in this area as well , or is there an unwillingness on the part of the rail industry to embrace the concept of interoperability ?
Why is progress on ERTMS so slow and are we going to fail in our attempt to have the ECM scheme in place by the end of next year ?
These are all questions that as a committee we seek answers to .
And , allied to that , we would like to know from the Commission what national barriers and loopholes are currently halting progress on interoperability , and which Member States are the most obstructive .
Following on from that , will the Commission use any legal powers at its disposal to ensure compliance with Community law ?
I know that the problems , particularly in regard to rail freight , but not exclusively in that area , lie firmly at the door of Council .
I and my committee want to work with the Commission and the industry to develop a safe , integrated , interoperable railway network .
My committee is now beginning to question whether the safety side , particularly as it refers to freight wagons , is starting to be compromised by this failure to implement European legislation .
If this is so , then action is needed urgently .
But action is also needed to deliver both integration and interoperability if passenger railways are to develop to their full potential and if rail freight is , frankly , to survive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before turning to the debate , I would like to make some essential introductory remarks .
Only when the technical investigations carried out by the independent Italian and Dutch bodies have pinpointed the exact causes of the accidents in Viareggio and in the Netherlands will we be able to draw specific conclusions with regard to possible improvements in Community legislation on the safety of rail transport .

Furthermore , as Mr Simpson highlighted , despite the two accidents , which we must obviously learn from in terms of rail safety - precisely to show our commitment on this , we organised a series of events which Mr Simpson also attended - I wish to stress that rail transport in Europe nevertheless offers an especially high level of safety compared with other means of transport .
Indeed , the report on the current first rail package , adopted by the Commission in 2006 , and the latest statistics indicate that the opening up of the market to competition has not had any negative impact on the overall level of rail safety which , on the contrary , continues to improve .
We must , however , be vigilant to ensure that this improvement continues , and we certainly cannot settle for the results already obtained .
Liberalisation , in fact , means that the number of operators on our networks is continuing to grow , and we must therefore continually assess the quality of the operators present .
Following the Viareggio accident , the Commission and the European Railway Agency organised a large number of meetings with all the interested parties , and a short- and long-term plan of action was drawn up in order to reduce , as far as possible , the risk of such accidents happening again .
The plan was adopted at the conference on rail safety organised - as I said earlier - by the Commission on 8 September 2009 .
Turning to the specific question of the safety of freight wagons , particularly maintenance of their critical components such as axles , the European Railway Agency has created a task force composed of experts from industry and from national safety authorities , which has already met on three occasions .
The task force has a specific two-step work programme which requires results to be published in December 2009 and June 2010 .
Step 1 consists of developing an urgent inspection programme to ascertain the state of the wagons in use as well as the quality of their axles .
It is important , however , that these measures are not adopted in isolation at national level , but that they are coordinated at European level in order to obtain results accepted in all Member States .
In Step 2 , the more general issue of wagon maintenance will be addressed in order to determine whether it is necessary to harmonise , and to what extent , the various elements of the maintenance system , namely technical standards , procedures and measuring and testing methods .
The International Wagon Regulations system , in force prior to the opening up of the market until 2006 , gave national undertakings the responsibility and the freedom to determine all of these aspects .
Such an absence of harmonised standards no longer seems acceptable in the new framework , which is governed by technical specifications for interoperability for wagons , and by the new private agreement , the General Contract of Use for Wagons , between technical wagon operators and railway undertakings .
With regard to certification of the entity in charge of maintenance , the European Railway Agency will do everything in its power to enable the Commission to comply with the timetable set out in the actual directive , and adopt the certification system by the end of 2010 .
Far from being an additional obstacle for operators in the railway sector , the certification system , which will specify the criteria which must be met in order for a rail operator to be recognised as an entity in charge of maintenance , will open up opportunities which , until today , have been limited only to certain undertakings .
The national practices or shortcomings which hamper interoperability relate principally to the transition from the old system , governed by national railway monopolies , to the new system , brought in by the directives on interoperability and rail safety .
The barriers in question are described in the communication adopted by the Commission in September .
In order to eliminate these barriers , in 2008 , the Railway Agency began work on the cross-acceptance of rolling stock .
In this connection , the agency is classifying all national standards on the basis of a harmonised list of technical parameters , before moving on to a comparison of the standards in the various Member States in order to establish the degree of equivalence .
The goal is to do away with the practice , common in the railway sector , of resorting to national standards to obstruct the approval of rolling stock already approved by other States .
Furthermore , the tardiness of the Member States and industry in conforming to the new legal framework represents a further barrier to interoperability .
Indeed , this tardiness is hindering the creation of a European railway area based on common harmonised standards , standards necessary to permit the optimum functioning of the market .
I have spoken for a long time , but there were a great many questions .
I will now start to conclude .
As for the ERTMS , it is in place and has given positive results on over 2 000 kilometres .
It is true that the original specifications had ambiguities which gave rise to different interpretations , but these ambiguities were eliminated in 2007 .
The Commission 's Decision of 23 March 2008 made it compulsory to use this new version , known as ' 2.3.0d ' .
The Member States and this sector are currently working to upgrade the train lines affected and the problem of incompatible applications at national level is therefore being resolved .
All the new applications take the compatible standard as their basis .
The Commission , in line with its own commitments , will provide financial support for the sector to upgrade all the lines and trains already fitted with this system so that they are compatible with the new version .
To this end , within the framework of the 2009 call for proposals , EUR 250 million was allocated for the ERTMS , part of which will be used specifically to update the relevant computer programs .
Mr President , Commissioner , you are right , the railway system is a very safe system when compared to other forms of transport .
Alongside many positive elements , however , liberalisation has also brought with it a degree of poorer safety in the form of the fragmentation of individual companies , the separation of infrastructure and operations , the outsourcing of maintenance work and the leasing of materials and staff .
In my opinion , it must be ensured that the national safety authorities issue their safety certificates and authorisations in accordance with what is laid down by the European Railway Agency ( ERA ) .
Are there adequate controls ?
Is it ensured , for example , that the training of the staff , the certifications and the working conditions are properly monitored ?
What is the situation , in this regard , with respect to the introduction of a standardised Community certification ?
What is the situation with regard to the European train driver 's licence ?
The efforts with regard to the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) must also be redoubled .
The recent implementation plan that you referred to must be binding and must not be delayed due to financial or national considerations .
The efforts relating to the introduction of the Technical Specifications for Interoperability ( TSI ) must be continued and extended .
This would represent huge progress , particularly in terms of the standardisation of materials , and would provide a higher degree of safety in relation to material maintenance .
Many of the most recent railway accidents and near-misses have been due to maintenance failings .
The intensity , in particular , is being neglected on cost grounds , and maintenance intervals are being lengthened .
What is the situation with regard to a Europe-wide certification system for maintenance works ?
I believe that everything possible must be done to prevent each individual Member State from turning back to its old rules and acting independently and in diverging ways .
The border crossings between the individual Member States , in particular , represent a safety risk .
How does the Commission intend to overcome this problem in the short term ?
I would also like to ask you to ensure that , when you make your evaluation , you do not forget the social aspects - they need to be taken into account .

Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Simpson just for asking his question , and to congratulate him , because his question has become the subject of our debate .
It is a very late debate , at a late hour in the evening , but it is very good that we are having this debate .
When the subject of the question was shown , we saw the words : context - the European railroad system .
I venture to suggest here that at the moment , we still do not have a European railroad system .
Why not ?
Every railroad has its own technical standards .
If they are electric railroads , it is either DC or AC .
If it is AC , it is either 15 kV , or 30 kV , or 35 kV .
I can tell you an interesting fact , which is especially appropriate in the presence of Mr Tajani .
In the North-South system , there are two railroads which are similar - the one in Poland and the one in Italy .
All of the others have differences between them .
Therefore , Mr President , let us give the railroads a chance .
Let us establish a truly European railroad system , even if this has to be done in spite of the almighty , national railroad carriers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , safety is a sacred thing .
It must be given absolute priority .
What has happened in Berlin recently , where the suburban rapid rail system has gone to pieces as a result of profits being prioritised , must remain an absolutely exceptional case .
What bombs and shells were unable to do in the war , we have had to experience for the last six months in Berlin .
This state of affairs cannot go on .
Safety arguments are also often put forward when someone wants to stand in the way of competition .
In such cases , safety arguments are created in order to completely prevent the opening up of networks , something that we actually regulated through legislation and made compulsory for every Member State as from 1 January 2007 .
You must intervene , therefore - the safety arguments must not be allowed to be abused .
Safety costs money , of course , but we need investment in the infrastructure and in safety .
The money is available .
I would remind everyone , for example , that the exemption from duty for kerosene costs European taxpayers EUR 14 billion every year .
If you were to spend this money on safety , we would have a European railway market and guaranteed safety , which is the order of the day .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to prepare for rail competition , the European directives have imposed the separation of the rail network and transport activities , thus prohibiting any kind of standardisation .
The result : trains in France travel more slowly on the secondary network today than they did at the start of the 20th century .
A third of the network is going to ruin through lack of resources to maintain it .
All the railway unions , all the experts say that this situation will inevitably result in terrible accidents .
That is not enough , however .
There is always a need for more profit .
Thus , there is a willingness to sacrifice rail safety by prohibiting national safety rules that offer the greatest amount of protection for the sake of future minimum European regulations .
Once again , the European general interest is being sacrificed for the sake of capitalist greed .
Thalys is the right model for Europe , as it is characterised by European rail cooperation that complies with the statutes protecting workers and with maximum safety rules .
That is the total opposite of the unbridled competition imposed on rail users by the European directives .
Indeed , to ensure the safety of rail users and residents alike in the face of hazardous freight transport , the European rail packages as a whole must be repealed .
( DE ) Mr President , it is not actually astonishing .
There is one thing that we can say , and that is that , where liberalisation and privatisation takes place , the numbers of accidents and incidents increase .
The reason is obvious , as where there is a need to generate high profits , there are poorly paid employees ; there is poorer training and gaining of qualifications , as this is costly ; there are fewer controls , as controls cost money ; and ultimately - we have seen this everywhere - when everything goes wrong , there are incredible costs involved for the public in clearing up the mess caused by liberalisation and privatisation .
We have gone down the wrong road here .
Mr Bach believes it would be enough to investigate this thoroughly and to introduce better safety mechanisms .
We took the wrong road and we should now return to a road that offers quality , security and efficiency .
That road is certainly not further liberalisation .
It is the opposite route .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make just two observations .
I think that we ought not to argue about greater privatisation , competition or what have you .
It is clear that the logic of rushing to reduce costs is a negative factor in terms of safety standards .
When there are attempts to reduce costs because a major competition mechanism is launched , it is inevitable that safety standards should fall .
The real issue is that I believe the Commission ought to initiate a more rigorous phase based around a more strategic role for the European Railway Agency .
It ought to take on a role of greater coordination , control and supervision over the national safety agencies , and it ought to do so in a much speedier manner precisely because of the differences between the various countries , which my fellow Members have already alluded to , regarding contradictions between national and European legislation .
In my view , there are huge delays on this aspect .
The model ought to be that of the European Aviation Safety Agency , and it should have the same binding powers over actions and enforcement .
If there is a call to be made to the Commission today , it is that it should move more swiftly in this direction .
The Commissioner has said that we need to wait for the results of the investigations into the accidents .
On the contrary , I believe that these results will add nothing to the existing situation .
Another element , Commissioner , which probably does not fall within your sphere of responsibilities , and which is probably also outside the scope of this evening 's debate , is that , all too often , the legislation as a whole does not ensure that anyone suffering loss or damage as a result of a railway accident - given that the rate of railway accidents is still low - receives immediate acknowledgment from the person bearing liability for it .
Mr President , it has been stated that EUR 200 million was spent on this area in 2009 .
I wonder , would the Commission consider only funding , from a safety and interoperable point of view , rail systems that are operated electrically , and phase out over a period of time diesel-guzzling locomotives - I know in my own country all the rail systems are operated thus - and set a target date to have safe , interconnected and environmentally friendly rail systems across the entire European Union ?
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , the safety of rail transport depends on the investment made in maintaining and modernising the rail infrastructure and rolling stock .
Lack of this investment will increase the number of rail accidents .
Investment in the railway system must become a priority , both at Community level , via the TEN-T budget and the Structural Funds , and at Member State level , through national allocations and the cofinancing of priority projects for trans-European transport .
The interoperability of railway systems is vital .
Appropriate pay for staff and the provision of training and testing for workers in the railway sector are also essential .
Railway accidents have occurred in Romania too during the last year .
The eastern part of the European Union requires substantial investment in railway transport to be able to maintain and modernise the existing infrastructure and develop it .
The extension of priority projects 6 and 17 to Bucharest and Constanţa , the construction of a rail corridor for freight transport on this route , as well as the implementation of the ERTMS , should become priority TEN-T projects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that many answers to the requests made during this debate were given at the conference on railway safety held on 8 September , which I convened immediately after the accidents in Viareggio and the Netherlands , precisely to give a signal regarding the strong commitment on the part of the Commission and the European institutions to take action in the very sensitive sector of railway safety .
As you know , representatives of all the institutions , Parliament and the Council were invited to the conference .
All the issues at the heart of this evening 's debate were examined , starting with the issue of the agencies and the European Railway Agency .
I share the position of Mr Milana , because during the conference itself , I proposed that greater powers be given to the European Railway Agency .
I am therefore in full agreement .
However , we need to change the rules of the game and I undertake , for as long as I remain Commissioner for Transport , to move towards the European Railway Agency being able to function along the same lines as the European Maritime Safety Agency or the European Aviation Safety Agency .
Another subject that we dealt with during that day of work , in which relatives of the victims also participated , is the liability of operators in the transport chain and thus , the question of the rights of those who are involved in rail accidents .
With regard to passengers ' rights in the rail sector , there is legislation that will enter into force on 3 December this year .
The Commission is also looking at aspects relating to victims other than passengers , namely those who are not passengers but are victims of accidents such as the Viareggio accident , caused by an explosion or a train derailment , and it is assessing what responses might be given to this problem .
The Commission has thus taken strong action in the rail safety sector , which it considers to be a priority , including in relation to the certification of staff .
The EU has already adopted Directive 2007 / 59 / EC on the certification of train drivers , and the European driving licence for train drivers already exists : it will enter into force on 3 December this year .
With regard to the social aspects that have been raised , there is the social dialogue committee which , in 2005 , discussed an agreement on working time for international traffic .
With regard to maintenance and more environmentally friendly rail transport systems , I believe that we need equipment to be modernised and effective maintenance .
As I confirmed in my reply to the question , I believe that the ERTMS system is an important project from the technological viewpoint , in which the European Commission has invested with a view to making all transport in the rail sector safer .
I believe that this is an important element which should not be forgotten .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
With regard to the issue being discussed , I believe that it is important to note that in relation to the ECM ( Entity in Charge ) , the owner or operator must be specified in every case so that we can reduce the risk of accidents .
Furthermore , we should consider , as is the well-known practice in France , raising the issue as well of the legal entities ' criminal liability so that a greater role can be given to safety as part of the legal entities ' management role .
When strategic decisions are made at company manager or owner level , profit must never take priority to the detriment of people 's safety and their lives .
If a mass accident occurs due to the reckless and risky management practices of the company in charge , the legal entity can rightly be held accountable .
Otherwise , only the senior manager leaves the company early , accepting the large bonuses and severance packages which are well-known nowadays , so that , in the end , only the train driver goes to prison .
The fate of the company must be linked to that of the manager and workers as well so that a safe service of suitable quality can be guaranteed , particularly in the state service sector .
I would like to ask the Commission the following question : what kind of proposal does it want to submit so that it can enforce not only civil ( compensation ) liability but criminal liability as well with regard to negligent service providers ?
Use of minority languages within the framework of the European cultural heritage ( debate )
The next item is the Commission 's statement on the use of minority languages within the framework of the European cultural heritage .
Mr President , honourable Members , the general objective of the European Union 's policy on multilingualism is to highlight the importance of all the languages spoken in the European Union .
In accordance with Article 151 of the treaty , the Community 's actions must help encourage cooperation between Member States in order to contribute to the flourishing of Member States ' cultures , while respecting at the same time their diversity at national and regional level and focusing on our common cultural heritage .
Based on these principles , the European Commission , in close cooperation with Member States , is implementing the strategy of promoting multilingualism and linguistic diversity , featuring in the document adopted in September 2008 , which is aimed at all the languages spoken in the Community .
All these languages represent an integral part of our common cultural heritage , and every single national , regional , minority and migrants ' language spoken in Europe offers an additional facet to this common cultural heritage .
As you are well aware , the European Commission has invited Member States to consider teaching regional and minority languages as part of their national strategies for promoting multilingualism in society .
The decisions made by the European Union in this area are not replacing the measures already adopted by Member States , but are intended to support and supplement them .
The main funding instruments available to the European Union are the Lifelong Learning Programme for the 2007-2013 period , which is open to all the languages spoken in the Community , including regional and minority languages .
There is no Community legislation for regulating the use of languages in Member States and none of the treaties includes options for adopting such provisions either .
Respect for linguistic and cultural diversity is enshrined via Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which stipulates that the Union must respect cultural and linguistic diversity .
As you know , the provisions of the Charter are aimed at the EU 's institutions and bodies , as well as Member States , only when they implement Community legislation .
Consequently , Member States continue to be the decision makers on their domestic linguistic policy , including with regard to regional and minority languages .
The protection of persons belonging to national minorities is an integral part of respecting human rights , which is one of the principles on which the European Union has been created , as indicated in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
As a result , Member States should use every legal instrument they have available to safeguard the rights of persons belonging to national minorities , in accordance with their own constitutional order and with the obligations and commitments incumbent upon them under international law .
By international law I mean , for example , the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of the Council of Europe , which provides a global framework in this area , as well as the recommendations from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , which the European Union has resorted to on different occasions .
The languages of Europe 's peoples as a cultural whole form the cultural heritage of Europe , just as the Commissioner has also said .
I thank him for making this point .
There are no differences between languages , whether they are spoken by a minority or majority .
At the same time , people 's right to use their own language is an integral part of their basic rights , as is also stated in Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is no coincidence that national communities are extremely sensitive about any infringement of their rights in this area .
I am speaking out , on behalf of a minority numbering more than half a million , against Slovakia 's national language law containing certain articles which infringe and restrict the rights of this minority .
Let me give you a few examples .
Article 8 ( 4 ) of the law stipulates that doctors must communicate in the national language with patients in locations where the minority 's proportion is less than 20 % .
This also applies to social workers and their clients , as well as to fire-fighters and paramedics , if they are on duty , in other words , when putting out a fire or taking someone to hospital .
According to Article 6 ( 1 ) , Slovak must be used in the text of adverts , whether public or private .
According to Article 8 ( 6 ) , adverts must appear first and larger in the national language , or the letters must be at least as big as those in the text in the second language .
This obviously conveys the message that the first language is more important , while the second is subordinate and second-class .
Article 9 of the law imposes penalties that are disproportionate on legal entities contravening the appropriate language use , including small businesses .
In any case , why is it a punishable offence for someone to speak in their mother tongue ?
Such a law cannot , obviously , be implemented properly .
Mr President , Slovak legislation could have integrated as part of its domestic legal system those commitments which it accepted from the Council of Europe 's Charter on languages and assumed through ratification , instead of approving a law which is diametrically opposed to this .
It is not even aimed at bilingualism , as it does not require workers , even in the public sector , to know the minority language , nor encourage them to learn it .
Mr President , just a final word .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has put this debate on the agenda and I greatly appreciate the clear stance adopted by the Parliament 's President , Jerzy Buzek , as well as the unequivocal message from the Commission that minority rights must be protected , not restricted .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , given all the differences of opinion in this House , it is a good sign that we have a president here of Hungarian stock of whom we can be sure that he will not act in a discriminatory manner , but that it is simply a natural matter of course in this Europe that the attempt is made to stick to what is right irrespective of language and origin .
Mrs Bauer , you were critical of the language law .
The language law is not as good as it might be , that has indeed been established .
It does not infringe fundamental rights , however .
That too must be stated .
That being the case , there is a need to work on eliminating those deficiencies that do exist - above all , in the interpretation of the law .
It is absolutely crucial that a signal be sent from this debate today that we are making improvements not because we want to play off one population group against the other but because we want the relations between Slovaks and Hungarians within Slovakia , and of course , also between the two countries , to improve .
That must be our concern .
Especially now , as we approach the elections , I can but call for moderation , reason and dialogue , which offer the road to a positive result .
Quite simply , there are also problems with an historical basis , and we should have no illusions about that .
My mother , who was born in Miskolc , and I , born just a few kilometres from Bratislava , feel and sense that .
The crucial thing , however , is that we do not magnify and heat up conflicts that often fundamentally only exist between political powers and not between the people themselves , who get along well .
Just as there is a Hungarian minority in Slovakia , so there is also a Slovak minority in many a municipality with a Hungarian majority within Slovakia .
We must therefore bring these elements together .
The second signal sent from this debate is also a crucial factor .
Together , we have a range of problems .
Slovakia and Hungary , too , have problems together , such as the problem of the Romani .
Would it not , then , be much more sensible to concentrate on solving these existing problems together via dialogue , in an effort to give all the minorities of this region a better chance ?
In the end , we are all members of minorities .
The aim must be that we clearly commit ourselves to linguistic diversity - as the Commissioner said - to promoting multilingualism , since languages are an ' asset ' .
People who can speak additional languages have an advantage , and when everyone understands that and accepts it , we will be able to look forward to a better future .
Mr President , I am pleased that the Commission has taken this issue seriously .
Life for many minority groups in Europe is difficult , and a strong message from the EU in particular may help to counteract the wave of intolerance that has swept over our part of the world in recent years .
I think that the EU should make it absolutely clear to every European that there is added value in both having and speaking languages other than the language of the majority .
Why ?
Well , for one thing , because every language carries with it an enormous cultural heritage that enriches European diversity .
Areas where minority languages are spoken are also more successful and competitive from an economic point of view than other areas .
It is therefore beneficial for anyone who wants to do business in such areas to employ people who speak the local languages .
Those were two good reasons .
I would like to thank the Commission for this initiative and I will not detain us any longer as time is limited .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his statement , and I agree that the current situation of EU law does not entitle us to legislate in the field of linguistic rights .
On the other hand , as of 1 December , we shall have a clause in Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union stating that the Union is founded on the values of respect for human rights , including the rights of persons belonging to minorities .
This probably cannot be a solid legal ground for immediately building our own minority rights concept in the acquis communautaire .
Nevertheless , we deserve a statement today that is more focused on the Commission 's political stance regarding minority rights and the message must , in my opinion , be very simple .
A party that acts against the rights of persons belonging to minorities , including linguistic rights , acts against the core values of the Union .
We name and shame those countries outside the EU which have a bad human rights record , even though the EU cannot impose legally binding obligations on them , but why are we so reluctant to name bad examples inside the EU , even if we cannot impose obligations ?
You mentioned the Council of Europe and OSCE documents , but the Commission should also undertake the obligation to monitor whether Member States are fulfilling their obligations under these documents .
Finally , in Parliament , itself we do not fulfil this multilingualism requirement .
I , for example , cannot speak my mother tongue despite the fact that 40 % of the population of my country , Latvia , has Russian as its mother tongue .
Slovak is one of the most beautiful languages in Europe but it is seldom heard in the European Parliament .
As a true friend of Slovakia , a long-term supporter of its development and a modest but active participant in Slovak reforms , I would be delighted to assist my Slovak friends in overcoming this disadvantage and , at the same time , in contributing towards Slovak being spoken and understood by an ever wider circle of people .
I firmly believe that we will succeed in protecting the diversity of Slovak language and culture .
The Slovak language does not wish to develop at the expense of other languages .
Precisely for this reason , it is incomprehensible that a law dealing with the use of ethnic minority languages defines for them a much narrower range of use than for Slovak .
This law in fact only treats the use of these languages as an option , and it views this option only in a negative way and not as a positive right , failing to regard it as a right that can be demanded and applied in everyday life .
In offices in Slovakia , there is still no use of printed forms in Hungarian and there are not even any official translations of the laws and legal standards of the Slovak Republic into Hungarian .
The amendment of the national language law has made the situation even more difficult .
Ethnic minority representatives were not involved in drafting the amendment .
One of the fundamental deficiencies of the new legal measure is that it applies not only to the use of the official language but even intervenes more deeply in public , commercial and private life .
Another fundamental problem is that the State language law also includes sanctions .
The amendment to the Slovak national language law is in breach of the basic human rights and standards of the European Union .
Retaining the law in its present form would be contrary to the national interest of the Slovak Republic and the majority ethnic group because the law will provoke suspicions and poison the atmosphere of good relations between the ethnic groups that have lived together on the territory of Slovakia for more than a thousand years .
Slovakia is a mature , grown-up and self-confident democratic country and is not dependent on cultural warfare , or on the use of law to defend itself against indigenous languages .
The indigenous ethnic groups do not threaten Slovak nationhood , the Slovak language or the culture of the Slovak nation .
On the contrary , the coexisting ethnic groups will enthusiastically and voluntarily protect , support and develop the Slovak language and its culture as long as there is a visible willingness on the part of the Slovak nation to protect , support and develop the languages and culture of the ethnic minorities .
Our Hungarian friends have recently been lecturing us on how we should find a European-style solution to the question of minority language use in Slovakia .
I would like to deliver a lecture on how they seem to have forgotten to look at themselves and how in Hungary , they restrict minorities in the use of their native languages .
Let us take a look , for example , at the upbringing of children and at schools .
The Slovak Republic allows Hungarian children to be educated in their native language from primary school to secondary school to university .
The teaching of all subjects is carried out by Hungarian speaking teachers in Hungarian .
On the other hand , Slovak children in Hungary can only dream of having Slovak schools .
The Hungarian Government closed them down in 1961 .
Since then , children from ethnic minorities in Hungary have had nowhere to learn the correct usage of their native languages as the Hungarian Government does not afford them the opportunity of being educated in their native languages , in contrast to other EU governments .
In Hungary , Slovak children must therefore study all subjects in Hungarian and their native language is added as something like a punishment , as extra work , with the intention of putting them off .
They are taught Slovak by Hungarian speaking teachers who are not proficient in the Slovak language .
In this way , the relationship of the children to their native language and their cultural links are suppressed and derailed .
Using this allegedly European approach to minorities , the Hungarian administration has , over the course of 50 years , reduced the Slovak minority to about a tenth of its original size .
That is why a former Hungarian ombudsman for ethnic minorities previously acknowledged openly that Hungary was continuing to work towards the total assimilation of ethnic minorities .
I hold my friends , the Members from the Hungarian Republic , in high regard .
For more than a thousand years , our nations have contributed together to the history of Europe and I would like only to ask them to understand that numbers do not lie .
As a result of policies of the Hungarian administration , the Slovak minority in Hungary has been decimated while the Hungarian minority in Slovakia , thanks to the correct policies of the Slovak administration , continues in the same numbers .
( HU ) Right at the start of this item , we need to clarify what we can consider of value to the European Union .
Is it what is written in documents , or is something of value when states respect it or , if not , the European Union makes them respect it ?
Can a national minority be regarded as something of value ?
Does it matter ?
Well , in the Czech Republic , the Beneš Decrees have currently been left in force so that Václav Klaus will sign the Treaty of Lisbon .
In other words , they have maintained the stigma of collective guilt for the Sudeten German and Hungarian ethnic groups .
Is a minority of value then ?
Is a minority language of value ?
In Slovakia , the indigenous Hungarian population are punished if they use their mother tongue .
This law simply cannot be implemented properly .
Europe should be ashamed as long as this law exists .
This should not be a dispute between Slovakia and Hungary .
It should be an issue to be resolved between the European Union safeguarding its values and Slovakia .
It is a hypocritical system that proclaims these values but does not comply with them in practice .
What is this agenda item dealing with ?
It is certainly reluctant to resolve this issue .
At this sitting , we are dealing with individual issues , such as Nicaragua , Vietnam , Laos and human rights violations .
On this issue , the European Union is not even assuming the role of protecting its values ; it is simply devaluing them .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , I consider it a success that in the debate proposed by my colleague , Edit Bauer , and myself , the European Parliament is finally dealing with the issue of national and linguistic minorities using their own language , which also means dealing with Slovakia 's discriminatory language law .
I am also particularly pleased that the Commission has adopted an unequivocal stance on this occasion with regard to minority language rights .
I wish to thank Commissioner Orban in particular for mentioning the Council of Europe 's Charter for Regional or Minority Languages among the rights and useful documents he referred to .
Similarly , I think that it is especially important that Mr Buzek visited Bratislava and issued a clear statement on this matter .
After all , all of us who have been dealing with human rights in this Chamber for years feel that it is outrageous that , as the Treaty of Lisbon dawns , citizens belonging to a minority are not allowed to use their own mother tongue in the land of their birth and cannot enjoy the rights guaranteed by democracy .
Indeed , the law makes it a possible criminal offence for someone to exercise the fundamental human right to use their mother tongue .
This implies that the minority are second-class citizens in their homeland .
We are talking , Mr Paška , about 530 000 Hungarians in Slovakia and 20-30 000 Slovaks in Hungary , just to give you a comparison .
However , I would simply like to reply to Mr Swoboda that a minority is fighting in this case for its most basic human right against the majority .
It is not two countries fighting against each other .
The European Union must intervene without fail and speak out against the Slovak and any other such law which jeopardises the use of minority languages and the protection of minorities ' identity as such laws contravene every international document , including the basic principles now reinforced in the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I would simply like to remind my fellow Members that already in 1995 , Slovakia was the object of serious international criticism when the language law was first adopted .
As a result of this , and specifically as one of the conditions of initiating the EU accession process , Slovakia had to remove the paragraphs on penalties from the legislation .
Therefore , 10 years ago , the European Union opposed what it is now extremely reluctant to speak out against .
( SK ) I am proud to say that Slovakia has made a great contribution to linguistic diversity and to the preservation of the linguistic cultural heritage .
A few facts : the Hungarian minority has about 700 schools with teaching conducted in Hungarian .
All minorities have the right to use their language in court proceedings , in official business , in place names and they have radio and television broadcasts in their mother tongue .
The state provides financial support for the cultural activities of minorities and accepts the use of the mother tongue in commercial , contractual and other relationships .
Hungarian Members here are attacking the Slovak language law .
Their assertions constitute the naked lies , fabrications and figments of injured Hungarian nationalism .
We must reject this , ladies and gentlemen .
On the contrary , the Slovak language law conforms fully with international standards , as confirmed by the most competent observer - Commissioner Vollebæk of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
Our language law contributes to the elimination of discrimination against minorities and to the safety and health of our citizens while creating a space for their full integration .
Moreover , Slovakia has signed the Minority Languages Charter and thus maintains the linguistic diversity of all minorities in Slovakia to a high degree .
( SK ) The Slovak Republic applies a high standard in relation to ethnic minorities and , at the same time , one of the most moderate national language laws in Europe .
Despite this , it is under permanent pressure from Hungarian Members who do not hesitate to employ lies and fabrications in order to influence European public opinion .
We have witnessed this at almost every session of the European Parliament since its expansion in 2004 .
Hungary is a country that has almost completely eliminated minorities in its own territory and is attempting a gross intervention in the affairs of the Slovak Republic .
This is totally unacceptable .
I believe that the European institutions will not charge into this affair like a bull in a china shop .
Slovakia will resolve problems relating to use of the national language by cultural means and in accordance with European traditions .
The implementing regulation for the amendment to the language law confirms the sensitive approach to all of the ethnic groups and nationalities living in Slovakia .
( PL ) Mr President , I am pleased that , as a Member from Lithuania , I can speak here in Polish , my mother tongue .
I think this privilege should be the norm not only in the European Parliament , but in all countries of the EU , because multiculturality and linguistic diversity are very important in the European hierarchy of values .
We should make every effort to ensure that national minorities , and especially indigenous minorities , do not feel any discrimination in the matters covered by today 's Commission statement .
Therefore , the Commission has before it the urgent task of resolving conflicts concerning the use of minority languages in all the countries of the EU , without exception .
The positive solutions found to these problems in Finland , Italy , Poland , Denmark , the Czech Republic and many other countries clearly facilitate this task .
We only need effective and , more importantly , immediate action of the Commission on this matter .
Mr President , it is good to hear of the need for diversity and multilingualism , but I want to highlight very briefly a situation in my own part of the United Kingdom .
The minority language of Ulster Scots is part of the cultural wealth of Northern Ireland and is recognised by the United Kingdom under the Council of Europe Charter for Regional and Minority Languages .
As a result of the St Andrews Agreement Act , the Northern Ireland Executive is charged with bringing forward a strategy for the Ulster Scots language and culture .
In preparing this strategy , the Culture Minister is taking into account the European Charter and other international instruments , including the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
He is also setting the strategy in the context of the promotion of a shared and better future for Northern Ireland based on equality , diversity and interdependence .
Unfortunately , Sinn Fein has used culture - especially language - as a weapon in its campaign against the state , and this has led to controversy and contention .
That is an abuse and misuse of language .
So we must hope that a shared and better future aspect of the strategy will address the legacy of that cultural war .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to highlight the efforts made by this House in support of minority and regional languages in terms of written communication between citizens and Parliament .
Citizens can write to Parliament and receive a response in these languages .
It is quite another thing , Mr President , for some people to want to use regional or minority languages or languages that have joint official status in some areas of the Member States when speaking in plenary sittings .
This desire is not viable in a Parliament that works on an entirely multilingual system in 23 languages , which uses up more than a third of our budget and occupies more than half of our staff .
There are such languages in the United Kingdom , Luxembourg , Estonia , Cyprus , Spain , Sweden , and Finland , and the list goes on .
This would mean , Mr President , that we would have to use 35 or 40 languages in plenary , which in financial and logistical terms , is simply unviable .
Therefore , Mr President , insisting on this might bring electoral benefits , but it certainly makes absolutely no sense and is entirely unrealistic .
It would only help to generate pointless frustration for many loyal citizens .
( HU ) Mr President , the Slovak national language law violates five basic rights contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights which comes into force on 1 December .

First of all , it discriminates on ethnic grounds by relegating the half a million-strong Hungarian community to second-class citizens and their mother tongue to a second-class language .
Secondly , it grossly interferes in people 's personal lives , as pointed out by Edit Bauer .
Thirdly , it is anti-democratic because it instils fear among citizens .
Fourthly , it contravenes two of the Council of Europe 's documents , which Slovakia accepted in the accession agreement .
Finally , Commissioner Orban has said that the EU supports bilingualism and multilingualism , while Slovakia has embarked on a path towards monolingualism and linguistic assimilation .
If the EU puts up with the violation of these five fundamental rights and does not speak out , it will not have any moral grounds for criticising China , Russia and other countries .
We cannot have double standards .
( ES ) Mr President , the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , adopted by the Council of Europe and 47 European States , including all the Member States of the European Union , establishes that regional and minority languages must be protected , because in some cases , they are at risk of disappearing .
I think that this attitude helps to maintain and develop the traditions , diversity and cultural wealth of the continent , which we need to preserve .
It also protects a fundamental right of the people who speak those languages , as the Commissioner said .
The Commissioner mentioned that the Member States must use every tool available to ensure that these languages are used , but we know that this is not the case .
Multilingualism is not guaranteed in all the Member States , nor is bilingualism when there are official languages , and the problem is that we do not feel that minority languages are part of the Union 's heritage , part of our heritage .
I would like to ask you , however , to reflect on the concept of a minority language , because there are languages in the Member States that are official in the European Parliament , but have fewer speakers and are less well known than some regional languages , which are therefore not official languages .
We are therefore violating the linguistic rights of 40 million Europeans , and protecting those rights is a question of principles , as the Commissioner himself said .
There are 700 000 Basques who speak Euskera , the oldest language in Europe , which is of unknown origin , and bringing Europe closer to the Basque people also means , among other things , making them feel that saying ' gabon ' is equally worthy of respect as saying ' buenas noches ' , ' good evening ' or ' bonsoir ' .
Mr President , as a Member of the European Parliament for Wales , I have a lot of sympathy for the many minority languages across Europe , particularly as my mother tongue is Welsh , one of the oldest European languages still in use .
Numerically , the situation of Hungarian speakers in Slovakia is very similar to that of Welsh speakers in Wales , in excess of half a million individuals .
This equates , however , to 20 % of the people in Wales but less than 2 % of the UK population .
After many hundreds of years of pushing and pulling between English- and Welsh-speakers in Wales and arguments very similar to those now between Slovak and Hungarian speakers today , a happy coexistence has been achieved in Wales .
The revival of the Welsh language over the past 15 years since devolution has been meteoric .
The positive attitude to the language has had huge cultural benefits .
In Wales , the key has been to take a pragmatic approach .
We should aim for people to be able to speak in whatever language they feel most comfortable in , but without causing undue burden or cost .
For example , I intend to finish my comments in Welsh although I would not want to incur the cost to taxpayers of simultaneous translation here in Parliament for the benefit of just two Welsh-speaking MEPs .
However , diversity should be celebrated .
( The speaker spoke in Welsh )
( SK ) I would like to remain consistently on the topic of our debate .
I will not talk about the law on the use of the national language in Slovakia because I firmly believe that this is a Slovak affair .
On 1 January 2010 , it will be 22 years since a very wise and widely-respected individual emphasised that respect for minorities and their culture is the foundation for building peace .
We must consistently uphold the right of minorities to retain and develop their culture .
Minorities have the right to use their own languages and this right must be set out in law .
Failure to do this would lead to the loss of a rich cultural heritage .
He spoke these words on the occasion of World Peace Day .
The cultural wealth of Europe lies in the nations that have survived through to the present day .
This is in contrast to the United States of America , where this wealth has dissolved into an indefinable mass .
A multitude of languages are used in Europe and the European Union therefore makes sense as the project of a community of nation states .
We have to talk about rules on the use of minority languages because rules are necessary , but we must not strip Europe of this wealth .
The issue of minority language use in any state arises where there is an unwillingness to communicate or where there are other issues in the background .
Minorities should feel good in the country where they live and I will therefore always consistently defend any minority language , but always as the language of a minority .
I believe this is also the view of the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to express my deep concern over the attitude of the Spanish Government , which does not allow the Catalan language to be used in this Parliament .
The Catalan language was banned and persecuted during the Franco dictatorship ; now Spanish democracy is demonstrating its low quality by not permitting the official use of Catalan in this Parliament .
All languages are equal , the same way that all human beings are equal .
Europe is an exquisite model of good practice which affords smaller official languages the possibility of being treated on an equal footing .
Ten million people speak Catalan , and this language is not allowed to be spoken in this House .
If Catalan were recognised and authorised to be spoken in Parliament , this would decisively help to improve the situation of the Catalan language in Spain , reinforcing our claim to break the centuries-old unilingualism of the Spanish Parliament .
As a Catalan Member of the European Parliament , who now knows that that represents a clear and significant demand on the part of the Catalan people , I ask for the special attention of the European Commission to normalise the Catalan language in this House .

( BG ) Mr Orban , more than 60 000 Bulgarian citizens watch the news in Turkish , their mother tongue , on Bulgarian national television .
This news programme in Turkish lasting just five minutes has been broadcast by the largest public media organisation in Bulgaria since 2001 when the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities was ratified .
This is how Bulgaria currently considers that it complies with the European Union 's fundamental principle on the protection of minorities ' rights .
However , I wish to draw your attention to the poll conducted on 5 November with the aim of ending the news broadcast in Turkish .
This is a result of provocation and nationalist pressure .
Removing this programme will deprive Bulgaria 's largest minority of the right to information in their mother tongue .
This would signify intolerance and discrimination , which will upset the traditionally good coexistence between ethnic groups in Bulgaria , something often held up as a model to the Balkans .
This is why I am insisting , Commissioner , on a response as to how the Commission monitors whether the public media are respecting the right of minorities to communicate freely in their mother tongue and hence participate fully in the social and political life of their homeland .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor .
I would like to draw your attention to a measure initiated by the European Union - in the right direction .
We are talking about a minority - deaf people - whose mother tongue is sign language and has been recognised in 10 European Union Member States , finally including my own country , Hungary .
This law states that not only is sign language our mother tongue , but that our cultural minority rights are protected by it .
I also want to bring to your attention that Slovakia actually leads the way on this issue because the use of Slovak sign language was recognised back in 1995 .
So , what about Hungarians ?
It is my duty to highlight the fact that double standards cannot be applied in the European Union .
If a Slovak deaf person can use sign language , let Slovak citizens use their own mother tongue .
( SK ) I am very disappointed that , despite the mounting social problems in EU Member States affecting every single citizen regardless of nationality , questions relating to the duel between Slovak and Hungarian Members are always being raised in plenary sessions in this institution , as is the case today at 10 minutes to midnight .
Neither the language law nor any of the previous topics raised here by the Hungarian Members have any detrimental effect on members of ethnic minorities .
Mr President , the rights of ethnic minorities in Slovakia and of all the other minorities are fully protected and are of an exceptionally high standard .
We extend the hand of friendship to our friends from Hungary , we want to have good neighbourly relations and it troubles us greatly that the institution of the European Parliament is repeatedly being misused for manifestations of hatred against the Slovak Republic .
( DE ) Mr President , I have read the new Slovak law from beginning to end .
Mr Swoboda is right - amongst the people , there is usually good cooperation in day-to-day life , including in southern Slovakia .
For this reason , too , the new Law on the state language is superfluous , as the Slovak language is not under threat in Slovakia .
Unfortunately , it discriminates against local citizens in parts , since Czech is often better placed than Hungarian .
Why does it not , at the very least , provide for equal treatment for Czech and Hungarian ?
This amendment of the law can only be explained by the peculiar composition of the current coalition government in Slovakia , where Comrade Fico is attempting to snatch away the votes of the nationalist SNS and the populist HZDS by invoking supposed Hungarian dangers .
I am pleased to report that this type of behaviour was not possible during the coalition government led by Mikuláš Dzurinda .
In those days , three member parties of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , including the minority party , worked well together and not against each other - and that , in actual fact , should be the aim .
( HU ) I also agree with those who have said that people in Slovakia have been living alongside each other very happily until somehow this tense situation arose which is upsetting the balance and making coexistence more difficult .
Allow me to mention a few points about Slovakia in connection with the language law , which have not been said yet .
I do not want to repeat those points which have been made .
On the one hand , Slovakia defines itself as a nation state , when we know - as was already discussed today - that a Hungarian community amounting to roughly 10 % of the country 's population lives in Slovakia , as do other minorities as well .
The language law creates an imbalance .
The problem with it is not only that it protects the Slovak language and not those minority languages which it otherwise should be protecting , as a huge number of positive examples in Europe can demonstrate .
Rather , it is also not a coherent , uniform law protecting minorities , which we have said many times is what would be needed to prevent this balance from being upset .
One excellent feature of today 's debate , which was very important , was that we heard about many positive examples .
I sincerely hope that this is the direction which Slovakia , too , will move in from this point on .
( HU ) Békesség Istentől !
Pace vouǎ !
Boží pokoj s Vami !
Peace to you from God !
In our multilingual Europe I wanted to wish you peace in Hungarian , Romanian , Slovak and English .
I was able to do this in the European Parliament , but under Slovak legislation , this would have been risky without violating the national language law .
In one EU Member State , people can have a fine imposed on them for speaking languages other than the official language , which includes using one of Europe 's official languages , Hungarian .
This is a downright scandal and disgrace .
Take a look at the map of Slovakia I have here in front of me .
Thanks to the Schengen Agreement , the border dividing Slovakia from Hungary has been dismantled , just like the Iron Curtain .
However , the post-Communist chauvinist Slovak Government is now putting up new walls between people , linguistic barriers .
We would like to thank President Jerzy Buzek for his mission to Slovakia aimed at resolving the issue .
On this matter of public interest , the European Parliament should not adopt an ill-informed , convenient stance of non-intervention , but should enforce its own regulations and requirements which it supports in the area of human , minority and linguistic rights .
( SK ) I originally wanted to respond to Mr Bokros but you did not give me the floor .
I wanted to say that I accept that the Slovak Parliament does not translate all laws into minority languages , of which there are 11 by the way and not just one , and that as far as the size of the Hungarian minority is concerned , with its half a million members , we also have a Roma minority of half a million and they do not complain .
I would like to ask whether the Hungarian Parliament translates all laws into minority languages and whether there are any translations into the Slovak language ?
However , I very much appreciate the fact that you took the opportunity to speak in Slovak .
Mr Tőkés , Slovakia is building bridges - and it troubles me greatly that you always mention this - but bridges must also be built from the other side , from Hungary .
It troubles me greatly that , as a new Member of the European Parliament , I must constantly respond to questions concerning Slovak-Hungarian relations and I cannot address the issues that really interest me .
I would hereby like to thank the Commissioner , as I am a member of the Committee on Culture and Education .
Your work is truly excellent and it is excellent that we are able to use 23 European languages , one of which is Slovak .
( HU ) I read in the Slovak press what Mr Gallagher already said .
I would therefore say it in the Slovak press if I wanted to highlight the fact that the conflict currently going on cannot be presented as either a conflict between two states or a conflict between two peoples .
There are problems with a certain law .
I am happy to support Mr Swoboda 's claim that we are moving in a peaceful , calm direction , looking for a way out .
If only he had not said that this law did not violate fundamental rights .
For instance , when a mother who is holding her 4-year-old child 's hand at the hospital in a Slovak town is told off for comforting her child in Hungarian , who is frightened of the procedure the doctor is going to perform , we cannot say that this does not violate their rights .
We cannot say either that this does not feature in the law .
The problem lies exactly in the law 's presentation .
The law actually bans those exchanges in hospitals where the Hungarian language is under-represented .
I therefore think that there are very serious problems with this .
Slovakia has reaped what it has sown as a result of an extremist party coming to power .
On the other hand , the Hungarians have not wiped out their minorities , but have kept them separate .
( SK ) I must protest against the previous speaker .
These are absolute lies , falsehoods and untruths .
I would like to ask you finally to study the language law , because it does not look like your own language law .
We have another , different language law in Slovakia and we are talking here about two different laws .
I come from Košíce , which is a cosmopolitan city of 250 000 inhabitants , including substantial numbers of Hungarians , Czechs , Ruthenes , Ukrainians , Roma and , of course , Slovaks .
Four years ago , voters decided that in the Košíce region , the coalition between us - the social democrats - and the representatives of the Hungarian minority was working very successfully .
I would like to state as a regional representative that our cooperation is exemplary .
Hungarians and Slovaks live in peace in our area and it does not occur to anyone to malign or attack one another on grounds of nationality .
In people 's everyday lives , there are no disputes and there is no nationality problem in mixed areas .
I say this in all seriousness .
If senior politicians in certain parties had not provoked this issue for their own reasons , the Hungarian ethnic minority issue would not have been raised in the European Parliament , because it does not exist .
( HU ) Francesco Capotorti .
When the UN was working on preparing the convention which later became known as the ' Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide ' , linguistic and cultural genocide was discussed along with physical genocide as a serious crime against humanity .
Linguistic genocide was defined - Article 3 ( 1 ) - in 1948 as the ban on a group being able to use its language in everyday contact or at school , or on books being published and publications being distributed in the group 's language .
At the moment , Slovakia is , unfortunately , not the only such country in the European Union , but is the most typical example of linguistic genocide , in other words , linguicide being perpetrated within an EU country .
This is nothing to be pleased about because Romania , Greece and France , too , can be listed alongside Slovakia in this regard . Thank you .
I would like to begin by focusing on the essence of the multilingualism policy which we have wanted to promote during this period .
On the one hand , we have wanted to be able to guarantee respect for and celebrate every language spoken in the European Union , whether we are talking about national , regional or minority languages , or languages spoken by citizens who have come from other continents .
On the other hand , we have wanted to ensure that this celebration of diversity achieves the common aim which we all want , namely , to preserve and consolidate the unity of the European Union , in other words , our unity .
We are talking about , if you like , the most direct application of the principle of ' unity in diversity ' .
In my speech , I cannot help either but take heed of the remarks made by Mr Swoboda to the effect that through what we are doing , we must look for those elements that unite us rather than divide us .
We must have respect for everyone , but we must also have the wisdom to find the ways to understand each other , communicate and be able to interact with each other .
This is precisely the reason why multilingualism has played and does play an extremely important role in strengthening intercultural dialogue .
We need to have dialogue and we cannot achieve this without languages .
I have had the opportunity to visit all the Member States .
I have also had the opportunity to travel in areas and regions where , regrettably , there are still discussions and disputes going on and , unfortunately , sometimes languages are held hostage to certain political interests which are not inspired by the EU 's unity .
I have also said loud and clear : we must find solutions enabling us to communicate and interact .
This is the reason why , as I have already said , even in situations where things seem more difficult to accept , the fact of learning and speaking the languages of the communities which we live alongside offers us important solutions in terms of understanding one another .
Therefore , in situations of this kind , and there have been countless cases , I believe that we can progress in terms of mutual understanding .
For example , the ability to speak the language of the area where representatives of national minorities are in the majority , in other words , the ability to speak the language of these minorities , along with the ability of the national minorities to speak the language of the national state , builds bridges and establishes points of understanding which can help us .
I want to make a few comments about the efforts we are making to be able to offer support to all languages spoken in the European Union .
We fund a large number of projects linked not only to official languages but to numerous regional and minority languages as well .
There are countless specific examples where the European Commission has supported , on the one hand , networks of organisations intended to promote regional and minority languages , as well as the less widely spoken languages in the European Union in general .
However , we also fund projects linked to particular minority and regional languages .
There are also specific examples of the way in which we support these languages .
As I have said and wish to repeat , the strategy on multilingualism adopted in 2008 is aimed at all the languages spoken in the European Union .
We have no barriers .
We consider each of these languages as an asset to the European Union and as part , if you like , of the cultural heritage which we currently have in the European Union .
I would also like to say a few words about the amendments made to the legislation on the use of Slovak in Slovakia , of course .
We are pleased that talks are going on at the moment between the Hungarian and Slovak prime ministers about the options enabling them to find common solutions based on mutual understanding .
From a Community perspective , I want to stress that , given the extremely wide scope of application of this law , we are currently unable to evaluate all the possible implications of its enforcement .
This is exactly why the implementation of this legislation is crucial , particularly the manner in which it is implemented .
On this point , I want to emphasise that the European Commission will carry out a very thorough analysis where we will examine in detail the way in which the legislation is going to be implemented .
I would like to end by emphasising once again that we are endeavouring , within the constraints of the relatively limited powers that we have , to support all the languages used in the European Union , whether they be official , regional or minority , such as Welsh , where we have specific examples of the way in which we are supporting this language , or Catalan , where , for example , the European Commission has tried to open up to or draw the attention of people using this language .
For instance , we have extremely detailed websites and information in Catalan about the Community 's policies .
The same applies to Basque and numerous other languages .
I want to show that these efforts are enabling us to demonstrate the specific way in which we want to support this policy , which I consider as being an important European Union policy , one which is actually at the foundation of creating the European Union .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I welcome the positive attitude of the European Commission and acknowledge that progress has been made with regard to the recognition of minority languages .
However , much remains to be done if we are to place minority languages on an equal level with the prominent languages within the EU .
Currently , Irish is only interpreted into English in the plenary session and I have had to stop mid one minute speech ( while speaking in Irish ) and revert to English due to a lack of translation facilities .
Adequate training for Irish translators is currently only available in National University of Ireland , Galway ( NUIG ) and the professional bar organisations in Ireland , while this outlines progress I am calling on the Commission to provide further funding to establish other recognised Irish translation courses - so that an adequate number of Irish interpreters will be available in order to enable the European institutions to offer a complete Irish translation service as outlined in Rule 146 in the Parliament 's Rules of Procedures .
As you said ' we cannot consolidate our inter-cultural dialogue without multilingualism ' and multilingualism cannot arise without adequate training facilities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Hungarian from Slovakia , I declare that the Slovak language law is bad .
It is not bad because it violates Europe 's system of values but because it violently interferes in the right of several hundred thousand free European citizens to use their mother tongue and restricts the free exercising of this right in an unacceptable manner .
The fear of punishment and the language law 's vague wording result in a situation where citizens do not even dare to use their mother tongue in places where it is permitted .
On the other hand , the use of two languages is made compulsory even when it is entirely unjustified .
The Slovak Government , which is also adopting nationalist ideals , justified the language law by saying that it apparently had to create some balance in the regions of southern Slovakia between the use of Slovak and Hungarian .
As has been said , this is intended to mean that Slovaks living in a district inhabited by Hungarians are entitled to receive any official information in this language .
However , this only applies the other way round if the proportion of the minority is at least 20 % .
What a fine balance !
To think that all this is going on in Europe in the 21st century .
Minorities add value to a nation as long as they can preserve their cultural values .
This is why it is particularly important to preserve minorities ' cultures .
From this point of view , I believe that Romania , the Member State which I represent , has one of the most modern sets of laws protecting minorities .
In Romania , minorities can address courts in their mother tongue .
They have schools where instruction is given in their mother tongues .
All 19 of Romania 's minorities are represented in Parliament .
In areas where minorities account for 20 % of the population , the local authorities must also produce documents in the minorities ' language .
All decisions are issued in Romanian as well as in the language of the minorities in that region .
I believe that Romanian legislation in this area can be held up as a model of good practice and as a benchmark whenever referring to minorities ' rights and the use of their languages .
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 00.10 )
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Passenger compensation in the event of airline bankruptcy ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
' made in ' ( origin marking ) ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Preparation of the European Council to be held on 10 and 11 December 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparation of the European Council to be held on 10 and 11 December 2009 .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , honourable Members , it is wonderful to have this opportunity to have this debate with you ahead of the next meeting of the European Council .
It will , of course , be the second ordinary meeting held during the Swedish Presidency and it will also be the last time that it is led by a rotating presidency .
As you know , the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force on 1 December , but in accordance with the declaration adopted in the European Council in December 2008 , the rotating Presidency will continue to preside over the European Council until the Presidency ends at the end of the year .
All the Member States have now ratified the treaty and deposited their instruments of ratification in Rome .
I am therefore delighted to be able to confirm that the Treaty of Lisbon will indeed enter into force on 1 December .
The work involved in getting to this point was long and strenuous , as Parliament is well aware .
The new treaty will change the way the EU works in several respects .
As a result of the treaty , we will have better opportunities to get to grips with the important issues that the EU is facing and we can do this in a more democratic , transparent and efficient manner .
It also brings with it many important reforms that affect you here in Parliament .
At the European Council 's extra meeting last week , the Heads of State or Government agreed to appoint Herman van Rompuy as President of the European Council .
He will lead the European Council 's work and take it forward from 1 January .
Agreement was also reached , following approval from the Commission President , on the appointment of Catherine Ashton as the new High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
In line with the treaty , Mrs Ashton will take up all of her roles on 1 December , including that of Vice-President of the Commission .
Just as the European Parliament adopts a position on all Members , you will , of course , also be holding a hearing with Mrs Ashton .
I understand that she will shortly be presenting herself to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and answering questions .
The European Council also reached agreement on the appointment of Pierre de Boissieu as Secretary-General of the Council Secretariat .
The work in preparation for the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has continued as detailed by the Presidency in its status report to the European Council in October .
On 1 December , a number of decisions will be taken in order to put the Treaty of Lisbon fully in place , for example , with regard to revised rules of procedure for the Council and rules of procedure for the European Council .
At the European Council meeting in December , we will present a new report summarising the status of the issues that we have dealt with in connection with the implementation and practical application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The European External Action Service will be included among these issues .
The report will also contain a road map pointing the way forward for the work in this area .
At the European Council meeting in December , the focus will primarily be on economic and financial issues .
The effects of the crisis will be felt for a long time to come - particularly on the labour market .
However , it is also important for us to take a long-term view and to meet important challenges in both the medium and the long term .
The EU , the Member States and Europe 's central banks have taken numerous measures , for example , guarantee programmes for banks and the European Economic Recovery Plan .
These measures have made a major contribution to increasing financial stability and reducing the effects of the crisis on growth and employment .
The economic prospects look brighter , but there are still major risks .
It is therefore not yet time to withdraw the support measures that have been taken .
However , within the Council we have initiated a discussion about how these special crisis measures should be phased out and when this can start .
The European Council will review the work that the Council has done with regard to exit strategies .
We will also monitor the EU 's Economic Recovery Plan .
With regard to the financial markets , it is gratifying that the situation on the financial market has improved considerably .
The financial sector 's need for support measures has diminished .
We therefore need to formulate strategies for how the measures can be phased out in a coordinated way .
However , it is important to emphasise that it is still too early to begin a general phasing out of the support measures in the financial area .
The Swedish Presidency is seeking agreement on a number of guiding principles with regard to the timing , coordination and sequencing of the phasing out of the support measures .
I will now turn to financial supervision .
There is agreement that increased and improved cooperation in relation to financial supervision within the EU is necessary , particularly in view of the experience we have had during the financial crisis .
The proposal for the structure and focus of the work in the Systemic Risk Council was adopted by the EU 's finance ministers at the Ecofin meeting on 20 October .
The Presidency then received the mandate to initiate negotiations with the European Parliament , which we have done .
As regards the three ' micro-authorities ' , the Presidency 's aim is to arrive at a general approach for these authorities and hence for the entire supervisory package at the next Ecofin meeting on 2 December so that we can report back to the Council in December .
The value of having a structure in place is significant for the financial services industry , for the world outside Europe and for our citizens .
The package will include a requirement for the plan to be reviewed in three years .
We will then be able to rectify any shortcomings that stand out as functioning less well or as being less effective .
The EU 's current strategy for jobs and growth , the Lisbon strategy , expires next year .
It is therefore imperative that the EU should agree on a new strategy that is able to promote a vision for long-term growth and prosperity .
This will be one of the most important issues over the next few months and one of the priority issues for the forthcoming Spanish Presidency .
The economic and financial crisis has created pressure for immediate action to be taken to minimise the impact on growth and the labour market .
At the same time , structural weaknesses and the long-term challenges for our economies have become more apparent .
Maintaining and strengthening Europe 's competitiveness on the global market , combating climate change and dealing with the challenges as a consequence of an ageing population are demanding tasks for the European Union and its Member States in the medium and long term .
These require common and coordinated solutions , a common vision and a strengthened European reform agenda for the next ten years .
The vision is about turning challenges into opportunities .
It is about fully realising the potential of the internal market and exploiting the advantages of foreign trade and openness .
It is about recognising the opportunities involved in turning Europe into an eco-efficient or climate-smart economy and creating a labour market with high levels of employment , sustainable public finances and social cohesion .
During the Swedish Presidency , a second follow-up assessment of the EU 's sustainability strategy is being carried out .
Progress has been made in many areas .
At the same time , there are several areas where unsustainable trends have been identified .
These areas include the rapid increase in demand for natural resources , the diminishing of biological diversity , the increase in energy consumption by the transport sector and the persistence of global poverty .
We have raised the question of how we can monitor and follow up the strategy in a better and more effective way , including how we can make use of the benefits of coordination resulting from the interaction with other EU strategies , the Lisbon strategy , for example .
The Integrated Maritime Policy will also be discussed at the European Council meeting .
The Commission has recently submitted its progress report .
The European Council will examine the report and give its opinion of the future direction of this important cross-sectoral work .
In this regard , I would like to emphasise our view of sustainable economic growth and eco-efficient work and innovation .
I will now turn to another very important item at the European Council meeting , namely the adoption of a new five-year work programme in the area of freedom , security and justice .
The Stockholm Programme is intended to supersede the Hague Programme that is currently in force and which was adopted in 2004 .
The vision of the Stockholm Programme is for a safer and more open Europe where the rights of individuals are protected .
The programme is a result of intensive contact and discussions in the Council and with the European Parliament .
There have also been valuable contributions from national parliaments , civil society , EU bodies and various agencies and authorities .
My Swedish colleagues , the Minister for Justice , Beatrice Ask , and the Minister for Migration , Tobias Billström , were here yesterday and presented the Stockholm Programme in a very long debate .
Therefore , I will not repeat what they said , but I would like to take the opportunity to emphasise that the Stockholm Programme focuses on specific measures that bring added value to the everyday lives of citizens .
It includes cooperation outside the EU .
A more secure and more open Europe requires genuine partnership with our partner countries .
Future work in this area should also be based on a balance between measures aimed at creating a safe and secure Europe and measures aimed at protecting the rights of individuals .
The ambitious work that has been carried out and our future method of working with increased codecision for Parliament should help to provide us with an action plan that is better able to deal with these major challenges .
With regard to climate change , while the European Council meeting is going on , the climate negotiations will , of course , also be taking place in Copenhagen .
These issues are important for Europe and for the future of our entire planet .
Two weeks ago , Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt stood in Parliament in Brussels and presented the outcome of the European Council meeting in October , including the most important elements of the EU 's position ahead of the Copenhagen conference .
It is now imperative that we continue to make it clear to our partners around the world how highly we regard this and that we provide momentum to drive the negotiations forward .
The Swedish Presidency will put all of its energy into this work .
Next month , the European Council will assess the situation in the negotiations that will be going on simultaneously in order to take the decisions that are necessary to enable us to have a successful outcome in Copenhagen .
As usual , a number of foreign policy issues may also arise at the European Council meeting , but it is a little too early to say what these might be .
The top priorities of the Swedish Presidency have been to respond to the demands of climate change and to ensure that the EU retains its leading position ahead of the negotiations in Copenhagen while , at the same time , we are responsible for continuing to address the economic and financial crisis .
These issues will have top priority at the final summit .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , we have , on many occasions , discussed the great opportunities offered by the Lisbon Treaty for the European Union , so let me express once again my satisfaction that when we meet each other next time , we will do so with the Lisbon Treaty already in force .
And , with the treaty in force , it is time to move even more decisively beyond institutional discussions towards policies and results for citizens .
The appointments made last week , naming Herman Van Rompuy as President of the Council and Catherine Ashton as High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , are the first steps towards the full implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
I know that both President Van Rompuy and High Representative Vice-President Baroness Ashton are eager to start putting the Lisbon Treaty to work .
The designation of Herman Van Rompuy was , by consensus , a decision of the Heads of State or Government .
It is a decision I welcome and personally support very much .
Herman Van Rompuy has earned huge respect as Prime Minister of Belgium .
He brings a combination of the instinctive Europeanism of Belgium - a founding member of our Union , a country that has always been at the forefront of this European project - and his own skills as consensus builder : exactly the two most precious qualities to have as President of the European Council .
I look forward to working in tandem with him and to joining him here in the plenary debates on the European Council .
It is essential that , while every institution has to work within the respect of its own competences and that of other institutions , we all work together for the common European good .
I am extremely proud and happy that Catherine Ashton has been designated as the first Vice-President / High Representative .
It is an appointment that I supported and approved during the European Council , as it is necessary according to the treaties .
We all know her well as someone who has both the political skill and the sense of direction to take on the demanding task of the first High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission .
I can assure you , from my own experience with her as a Member of the Commission , of her deep commitment to the European project .
As I said yesterday , all the nominations for the Commission have now been made .
I am particularly happy that within one week , it was possible to triple the nominations of women from three to nine .
So the next Commission will have nine female Members , one more than the current Commission , and once again I want to thank all of you who have supported me in this difficult task of getting at least a reasonable - not an ideal , but a reasonable - number of women for the next Commission .
I will now move on to the portfolio allocations .
It is my privilege to assure this House that I will do so in the full respect of the priorities defined in the political guidelines that I presented to you and that through your vote were endorsed by Parliament , and I will also respect all the commitments I made to Parliament on that occasion .
Then Parliament can hold substantive hearings and vote on the next college in January .
Next month , the European Council gives us the first significant opportunity to show that we are now focused on policy substance , to show that it will make a difference .
I would like to concentrate very briefly on three key dossiers which will be under the spotlight .
First , climate change .
A European Council a week before the conclusion of the Copenhagen Summit is certainly well timed .
The European Union has shown itself the pioneer of action on climate change .
We have been the first to show that cap and trade can work .
We have been the first to put a binding , tough target for reduced emissions on the table .
We have led the way in defining how the developing world can make a real contribution to financing the costs of climate change in developing countries .
But , as the preparation of the Copenhagen conference draws to its close , the pressure grows .
We need to stay united and to keep focused on our goal of cutting global emissions and getting the necessary finance on the table ; that is our task .
We have to say clearly that it cannot only be a task for Europe : we need others , namely the major economies , also to contribute to ambitious goals .
What should the key messages from the European Council be ?
First , that we want to see an ambitious and meaningful agreement in Copenhagen that , first and foremost , enshrines the 2 ° C objective . This is essential .
Sometimes we see politicians and diplomats negotiating .
They can negotiate - we can negotiate - with each other , but we cannot negotiate with science .
We cannot negotiate against the science of nature .
We cannot negotiate against the scientific advice , and this is the minimum : to reach an agreement compatible with the 2 ° C objective . So we must set real and effective emission reduction targets for developed countries , as well as substantive actions from developing countries , especially the fast-growing , emerging economies .
It must also be comprehensive , covering the full range of issues in the Bali road map .
Second , even if at Copenhagen it will not unfortunately be possible to finalise a new treaty , it must bring an operational agreement based on real commitments on all sides , to which all the major players contribute and which is endorsed at the highest political level .
We need a clear , simple political text that shows that we are moving from talking about tackling climate change to doing something about it .
And it should be explicit that this will be turned into a fully fledged treaty as soon as possible .
The agreement should be precise .
That means specific individual numbers on reduction of emissions and a detailed finance package to help developing countries both to develop mitigation programmes and to adapt to climate change .
In particular , fast start funding is going to be very important .
Finally , I feel the leaders ' involvement is going to be central as these are difficult decisions that need to be made at highest levels of government .
I am pleased to hear that , following Prime Minister Rasmussen 's invitation , already at least 65 or so Heads of State or Government are planning to attend Copenhagen .
I will attend myself .
Another key area is the Stockholm Programme in the area of justice , liberty and security .
People want to live in a European Union that is prosperous and peaceful , where their rights are respected and their security protected .
They want to be able to travel freely and to move temporarily or permanently to another European country in order to study , to work , to found a family , to set up a business or to retire .
We have come a long way over the last 10 years .
The removal of controls at internal borders in the Schengen area allows more than 400 million citizens of 25 countries to travel without border control from the Iberian Peninsula to the Baltic States , from Greece to Finland .
Now the Lisbon Treaty gives us a new opportunity to move ahead .
We all know that freedom , security and justice will see some of the most significant changes from the treaty .
It brings this area of policy fully within the scope of our normal procedures .
It clarifies what action can be taken and , in particular , it extends the democratic framework for these policies by the full involvement of your Parliament .
The Stockholm Programme , which is largely based on Commission input and proposals , will be a key lever to make this happen .
It should set the scene for a comprehensive , effective programme of action which brings real change , real benefit for our citizens .
The programme as it emerges from the European Council needs to lay out the guiding priorities for justice and home affairs in the years to come and to show how they will be put into practice .
More effective respect for fundamental rights ; better access to the courts ; more determined action against organised crime , human trafficking and terrorism ; effective management of migration - these are all areas where the Stockholm Programme should set out a series of concrete steps forward .
They also require a strong approach with our third-country partners , which I am determined to pursue as we work together to maximise our global interests .
Finally , we must continue to keep the focus on tackling the economic crisis .
European Union action has made a major contribution over the last year .
Now we must keep the strength of purpose and sense of focus .
We must keep a close watch on our recovery measures , especially with unemployment still rising .
Our top priority must remain keeping people in jobs and helping those who have lost their jobs to get back into work .
We must also start to shape a post-crisis agenda to exploit new sources of growth and find new job opportunities .
The agenda we have sketched out in the 2020 strategy , the consultation paper that the Commission circulated yesterday .
I very much look forward to hearing the thoughts of Parliament and including your views in the final document .
The European Council will also face a test of ambition with progress on the financial supervision package .
I know this goal is shared by this Parliament , and I urge you to work with the Council to allow final adoption by mid-2010 , so that effective new authorities can be in place by the end of 2010 .
To conclude , climate change , freedom , security and justice , and the response to the economic and financial crisis - these are three areas which impact on citizens every day of their lives and three areas where the European Council can show that the Lisbon Treaty has indeed opened a new chapter in the history of the European project .
In order to obtain meaningful results , we must work in partnership - in partnership between the Commission and Parliament , to which I am grateful for consistent support for the policy ambitions put forward by the Commission in these areas ; in partnership with the Swedish Presidency of the Council , which I really congratulate for the hard work done ; and in partnership with our Danish friends preparing the Copenhagen conference .
Let us make the most out of what lies ahead .
Let us work together for the common European good .
The Commission and I myself are ready to take up the challenge .
I am sure this Parliament , with reinforced powers under the new treaty , will also show its sense of responsibility and its commitment to the Europe of citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here we are at last .
The Heads of State or Government have chosen Herman Van Rompuy as the first President of the European Council and Catherine Ashton as High Representative .
Thank you to Fredrik Reinfeldt , the last Prime Minister to hold the rotating Presidency of the European Council .
Thank you for having brought about a consensus on the two figures who will bear the heavy burden of carrying out the new functions created by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today , in this Chamber , I would like to praise the initial statements of President Van Rompuy for whom , I quote , ' the image of the Council will be shaped by its results ' and who advocates a step-by-step approach .
It is through this method - what I would describe as the ' Jean Monnet ' method , a way of acting effectively but without any political posturing - that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is finding its bearings .
It is this method that has taken us from yesterday 's conflicts to today 's exchanges .
It is this method that has taken us from long waits at the borders of the Schengen area , from fluctuating exchange rates to a stable euro .
Indeed , thanks to this step-by-step integration of Europe , considerable progress has been made , and no one can deny that .
I would like to warn you , ladies and gentlemen , against the facile criticisms that we have heard in recent days .
I am thinking in particular about those who , just for the sake of making a witty remark , have discredited themselves through irresponsible statements .
Like everyone , the members of the PPE Group also nurture dreams , but the difference between us and others is that we are striving to turn those dreams into a reality .
We did it with the integration of Europe , we did it with reunification and we also did it with the Treaty of Lisbon which , despite its imperfections , will take us a little further in the right direction .
It is this , and not merely sensational and short-lived statements , that Europeans expect , ladies and gentlemen .
We are convinced that President Van Rompuy will get down to his task with the same determination and the same willpower that he showed in his own country , qualities crowned with success and recognised by everyone .
President Van Rompuy has the full backing of the PPE Group , and I offer him our support in a task that will undoubtedly be very difficult .
Indeed , I expect the Council to evolve .
I expect it to evolve into a more transparent institution and to work even more closely with Parliament and the Commission .
I expect ministers to stop proclaiming national victory against their partners when they have only just got back from Brussels and to stop blaming Europe for everything that goes wrong .
Finally , I expect the Council to stop changing its position depending on who its President is .
I , along with the PPE Group , expect all this from the Council 's first permanent presidency .
Mrs Malmström , this does not apply to you since you have already been appointed commissioner by your country .
You therefore no longer have any choice ; you have to talk about Europe .
On behalf of the PPE Group , I also congratulate Catherine Ashton , the new High Representative and Vice-President of the ' Barroso I ' European Commission .
We welcome her appointment and will listen closely to her answers to our questions at next January 's hearing of the commissioners .
It is at the end of this process that she will be fully invested with her duties as Vice-President of the ' Barroso II ' Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that the time of asking questions about individuals is behind us and that we can finally , with complete peace of mind , get down to the fundamental issues .
We know that two major topics will dominate the European Council in December .
The first is the recovery in growth , which must not take place without a recovery in employment .
In this respect , we are expecting concrete undertakings from the European Council .
The second topic is climate change .
Everyone knows that the Council will be sitting in the middle of the Copenhagen Summit , which ought not only to result in political objectives , but also in quantifiable commitments .
This is essential .
This first European Council held under the Treaty of Lisbon must enable Europe to play its full role .
I therefore hope that it will be able to use its influence and assert its positions with greater determination than in the past .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , both present and absent , in the last few days following the European Council meeting , we have talked a great deal about people and posts .
Once again , I would like to direct my remarks today at you , Mr Barroso .
It is important for us to discuss people and positions .
As far as the posts are concerned , our group had one clear priority .
We said that , as the second largest group in this House , we wanted the second position in the Commission , in other words , the High Representative who acts as Vice-President of the Commission , to come from our party .
This is because we believe that the Commission , which is not a neutral organisation , but a political body , should reflect the reality of this Parliament .
We have achieved what we have been fighting for .
I know that you have also been fighting for this and that is why I would like to offer you my sincere thanks , despite the criticism that you usually receive in this House from me .
This sends out a positive signal because it indicates that the claim that we , as social democrats , make in this House is taken seriously by you , because we still have some distance to go before the final vote on the Commission .
We also expect the structure of the portfolios that you will establish for the individual commissioners to reflect the content and the challenges which these people are faced with .
In my opinion , this is much more important than the debate about posts and people .
Of course , we are pleased that Cathy Ashton now holds the position of High Representative .
Enough has been said about Mr Van Rompuy and I agree with the previous speakers .
However , much more important than this is the question of which tasks these people will be responsible for carrying out .
I do not believe that the citizens of Europe have any serious interest in the way in which Mr Van Rompuy and Baroness Ashton were elected .
However , the question of how we can reduce unemployment , which is currently rising and not falling in Europe , is an important issue .
People are interested in the question of whether we can really still prevent climate change and whether Copenhagen will be a failure or a success .
Nevertheless , this is not enough .
In my opinion , we are not talking enough about climate change .
We are not having sufficient discussions about the fact that , for example , in overcoming climate change and investing in environmentally friendly technology in industry , there is huge potential for job creation , that green technology is a project for the future and that industrial policy and protecting the environment are not mutually exclusive , but can be combined with one another .
The ideas that you have presented here about the structure of the Commission are pointing in the right direction .
This is an issue which needs to be resolved in Copenhagen in just the same way as the global health policy , the question of whether Europe should show solidarity with a dying continent like Africa , combating aids and opening up resources for the future .
Can Europe 's energy security problems be solved peacefully ?
Or are we threatened by intensifying conflicts on Europe 's borders resulting from the purchase of gas , oil and other raw materials ?
This is a job for the High Representative of the European Union .
The question of bringing the financial markets under control is a primary objective of European policy , because it is truly scandalous that , in the middle of the phase when the taxpayers of Europe continue to be responsible for the follow-up costs of the crisis , the casino has opened again and the gamblers have once more started travelling around the world .
In this case , we do not need a debate about the allocation of posts , but clear rules for the financial markets in the European Union .
That is much more important .
( Applause )
This is why I am saying that , yes , Herman Van Rompuy and Cathy Ashton have been elected , but now they need to get on with their jobs and the Commission has to be set up .
Therefore , I would like finally to repeat my remarks to Mr Barroso .
We social democrats have discussed our ideas with you .
One of our requests has been fulfilled to our satisfaction , that is the position of the High Representative .
We assume that the environmental , social and financial policy structure of your Commission will correspond with what the social democrats are asking from you , preferably under the leadership of social democratic commissioners , and then all will be well .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I shall not go back to the nominations of last week .
Let me just say that there was good news and there was bad news .
The bad news was that it was not a Liberal who was in the President 's seat , but the good news was that it was a Belgian .
As the President of the Commission said , Belgium is , in fact , a country with an overall consensus , certainly about European matters and about the future of Europe .
So , Mr Barroso , what we hope now is that we have a new Commission as soon as possible .
I hope that there will be a large number of Liberal Commissioners in it -some people are saying there are too many , but for me 50 % would be good !
I think that nearly one third of Liberal Commissioners is a good figure .
Anyway , I am very pleased that , of the eight Liberal Commissioners who have been presented as candidates for the Commission , there are four women , so there is a gender balance in the Liberal presence in the Commission .
On priorities , I think that there are three main priorities for the next days and weeks .
First of all , Copenhagen .
We have to make a success of it .
I think there are two remaining questions : how to address the concerns of the developing world , and how to make a treaty that is legally binding , because that is the main question .
What the substance of the treaty will be is important , but more important in my view is the legally binding character of all this .
The second point is the Stockholm Programme .
For our group , the basic point here is the balance between security and freedom .
It is obvious that we have to protect our citizens against terrorism and organised crime , but maybe , after 9 / 11 , we have put too much focus on security and protection .
I think that the Stockholm Programme - and also the philosophy of your Presidency - has to rebalance that towards respect for fundamental rights and also more openness in society .
I think this is the big ambition and what the Stockholm Programme has to do .
The view of our group , the ALDE Group , is that it is more ambitious than the Tampere Programme and the Hague Programme , but with a more important focus on the fundamental rights of the people .
It is good to protect and to organise security , but you have to do it in a balanced way with respect for fundamental rights .
The third big task for the next days , as the President of the Commission said , is financial supervision .
Mr Barroso , I think that it is perhaps becoming more and more clear that in the end , a single European financial supervisor is what we need .
We need a good supervisory body for cross-border financial institutions that would link micro- and macro-supervision and perhaps link it as closely as possible to the European Central Bank - why not ? - and , naturally , also to what is happening in the Commission .
What is important now is that the Council does not downsize the proposals that are on the table .
That is my fear for the moment .
In Parliament , we are pushing for more ambitious proposals , but I think the temptation for the moment in the Council is in the opposite direction .
Therefore , it is absolutely necessary that there is a good understanding about this between the Commission and Parliament , which will involve saying to the Council : that is codecision procedure , so if you come with proposals and the Council comes with proposals which go down towards the Commission proposals , that is not going to work in the Parliament .
We are going in the opposite direction .
I think there is a majority here in Parliament in favour of going in the direction of a single supervisor .
That is what we need in the future , and I think it is an important message to give to you to give to the Presidency , because there will certainly be a huge discussion on 10 and 11 December when there is the next European Council .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , you will understand that , as the leader of a group in this House , I am , of course , pleased that we women have succeeded in making the women at the top of the European Union more visible .
However , it is important for us that women are not only taken into account in terms of numbers .
You can rely on us to help you ensure that these women have influential positions within the Commission .
We do not want mere token gestures .
There has been a lot of publicity about the people in the top jobs , Herman Van Rompuy und Baroness Ashton .
The Members of this House are more familiar with Baroness Ashton than they are with Herman Van Rompuy .
We will have the opportunity to get to know them even better in the hearings .
I recommend that you suggest to Herman Van Rompuy that he comes to meet the groups in this House , so that we can find out more about him .
Everyone is saying that the Belgians are very proud of him .
Why does he not enter into a voluntary debate with the groups in this House , so that we can get to know one another better at the beginning of his period of office ?
That was my look back at last week .
The next summit will soon be upon us .
Mr Schulz , I do not think that we are talking too little about Copenhagen .
We are drawing too few logical conclusions from our discussions .
Parliament will be voting this week on a resolution which includes everything that would be right for Copenhagen , if you believe the United Nations and the scientists .
People in Europe have increasingly backed away from these recommendations over the course of time .
My analysis of the central problem behind this is that climate protection is regarded as a burden and that the opportunities presented by a consistent climate policy are not recognised .
Another agenda item for the next summit is the Lisbon Strategy .
One of the long-term tasks of this strategy has been to promote sustainable development , but we have not been able to achieve this .
The different pillars of the Lisbon Strategy have always been given different levels of importance .
The environment , social justice and sustainability have always been marginalised in favour of older and , in my opinion , outdated priorities relating to industrial , economic and even research policy .
If you intend to decide at the next summit that we should adopt the revised Lisbon Strategy in the spring , we do not have time to analyse the weaknesses of the Lisbon Strategy , which , as I see it , has failed .
Why did we get into such a disastrous economic crisis ?
Why do we have so many social and labour market problems in the European Union ?
We do not believe it is a good idea to prepare the Lisbon Strategy and to review it without careful reflection , without self-criticism and without a genuine consultation process , such as the one called for by the trade unions and the Social Platform , because the Lisbon Strategy is very important for all of us and for the perspective of the European Union .
Finally , I would like to look at the Stockholm Programme .
Like many of these large programmes , it sounds like a good thing , and this is what is constantly being said about it and what people generally seem to be thinking .
However , my group has the impression that there is an imbalance between freedom and security .
We do not agree with this development and we will be highlighting this using the example of SWIFT .
It was a serious mistake not to put SWIFT on the agenda .
Mr Barroso , you are attempting to bypass Parliament with this provisional SWIFT agreement , while disregarding the concerns about data protection .
This is an indication of the fact that freedom and security are currently out of balance .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all may I wish Mr Van Rompuy and Baroness Ashton well in their new roles , and I hope they are able to establish templates for their posts which will endure .
If the European Council is to have a semi-permanent president , it should be someone who takes a low-key but practical approach to building a consensus among the Member States where this is possible and desirable .
If we are to have a reinforced High Representative for Foreign Affairs , the main task should be working closely with Member States in coordinating common policies where they have shared objectives .
These appointments should be an opportunity to put a stop , once and for all , to the nightmare vision of an ever more centralised and bureaucratic European foreign and security policy , in favour of one that is based on willing cooperation amongst our Member States .
The appointment of Baroness Ashton , in particular , as a currently serving Commissioner must have been a source of particular happiness for President Barroso , though this must not afford an opportunity for the Commission to assume greater power in its hands rather than in the hands of the democratic institutions of Europe .
But having spent a decade obsessed with its own institutions , the European Union now needs to get back to business .
It is often said that the citizens of our Member States do not understand Europe , and , if they did , it would be more popular .
But this misses a vital point .
Our citizens do understand Europe 's self-absorption only too well .
What they do not understand is why so much time , effort and resources are devoted to the institutional processes and so little to the policy outcomes which actually might make a difference to their lives .
Our citizens can see that our economies are in crisis , that unemployment is rising , that businesses are finding it harder to generate growth , that climate change is getting worse and that other parts of the world are becoming increasingly and dramatically more competitive .
Yet , when they turn to Europe , they find a Union which has devoted years to this institutional wrangling .
Why should they care about the details of qualified majority voting if they have lost their jobs ?
Why should they be interested in the intricacies of codecision if their children face such an uncertain future ?
I hope that the appointments last week can draw a line under these years of introspection .
The European Union must now move on and concentrate on the real work at hand , in building dynamic and competitive economies and in creating a strong global trading system and , specifically during the course of the weeks ahead , in securing a really effective agreement on climate change .
I admit that the words from the Swedish Presidency and from President Barroso are encouraging in that respect .
Let us hope that practical delivery in other areas , vital to all of our citizens , can now follow .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , after the fine words that were spoken then by Mr Kirkhope regarding the situation that we find ourselves in , my question to him is : do you not feel that you have denied the British people a referendum , which David Cameron promised in the UK ?
You are here now with no mandate and the bottom line is that the people of the UK and in most parts of Europe have had no say on Lisbon .
David Cameron should be ashamed of himself .
As for the Conservatives in this Chamber , the way that they vote is to press green , green , green .
It is go , go , go all the time .
They are pro the EU .
I think it is time now that you came clean and told the people back at home where you actually stand .
Mr President , I am very sorry that UK domestic politics seem to have taken over here this morning .
What I would like to make very clear is I am not ashamed of anything at all that the leader of the Conservative Party is saying or doing and , in particular , it is clear to all of us that we have always indicated that , if the Lisbon Treaty had not been ratified , we would have wanted it to be put to the British people .
I think that is an honourable position for us to take .
I think that those who talk about unreal objectives in relation to Europe , those who talk in an extreme and obsessive manner , will do no good to the very people that I have been talking about in my speech - the citizens , not only of Europe , but the citizens of my country , who want prosperity , who want certainty in their lives and the future .
This institutional navel-gazing occurs with these people just as much as it does with any of the institutions of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the two candidates on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group .
Above all , we welcome the fact that a woman has been elected .
We assume that the two candidates for the high offices will not only focus on the content of their responsibilities , but will also develop a cooperative approach to Parliament .
We expect the Council to deal more closely with the social issues resulting from the crisis and to draw the right conclusions .
Billions have so far been paid to the bankers , but there has been virtually no help for the ordinary people .
Mr Schulz is right when he says that the casino is open again , but at the same time , poverty and , in particular , child poverty is growing .
Four million jobs were lost throughout Europe as a result of the crisis .
According to reports from the Commission , this figure could increase to seven million over the course of the next year .
We know that estimates of this kind are often lower than the real figures .
For example , 1.5 million people in Germany are on short-time work and it is important to emphasise this .
However , growing unemployment and poverty are the first signs of even greater inequality of opportunity which will have a major impact on educational opportunities .
We also need to discuss this subject .
The question that arises is whether the Heads of State or Government will find ways out of the crisis which combine the European concept of integration with social progress and which have a real impact for the citizens of Europe .
Instead of exit strategies for the economic recovery programmes and mandatory budget consolidation , we need a change of policy .
I have just three observations to make about this .
Firstly , we expect the Council to give a statement on its position on the plans for the 2020 strategy , which is intended to replace the failed Lisbon Strategy .
Innovation and knowledge , combating exclusion , green economic strategies , a digital Europe - as a list of slogans , this does not sound too bad .
However , we urgently need concrete proposals describing how all of this will be implemented .
Secondly , the Council must finally commit to a strict control system for the financial markets .
I have a number of legitimate questions about how the Council can bring this into line with existing treaties , because in some cases , restrictions on the free movement of capital and payments are not permitted or wanted .
We are interested to see how you will achieve this .
Thirdly , I would like to emphasise once again that the Council must give a clear signal after Copenhagen that a binding climate change agreement is needed .
Voluntary commitments have never achieved the desired objective .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , you are all very downbeat this morning .
I thought this was going to be a big , proud moment !
It has taken you eight and a half years of bullying , of lying , of ignoring democratic referendums .
Eight and a half years it has taken you to get this treaty through , and on 1 December you will have it .
Of course , the architect of all of this , Giscard , wanted , from this constitutional treaty , for the European Union to have a big , global voice , but I am afraid the leaders have suffered from a collective loss of nerve .
They have decided that they want their faces to be up on the global stage , not somebody from the European Union , and so we have got appointed a couple of political pygmies .
The Kissinger question of who to call in Europe has not really been answered , has it ?
I guess the answer can only be Mr Barroso , because he is the only one that anybody in the world has ever heard of and is probably the big winner out of these posts .
No wonder , Sir , you look so happy this morning .
And we have a new president of Europe , Herman Van Rompuy .
It does not exactly trip off the tongue , does it ?
I cannot see him stopping the traffic in Beijing or Washington ; I doubt anybody in Brussels would even recognise who he is .
And yet he is going to be paid a salary that is bigger than Obama 's , which tells you all you need to know about this European political class and how they look after themselves .
But at least he is an elected politician , unlike Baroness Cathy Ashton , who really is the true representation of the modern-day political class .
In some ways she is ideal , is she not ?
She has never had a proper job , and she has never been elected to anything in her life .
So I guess she is perfect for this European Union .
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
She has never been elected to anything and no one knows who she is !
Even the Prime Minister was talking about Baroness ' Ashdown ' as opposed to Ashton .
I mean , no one has ever heard of her .
She is even less well-known than Herman Van Rompuy !
I mean , that takes some doing , does it not ?
She has risen without trace .
She is part of this post-democratic age .
She married well : she married an adviser , friend and supporter of Tony Blair and got put in the House of Lords .
When she was in the House of Lords , she was given one big job , and that job was to get the Lisbon Treaty through the House of Lords and to do so pretending that it was entirely different to the EU Constitution .
So she is good at keeping a straight face , and she vigorously crushed any attempt in the House of Lords for the British people to have a referendum .
So here she is : never stood for public office , never had a proper job , and here she gets one of the top jobs in the Union .
Her appointment is an embarrassment for Britain .
( Interjection from the floor )
Well , at least I have been elected , Sir , unlike her !
She has not been elected , and the people do not have the power to remove her .
But just hear the next bit .
There is something rather more serious than that .
Cathy Ashton was an active member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament .
In fact , she was the treasurer of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament during a period of time when CND took very large donations and refused to reveal the source .
What is known is that these donations were obtained by a man called Will Howard , who was a member of the Communist Party in Great Britain .
Will Baroness Ashton deny that , while she was treasurer , she took funds from organisations that were opposed to Western-style capitalism and democracy ?
That question must be asked .
And are we really happy that somebody who will be in charge of our overseas security policy was an activist a few years ago in an outfit like CND ?
If we really think that , frankly , we need our bumps felt !
I do not think she is a fit and proper person to do this job .
She has no experience and she must answer those questions .
Did she take money from enemies of the West ?
That question must be answered .
Well , we have our two pygmies .
We will have the bland leading the bland , but I am not celebrating because they will press on with political union and , whilst our leaders may have saved face for the moment for themselves on the international stage , they have all betrayed their national democracies .
The European state is here .
We are about to get an avalanche of new laws because of this Lisbon Treaty and there is no question in my mind that there has to be a full , free , fair referendum in the United Kingdom to decide whether we stay part of this Union or not .
I hope and pray that we vote to leave , but either way the people simply must be asked .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
I would like to say a word to Mr Farage .
It would be very much appreciated if we could calm the atmosphere down a little , because some words and expressions are not always easy to accept .
Mr President , Mr Farage has said that those people who were elected last week are not people that the traffic will stop for .
This is why we elected them - because we wanted to elect people who will make the traffic move for all European citizens to get a better life for themselves , and this is what they will do .
Mr Van Rompuy and Mrs Cathy Ashton are for the people , and the 480 million Europeans will know it soon .
I think this is the stake .
We have to stand up for them .
We have to save their personal integrity .
And , Mr Farage , I would like to quote a Hungarian saying to you .
It is good that you are here because , if the monkey goes up the tree , it is easier to see its backside !
Mr President , with respect , I think the honourable Member has completely missed the point , because twice she said ' the people that were elected last week ' .
They have not been elected .
That is the point that I am making , and , in the case of Baroness Ashton , she has never been elected to public office in her entire life .
She takes an enormously powerful job , and the peoples of Europe , of Britain , of everywhere else , do not have the power to hold her to account and to remove her , and that , fundamentally , is what is wrong with this whole European Union .
It is all about bureaucracy versus democracy .
Things have gone horribly , horribly wrong .
But can I please come back and ask you a question , Mr President ?
You seemed to imply that I have said something that was inappropriate , or over the top , or wrong .
Could you please explain what that was ?
I want to know .
Your way of describing the selection of people who are so important for the European Union and what you say about the whole issue connected with it are , in my opinion , absolutely improper to the whole situation .
( Protests )
That is my opinion , colleagues .
Mr President , when you were elected as President , you said you would act as a neutral President to ensure that all sides of the debate were given their chance to have a say .
If you are criticising me on the political content of what I say , then you are not doing your job as a neutral chairman .
( DE ) Mr President , after all this excitement , perhaps we need a more down-to-earth approach .
Energy-hungry emerging economies and wasteful industrial countries were not even prepared to implement the Kyoto Protocol .
I am therefore doubtful as to whether anything will change following the Copenhagen conference .
The purpose of certificate trading is also questionable , with millions being spent on this , while the genuine alternatives , such as renewable energy , are fobbed off with peanuts .
This must definitely not lead to nuclear power plants being promoted as a Kyoto-friendly alternative .
The second urgent crisis , in other words , the subsidy race for the failing car manufacturer Opel , is an equally explosive issue .
Signs such as a drop in orders were not taken seriously enough and the EU has probably contributed to the decline of a once flourishing industry with its raft of regulations .
The lesson we must learn from this is that we need , in future , to establish basic conditions which can be planned and predicted for all industries , and until we have fully-developed concepts in place , it is irresponsible to throw billions of euros of European taxpayers ' money at the problem .
It is important to ensure at least that this money does not go to the US .
In addition , repayment rules must be introduced .
If nothing else , it should be possible to lay the foundations for finalising the ' transparent ' European citizen at the forthcoming meeting .
The Stockholm Programme gives people fewer rights , not more , because they have no control over how the data is used .
There is no sign of an end to the monitoring of passengers , the controversial subject of data protection has not yet been resolved and if we are to introduce a European asylum system , then in my opinion , we should apply the strictest criteria , such as those in use in Denmark .
Mr President , my thanks to the group leaders for their very inspiring contributions .
The vast majority , although not all , seem , like the Swedish Presidency , to be pleased that we were able to successfully make the two appointments of Herman Van Rompuy and Catherine Ashton .
Both of these people contribute to coherence , stability and increased coordination in the European Union , something that is necessary if we are to be able to focus on the major challenges that overlap the six-month presidencies .
I think that is very good .
Like Mr Schulz said , now that they have been appointed , they will be able to focus on their tasks and we can move past this debate .
Perhaps once the Treaty of Lisbon finally enters into force on 1 December , the British domestic policy debate can also be left outside this Chamber .
The EU needs modern ground rules and the Treaty of Lisbon will provide us with them .
We will be better equipped to deal with the major issues that we face .
In the forthcoming period leading up to the European Summit , there are three main issues on which the Swedish Presidency hopes to make progress together with you and with the help of the Commission .
The climate issue , with regard to which we are doing our utmost to get an ambitious political agreement with a timetable , so that it can eventually become legally binding .
We will have to live with the outcome of Copenhagen and what happens afterwards for a long time and we need to gradually change our societies to become more climate smart .
On the economic issues , even though things are looking brighter on the financial markets , we are facing high levels of unemployment in many countries and this will be a distinctive feature of our economies for many years to come .
With regard to Mr Verhofstadt 's questions concerning supervision , I am pleased that we are nevertheless making progress on this issue .
The problem that we have had up to now with financial supervision is that it has focused too much on individual companies and too little on the financial system as a whole .
Cooperation between the different supervisory bodies has not been working either .
With the new European supervisory bodies in place , we will be able to remedy this .
They will have an overarching view and enhanced cooperation .
They will also , of course , be accountable to the Council and to the European Parliament .
Other details of this matter will be discussed at the Ecofin meeting on 2 December , when I hope that we will make further progress .
Finally , with regard to the Stockholm Programme : this is a very important decision that we will also have to live with for a long time to come and over which the European Parliament will have a very great deal of influence in future .
As many of you said , it is a matter of finding solutions to the terrible problems that we are facing with regard to cross-border crime , trafficking and the threat of terrorism , and of balancing this with a policy that places citizens centre stage and ensures that an individual 's privacy is respected .
I hope that we can produce a long-term programme to deal with these issues within the Stockholm Programme .
These three issues , together with a number of others , have been the Swedish Presidency 's priorities and I am very pleased to see that we will , hopefully , bring these to a successful conclusion in December .
Thank you very much . I will , of course , speak again at the end of this debate .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , there was this concrete issue on SWIFT and I want to clarify the position on that matter because I think it is extremely important .
It also has to do with the Stockholm Programme .
The SWIFT Programme is , indeed , a very valuable instrument for Member States in their fight against terrorism .
It has allowed Member States ' authorities to prevent terrorist attacks in Europe .
We are not talking about theoretical cases .
We are talking about actual cases .
The draft European Union-United States agreement , which is currently being discussed , is an interim arrangement with a maximum duration of 12 months .
It is needed in order to legally replace the existing one after the move of the data storage out of the United States .
If the interim agreement is adopted before 1 December and the legal basis is changed , it will avoid a security gap and a serious blow to European Union-United States relations in this area .
In the recent meeting we had , involving the European Union and President Obama , the first issue he raised was the cooperation on the fight against terrorism between the United States and Europe .
He gave us the names of concrete countries in Europe that escaped terrorist attacks recently because of the cooperation in this matter between us and them .
I can give you some data on that , if you wish .
More than 5 450 cases under the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme have been passed to date to European governments , with over 100 new generated leads provided to European countries from January to September this year .
I can give you concrete examples .
This information has provided substantial assistance to European governments during the investigation into the al-Qaeda-directed plot to attack transatlantic airline flights travelling between the UK and the United States .
In mid-September 2009 , three individuals were convicted , and each was sentenced to at least 30 years in prison .
In early 2009 , this system was used to identify the financial activity of a Europe-based al-Qaeda individual who played a role in the planning of an alleged attack on aircraft .
The information was passed to the governments of European and Middle Eastern nations .
In summer 2007 , the same system was used to identify the financial activities of Germany-based members of the Islamic Jihad Union .
This information contributed to the investigation and eventual arrest of Islamic Jihad Union members who were plotting to attack sites in Germany .
They subsequently confessed to these activities .
So , this system has already saved many lives in Europe and elsewhere .
We are talking about an extremely serious matter .
I fully agree that the whole fight against terrorism has to be done in the full respect of fundamental rights and guarantees of our open , free societies .
We were the first in the world to say to President Bush that he needed to close Guantánamo - we Europeans .
And we stand by it .
At the same time , we have to see to it that we stay united and committed to the fight against terrorism .
That is why I want to give you all the assurance that we will present to you a new mandate on the basis of the new Treaty of Lisbon , precisely for addressing this issue , where the European Parliament will have its full powers .
So , in early 2010 , we will come with a new basis respecting the Lisbon Treaty that will , of course , give Parliament all the capacity to act in this matter because we want Parliament to also be at the forefront of this action against terrorism and for security , by fully respecting , of course , our fundamental rights and our legal guarantees .
Finally , since so many of you spoke - and I thank you for your comments - on the issue of gender balance , which is so important for me , for the Commission and for the European institutions , let me signal the fact that today is the 10th anniversary of the international day for the elimination of violence against women .
I think this is an agenda where we also have to do something in Europe .
Unfortunately , there are still many cases in Europe where women are affected by attacks by their male companions or former companions .
I want to use this opportunity to show our commitment to this very important agenda which is also in our European society .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when commenting on the appointments made for the opening of the new European Union season , the international press has very often used terms such as ' candidates who are not up to the job ' or ' unsatisfactory candidates ' .
I would like to buck the trend .
Mr Verhofstadt never said a truer word when he stated that a glass may be seen as half full or half empty .
I therefore wonder what the Council 's rationale was when it chose these individuals .
I believe it was a Community-based rationale , and I will try to explain what I mean by that .
Choosing an outgoing member of the European Commission for the role of European Foreign Minister sends out a clear message : it is saying that the intention is to conduct a Community foreign policy and not a foreign policy that adheres to the philosophies of any one nation in particular .
As far as I am concerned , therefore , the news is not that Mrs Ashton is British , but that she comes from the Commission .
In other words , she adopts a Community approach to foreign policy matters that is not linked to the particular viewpoint of one nation .
As for the Belgian Prime Minister 's nomination as a candidate , this has been questioned by comparing him with higher-profile individuals .
I believe that what we are asking of the President of the European Council , who will remain in office for two and a half years , is not to shout louder than others or to assert his authority more than others but to persuade others to speak with one voice .
For this reason , I believe that it was a good choice to put forward Mr Van Rompuy .
We must be driven by a Community approach , because if we really want to build Europe , it is right that we choose these individuals on the basis of this criterion .
We will be able to observe the efficiency and effectiveness of this choice when we see them in action , but I call on everyone to strongly support their work because otherwise , we really will have wasted the best opportunity of our lives .
( ES ) Mr President , I took the floor yesterday in plenary to highlight the importance of the Stockholm Programme , which is on the agenda for the European Council on 10 December .
I did so in order to draw attention to its content and , in particular , to call for the broadest possible parliamentary support to move forward the report drawn up by three committees working together .
I refer to the Committee on Legal Affairs , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Yesterday , therefore , I focused on the importance of creating a Europe for the citizens , as well as a market .
I think now is the right time to emphasise the significance of this matter from a constitutional point of view , on the agenda for the European Council to be held on 10 and 11 December .
After all , Parliament will be strengthened pursuant to the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament will be strengthened notably in the area of freedom , security and justice and through the development of the action plan to be adopted during the Spanish Presidency .
This is because , pursuant to Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union and Article 295 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , such cooperation is required .
These articles call on us to engage in interinstitutional cooperation and require us to reach an agreement on interinstitutional cooperation in order to jointly develop a strategy for implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Furthermore , we are required to do so whilst complying with the principles of the greatest possible transparency , subsidiarity and cooperation with national parliaments .
The latter will therefore be involved in the development of the Lisbon Agenda .
This means we will have to work much harder .
Life is not going to be easier for us .
On the contrary , it is going to become more complicated .
We will also be forced to undertake an evaluation process to learn from the experience .
The main aim of the exercise will be to ensure we comply with the European model and with fundamental rights .
The European Parliament will also have to be more involved regarding data protection .
I have in mind the follow up to the SWIFT Agreement referred to earlier today and which is so important in the context of our bilateral relationship with the United States .
Most significantly , however , the European Parliament is going to be involved in the assessment and follow up of the performance of the agencies within Europe 's institutional structure .
I refer to Europol , the European Asylum Support Office , Eurojust and Frontex .
For all these reasons , I would like the agenda for the European Council to reflect the importance of strengthening the commitment to act and work in cooperation with the European Parliament , notably in relation to the preparation and follow up of the action plan to be adopted during the coming six months of the Spanish Presidency .
( DE ) Mr President , we have done it - the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force .
I would like to thank Cecilia Malmström , the Swedish Presidency and the entire team who have all worked very hard .
This is a major achievement .
In this context , I would like to talk briefly about two points which formed the subject of this debate .
The first point is the Council President .
Mr Barroso , you have just said that you want to work in tandem with Herman Van Rompuy .
I think that this is a very good idea .
It is right that you should work together with the Council .
There is , though , one thing that I would like to say quite clearly : the Council President is not responsible to the European Parliament nor to any other parliament .
This means that you in your role of Commission President are the legitimate democratic institution and the legitimate democratic president of Europe .
For this reason , by all means work in tandem , but please make sure that you are sitting in the front and steering the vehicle .
My second point is that the representative of the Council said that Cathy Ashton would take up both the office of High Representative and the office of Vice-President of the Commission on 1 December 2009 .
Firstly , it is only one office - High Representative , Vice-President of the Commission - and secondly , she cannot take up office without the consent of Parliament .
From 1 December , the first Barroso Commission is in a legal no-man 's-land between the end of the Treaty of Nice and the beginning of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Cathy Ashton will only fully take up office after receiving the consent of Parliament at the end of January 2010 .
One final word on the debating culture in this House .
We only need to listen to Mr Farage .
If he and his party were ever to be in government in the United Kingdom , the British would really come to value the freedom of establishment in the European Union , because huge numbers of them would move to France , Germany , Spain and Italy and to Portugal , Mr Barroso .
Mr President , the Council meeting will take place less than two weeks after the Treaty of Lisbon comes into force and we have , as the Minister said , been through a long and difficult process to reach this point .
But many of us feel that we have missed a critical opportunity .
There is still a missing link , a vital democratic element in the relationship between the EU and the people of Europe , and that is the sub-state , or regional level of government .
Many constituents feel that Europe is as distant as it ever was and we have to address this urgently .
Not all of us had a referendum and the opportunity to give our views on the future development of Europe , yet there are things happening across the EU that have a direct impact on our work in facing the challenges before us and all of those policy issues that have already been mentioned - employment , social rights , economic regulation , fighting terrorism , peace and justice - and I am proud to speak , incidentally , as chair of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in Wales .
We are weeks away from the Copenhagen Summit , the biggest challenge of all .
Up to 80 % of mitigation and adaptation policies will be implemented at the local and regional levels .
And many regional governments , like the government in Wales , have been leading the way in adopting radical policies to combat climate change .
This is where any international agreements made will be delivered .
So we must look beyond the Member State level to the peoples of Europe .
On Sunday , 13 December , over 150 municipalities in Catalonia are holding referendums on independence from Spain .
How is the EU responding to this ?
Will this be on the Council agenda ?
I very much doubt it , but it should be .
Europe is changing and I hope that the new President will recognise and respond to this .
( NL ) First of all , I should like to express my compliments to the Swedish Presidency for the efforts it has undertaken over the past few months .
It deserves particular recognition for the manner in which it has solved the Rubik 's cube with the appointments of Mr Van Rompuy and Lady Ashton .
I am very happy with these appointments , because Mr Van Rompuy has already said that his personal views are entirely irrelevant .
His words are a testament to the wisdom and good sense of his insight .
I congratulate Mr Van Rompuy on this Euro-realistic approach and will keep reminding him of it in the future , regardless of whether these reminders are expected or necessary .
Unfortunately , I have also heard expressions of disapproval from those who fear that the first permanent President of the Council does not have sufficient competences for the job .
Evidently , some had been hoping for some kind of European superman .
I certainly do not share such views and Mr Van Rompuy 's first statements have put me at ease .
He has never indicated that he wants to become a European superman of that kind .
President , at the upcoming Council meeting , the heads of European governments will have to dot the i 's and cross the t 's of their Copenhagen strategy in order to be able to achieve the best result possible .
I wish President Van Rompuy and Mr Bildt , President-in-Office of the Council , every technical success in this very important task .
In addition , I wish all of us a positive and , above all , a forward-looking outcome .
( EL ) Mr President , the next Council will face a major issue , the issue of enlargement .
When we talk of enlargement , we understand that Turkey is a large chapter in the debate .
We , both Cyprus and my party - and I wish to say this very clearly before the European Parliament - are absolutely in favour of Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
However , we shall not tire ourselves repeating that this accession cannot happen if Turkey fails to deliver , like all the other countries which have acceded , on all the commitments it has made to Cyprus and to the European Union .
Talks are under way in Cyprus between the two leaders and , if a solution is achieved , it will be a symbol of victory for the entire European Union .
This victory will encourage the European Union to take up its place in the modern world .
However , we must put the truth back on the table and the truth is that Turkey is occupying half of Cyprus with 40 000 troops supposedly protecting 80 000 Turkish Cypriots .
That equates to two Turkish soldiers outside every Turkish Cypriot house .
I do not know of any MEPs with that much security .
So we are talking about the isolation of Turkish Cypriots and we are publicly in favour of eliminating the isolation of Turkish Cypriots by the occupying army .
To close , I should like to point out that , while supporting the accession of Turkey , Cyprus cannot consent to the opening of the energy chapter until Turkey has honoured its commitments towards the European Union and Cyprus and until it has eliminated the obstacles it is placing on the Republic of Cyprus in its efforts to enlarge its economic area .
( HU ) There have been two important personnel decisions made very recently in keeping with the Treaty of Lisbon .
The European Union now has a permanent president and a foreign high representative .
Do these personnel decisions convey an important message to us ?
They do , indeed .
We talk a great deal in this Chamber about the balance which exists between the European Commission , Council and Parliament .
In my view , there is an imbalance , with the EU 's government , the Commission , having a monopoly over initiating legislation .
In some cases , it almost acts like a judge .
It controls the main power , while we in this House give it the rubber stamp of democracy .
The Treaty of Lisbon does not specify the duties of the permanent president .
These will obviously depend on how charismatic and determined the person ending up in this post is .
It can be interpreted from the decision that the power and control should remain - in your words - with the Commission representing the supranational common interest .
However , what we say is that it has remained in the hands of the head of an empire centrally controlling the lives of 500 million people .
On the other hand , it would also be very important to make sure that we act decisively where our immediate task is concerned , when we talk about the climate conference .
However , this involves a decisive step against the United States .
I am almost confident that the reason why President Barroso has just stepped out was to make a telephone call on this matter .
( EL ) Mr President , it is important that the Treaty of Lisbon has finally entered into force .
Of course , European citizens have been watching for ten years as the European Union has failed to find ways of ensuring the institutions work effectively following enlargement with the accession of the twelve new Member States .
Today , however , things have changed .
We have a Council President - and everyone assures us that this is a person who will seek consent and agreement - and we also have a High Representative for foreign policy .
Commenting ex ante on whether or not they are suitable in comparison with those whose names were being bandied about beforehand or compared with those who have supposedly specialised in such matters is unimportant .
What is important is how the treaty will be applied .
Cooperation between the European Commission and the European Parliament is hugely important here .
Parliament 's role has been strengthened but , in order for it to be strengthened in essence and for European citizens to perceive this , the European Commission urgently needs to raise questions , given that it has the initiative in the European Council .
The Council will supposedly operate faster , given that it will no longer operate as before under the presidencies of the Member States , and governments will not have the opportunity to manipulate the Councils in order to argue that everything good comes from governments and everything bad and irritating comes from Brussels .
Clearly , there will be questions at the December Council about enlargement , but neither the Minister nor the President of the Commission has given us any details ; they have only spoken to us in general about other matters .
It is a fact that enlargement to the western Balkans and Turkey , on the basis of the proposals by the European Commission , is up against numerous doubts and questions , despite the objective of integrating these countries into the European Union .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , on Thursday the European Union appointed Mr Van Rompuy as its first permanent President of the Council and Mrs Ashton to be in charge of European diplomacy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wanted to return to the debate that has been taking place in our institutions since these appointments were announced .
Indeed , in my opinion , beyond the issue of names and functions , there is the central issue of the States .
Let me explain what I mean .
We are witnessing what could be the worst nightmare of those who conveyed the ideal of the European Community and their desire for union .
At that time , it was believed that the roots of the Union were to be found in state legitimacy and that its future lay in transcending national selfishness .
Tension between two contradictory mediums , which is sometimes painful , often produces original mechanisms , but , above all , serves a political approach that is unique in the world .
This nightmare , ladies and gentlemen , is that of a Europe that would be limited to a community of intergovernmental acquisitions .
The result , as we can see today , would be suspicion of incompetence , presumption of illegitimacy and tension between political families .
In making this speech , I do not intend , as you will have gathered , to return to making judgments on mere intent .
I prefer to recall with you the rights and duties of we MEPs .
Our duty is to question the impenetrable haggling that surrounds appointments to the posts that resulted from the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our duty , in future , is to force the Council to put an end to this undemocratic , archaic method of appointment that fosters the idea that Europe , in building itself , is sheltered from the peoples .
Our duty is to use all our new parliamentary prerogatives to influence the policies that will result from the new powers guaranteed to us under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament , between a weakened Commission and a strengthened intergovernmental centre , needs to become the institutional point of equilibrium .
On this matter , I hope that the Vice-President of the Commission will be subject to the same hearing process by the European Parliament as the other commissioners .
Indeed , we have a right to carry out this process ; it is conferred by the treaties .
I also support the proposal of Mrs Harms , who has suggested a meeting between the new President and the groups as a whole .
Our duty is to kick-start European integration , which is in a seriously bad way .
No one can reasonably want the mandates entrusted to Mr Van Rompuy or Mrs Ashton to fail and , more especially , I wish Mrs Ashton every success because I am proud that a woman has been appointed to this post of High Representative .
( FR ) Mr President , first of all , thank you to the Swedish Presidency for leaving us , at the end of the year , with the best of itself .
This is good news for the Commission and good news for our Parliament .
Having said that , I shall now take up a number of points .
Firstly , the issue of appointments .
I am not calling into question the issue of people , but that of procedures .
Furthermore , I really do hope that this is the last time that this will happen in such a way .
Europeans expected transparency , democracy and clarity in the debate and , basically , what they got was obscurity and last-minute negotiations held behind the closed doors of a European Council .
This must not be repeated , and I believe it will be up to our Parliament to propose new procedures and new rules for the future .
With regard to climate change , my wish is that the Union will speak with one voice and act jointly after Copenhagen , no matter what the scope of the outcome of the conference .
Let us move forward !
Let us aim for an actual 30 % reduction in greenhouse gases !
When I say ' actual ' , this means that it will eventually be necessary , one day , to raise the issue of derogations and emissions trading .
Let us move forward and , again , make a firm financial commitment to developing countries .
We owe it to them .
Lastly , with regard to the economic and social situation , we must work on establishing a new economic model that gives priority to employment , social progress and the long term , in other words , sustainability in all its forms .
We therefore need supervision and regulation , a policy that is more advantageous to small and medium-sized enterprises , and common thinking on a tax system that favours the long term over the short term .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what position are we in now in the run-up to this summit in Europe ?
Some speeches made it sound as if everything would be fine provided that we simply had enough social democratic or liberal - yes , Mr Schulz - commissioners .
I believe that is a mistake .
Everything will be fine when we agree on the major tasks facing Europe .
In Europe 20 years ago , we brought down the Iron Curtain and it seems to me significant that it was the people , the citizens , who achieved that and not the armed forces , the governments or the secret service .
I believe that in future , too , we will only be able to build Europe together with the citizens .
Secondly , there are other walls to be brought down , including those in our heads .
For example , many people still believe that we can play off freedom and security against one another , although we know that freedom is only effective when we protect it .
However , this protection must not be at the expense of our fundamental rights and must not lead to the creation of a surveillance state , given the example of SWIFT and other issues .
Many people also believe that it is possible to play off Europe and democracy against one another .
However , only a democratic Europe can be successful in the long term .
Many people believe that the environment and the economy are opposing concepts , whereas the only way to ensure long-term prosperity is to establish an environmental economy .
Finally , I would like to say one thing . We are now in the run-up to Stockholm and if we do not do whatever is possible there , regardless of the cost - and many people are prepared to spend hundreds of millions on bailing out the banks , but are tight-fisted about the climate - if we do not act quickly and consistently , then what applies to me as a speaker now will also be true of the human race .
Its time will be up .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Last week , European society experienced two events .
The society of football saw how a referee chose a team that will take part in the World Cup finals , but society as a whole failed to see or to understand how and why certain arbiters chose the champions for European office .
Yet , if one asks whom the occupant of the White House or the Kremlin will call in future , the answer is they will call the same people they called before .
As for the Council 's December measures , given the economic , financial and employment situation , I challenge the Swedish Presidency not to forget the well-known situation of the Baltic States in these respects .
Given the aggressive investment into these countries , they have been forced desperately to adhere to their national currencies ' tight and investor-friendly peg to the euro .
What this means in reality is the devaluation of their economies , so that the Baltic peoples are becoming the unemployment champions , while their demographic society bleeds to death .
What sort of European solidarity can we tell our citizens about if their social and economic situation ends up even further behind the European average than it was before they joined the European Union ?
( BG ) The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon should entail greater transparency , greater democracy and greater effectiveness for the decision-making process .
However , as we are well aware , effectiveness and democracy do not always go in the same direction , especially when there is a lack of coordination between the institutions and relations with citizens .
There is no doubt that it is more democratic to find an appropriate way for European citizens to be involved in the election of a president of the Council so that the European Union can really get closer to its citizens .
I think that this will be a task for the future .
In spite of all this , I wish those appointed as President of the Council and High Representative every success .
As far as the forthcoming Council meeting on 10 and 11 December is concerned , I greatly hope that an ambitious programme of institutional matters relating to the Treaty of Lisbon will be adopted at it .
I am thinking of the European External Action Service .
We must be given a clear understanding of its composition , legal status and powers .
In this sense , our Parliament is voting on its position on Mr Brok 's report .
I am also expecting to receive a clear explanation from the Council on the results of the coordinated strategies applied and proposed for exiting the crisis , including any package of economic and financial measures .
I would like to know in particular what the Council 's view is of the future European Financial Supervisory Authorities , which should reduce in the future the risk of financial misdemeanours , which basically contributed to the current crisis .
Another important point which I am expecting to hear the Council 's decision on is , for example , an integrated post-Lisbon strategy , which we heard is expected to be adopted in March 2010 .
I hope that Parliament will take an active role in this strategy .
Europe 's citizens must be at the heart of this strategy .
Providing jobs through investment , research , innovation , green technologies and eco-efficiency must be a factor contributing to sustainable economic development , and not the other way round .
With regard to the Stockholm Strategy , I would also like the Schengen Area to be expanded , of course , to include Bulgaria and Romania as soon as possible .
Thank you and I wish you every success at the meeting .

Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I welcome the new appointment of Mr Van Rompuy and I am particularly proud that we have an extremely able and talented British woman in Cathy Ashton as the first High Representative .
Regarding the Council meeting in December , we have seen the impact of adverse weather this week in Cumbria in the north-west of England , which has experienced severe flooding , and it is not just in Europe that the weather is creating unexpected hardship .
Adverse weather is causing other unforeseen human tragedy across our planet .
Denial is the easy option , but I did not go into politics to fight for easy options .
I do not want my children or my grandchildren to ask why I did not act .
In my region , the Conservatives are represented by Roger Helmer , who describes man-made climate change as a myth .
Despite the claims of the Tory leader , David Cameron , that they are a party of the environment , Helmer represents the danger and unreliability of Conservative environmental policy .
We need to act , but fighting this alone will not work .
We need action at all levels , which involves reducing the amount of carbon we produce to at least 2 % .
I support those like our Prime Minister , who has pledged to cut carbon emissions by 80 % by 2050 .
The Labour Government in the UK wants a deal that is ambitious , effective and fair and to support the poorest countries to cut their emissions and adapt to climate change .
Any climate financing agreed must be additional to existing development aid targets and it must not come from existing budgets .
Any funding agreed at Copenhagen needs to deal specifically with the effects of climate change on the developing world and should not replace other valuable aid flows .
Presently , the focus seems to be on near-term , fast-start finance , but we also need long-term commitments .
Can Mr Barroso guarantee that he will make post-2012 finance commitments a priority for any Copenhagen agreement ?
Mr President , we stand at the beginning of a new era , and perhaps we should pose ourselves three questions : who , how and what ?
The ' who ' was more or less answered last week , and nobody could be more pleased than me .
In a week where we started with only three women in the Commission , we finish with nine .
I can advise some of those that the women MEPs in suits and ties have stood down for the moment , but they will be back in five years ' time if the process does not improve .
Next time , please can we have a process where all Member States nominate a woman and a man as candidates , so that we do not have the last-minute rush .
That is what I want to talk about as well : the ' how ' .
This process was untransparent .
It has been mentioned that we now have to think about the practical implications of the Lisbon Treaty .
Let us make transparency the watchword for our three institutions and how we deal with one another , how we are open to the public .
Transparency must rule in the future .
The ' what ' must be the focus on our citizens .
The new Stockholm Programme is a good start , much more citizen-centric than any of its predecessors , but we must continue to protect our citizens ' rights in giving them protection but also making sure that their daily lives are easier across Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the forthcoming European Council Summit is still going to be dominated by the recent elections of the President of the Council and the head of EU diplomacy .
For many , not only was the election of these particular people a surprise , but also the lack of a clear indication of their responsibilities .
For a long time , we have been told that the new Lisbon Treaty will improve the work of the EU , but now , at the outset , it turns out to be evoking conflicts over personnel .
Neither of the candidates has presented a programme , in contradistinction to Mr Barroso , for example , who did present a programme prior to his election .
We are moving into an experimental phase in which a great deal is going to depend on the personality and imagination of the new leaders .
We can only hope that , when they are dealing with matters like Commission reshuffles and cyclic changes in nature which are largely independent of human activity , they will also deal with resolving the specific problems of EU citizens , such as the economic crisis , aid for the poorest regions in the EU and the fight against terrorism .
Mr President , I think that after the Lisbon Treaty becomes reality , the meeting of the European Council last week and the nomination of Commissioners , it is time to set new perspectives and see the new challenges that are ahead of us .
One of them is obvious and that is that the work after Copenhagen will be just as challenging as the work before .
It will continue to be one of the main tasks for the European Union and the new Commission .
But , also , we shall consider the fact that now is also the time to leave behind the old concepts of East and West in Europe , or new and old , and to think that it is one Europe .
And it is also time to see that now , after all the discussions regarding the Lisbon Treaty , it is time to see a new momentum for the enlargement process .
Croatia and Iceland - I would like them to compete to be number 28 .
But , also , the western Balkans and , of course , the negotiations with Turkey need to be considered .
Those are issues that are now ahead of us and are a way of improving the strength of the European Union in a new world , where we need to be strong and to lead as regards ideas and values .
But it is also a matter of now ensuring that we will have a new agenda for a social Europe - meaning jobs , innovation and prosperity - and the only means to achieve that is to ensure that , after the crisis , we can become a competitive and leading economy .
And I would underline that there is a responsibility for the new Commission to ensure that there will be no protectionism , that it will be easy for small and medium-sized enterprises to grow and emerge and act throughout Europe , and that we can ensure that Europe will be a dynamic economy .
This is important , and I say this to the President of the Commission and to all Commissioners : we need to ensure that we have a competitive European economy in order to have a social Europe .
( HU ) Mr President , Mrs Wallström , the Treaty of Lisbon 's ratification process is now over , and Heads of State or Government have elected Commissioner Catherine Ashton as the EU 's first Foreign Minister , although this is not her official title .
The next task now will be to set up the European Union 's foreign service .
There is one consideration which I think is important to bear in mind when setting up this service - and I am asking the Swedish Presidency , and Cecilia Malmström specifically , to ensure that attention is paid to this in the foreign service - which is that there is an extremely low level of representation of new Member States in the Directorates-General for External Relations and Enlargement .
When national quotas are being assigned to Member States , consideration must be given to the fact that the new Member States are essentially barely represented in these two Directorates-General .
Therefore , no discrimination should be applied because for the foreign service to gain credibility in people 's eyes , attention needs to be paid to this proportionality .
It is very important for this proportionality and equal treatment to be implemented in the foreign service .
This is in our common interest .
I urge the European Commission and Council as well to look closely at this aspect .
Out of the EU 's 143 external representations , there is only a single ambassador from a new Member State .
This fact speaks for itself .
( FR ) Mr President , what I am going to say does not concern the Swedish Presidency-in-Office of the Council , which has been an excellent presidency , and I would like to congratulate it , but my comments concern , more specifically , the entire College of the European Council .
What has not been done to save the Treaty of Lisbon ?
We have fought for years to make Europe more transparent , more efficient , more visible , closer to the citizens .
By our reasoning , the extraordinary European Council on 19 November 2009 would not have betrayed the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon by appointing the President of the Council and the High Representative only after the new treaty came into force .
We have fought for 10 years to have this treaty , and the Council did not want to wait 10 days to enforce the new provisions relating to the appointment of the two posts .
The spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon , for which we have fought so hard , would not have been betrayed by entrusting the post of President to Jean-Claude Juncker , a staunch European , fine teacher and Europe-enthusiast with outstanding experience and expertise .
It is rare to come across someone embodying so many qualities .
It has not yet been explained to us in what way his unquestionable qualities constituted an obstacle to his appointment , as indeed seems to be the case .
I am not the only one who would like to be enlightened on this matter .
From ordinary European Council to extraordinary European Council , last Thursday 's meeting was not capable , either , of disguising the underlying divide between intergovernmental spirit and the Community method .
I am not the only one to deplore this state of affairs .
Even though , after the referendum in Ireland , many people believed Europe had been given a new lease of life , just as many people regretted the rather unconvincing start to the beginning of this parliamentary term .
Just a word to conclude : it only remains for me to hope that the appointed President , whose human qualities and political skill are well known , manages as quickly as possible to give fresh impetus to a Europe that sorely needs it .
( MT ) Sometimes we get so caught up in our daily work routine that we fail to fully appreciate the historical moments passing us by .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty is one such occasion that will go down in history and which our children and future generations will eventually study and learn about .
However , on occasions such as this , we must also reflect upon the meaning of such an historical moment .
I would like to make two brief reflections .
First , thanks to the treaty , we will finally see an end to what I believe are useless debates on the European Institutions and on the constitution of the European Union .
Instead , we are now going to be in a better position to face up to the realities that Europe has to deal with , such as the economic situation , employment , climate change and immigration .
These are the challenges that our electorate wants us to tackle .
The second reflection concerns Parliament 's role .
This is the last time that the Parliament will be meeting within this plenary with the powers it has had thus far .
This parliament was born fifty years ago , and its members were appointed by national parliaments .
Today , it is a Parliament that shares the power to decide , legislate and draw up laws together with the Council of Ministers .
I believe that this will result in the creation of European Union laws that will better reflect our citizens ' interests .
This Parliament shall be committed to guarding the citizens ' interests in the laws we adopt .
I augur that the Council that is meeting next week will dwell upon the historical meaning of this moment and that together , we will work towards overcoming the challenges we are contending with .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is one clear priority for me , for all of us and for the entire European Union in future , and that is the labour market .
We must pay much , much more attention to creating new jobs and securing existing ones .
This highly important area can be the key to a successful and sustainable Europe and , in my opinion , has been seriously neglected in recent months .
We must be aware that a low unemployment rate has a positive influence on many other areas .
Let us make sure that we are applying the lever in the right place .
In addition , I fail to understand many of the speakers in this House who complain that some European politicians did not enjoy worldwide fame before their election .
Why should they be famous ?
We need to be self-confident enough as Europeans to say who we like and who we think is appropriate and then to elect these people and not to decide on the basis of whether other people have or have not heard of them or whether or not they suit our partners throughout the world .
Any other approach would be ridiculous , just as ridiculous as many of the speeches from many of the people who , if they are here at all , are hiding behind their brightly coloured flags .
Mr President , this is a good beginning for Advent time - looking forward to the Lisbon Treaty coming into force .
However , it is not just God 's gift .
We need to make a determined effort to gain added value for our European project .
First and foremost , the way is now open for common European policies .
There are no longer any formal excuses to abstain from them .
It is now up to the Council to start vigorous common foreign security and energy policies that could become truly credible for our partners .
One of the most pressing tasks will be completion of the single energy market , developing all-European energy-supply networks and storage facilities , as well as implementing an energy solidarity clause .
The second problem arises from the economic crisis .
In fact , the countries outside the euro area have suffered the most from the dramatic decrease in investments and rising unemployment .
They also have become more vulnerable due to competitive disadvantage if compared to the euro area members .
Therefore , temporary measures by the EU , like additional lending facilities to support SMEs and energy and infrastructure projects are clearly needed .
Furthermore , better access to the European funds could be facilitated by temporarily reducing the national cofinancing requirements .
As you know , President , my country , Estonia , is making determined efforts to join the euro area by 2011 .
Estonia has one of the lowest foreign debt rates and has succeeded in bringing the budgetary deficit under control .
The recent acknowledgement of Estonia 's efforts by the OECD and Commissioner Almunia are encouraging signs that we are on the right path .
( SL ) In December , the European Council will address very important issues .
This will be the first Council meeting after the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and my colleagues in this House have already spoken about what those issues will be .
Personally , I would like to draw your attention to one very important issue that sometimes tends to be overlooked but which concerns the stability of Europe and the European Union as a whole : and that is the issue of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) .
The FYROM has been a candidate country for the past four years and , over the past 18 years , it has been in a virtual frozen conflict with Greece , its southerly neighbour and a long-standing member of the European Union .
This means we could be said to have a frozen conflict in the heart of Europe .
This year has been a very successful one for the FYROM .
In 2009 , the FYROM made significant progress .
It has received a positive report from the Commission , which recommended that the Council give this country the go-ahead to commence negotiations on fully-fledged membership .
On 20 December , it will have its visa requirement lifted and , a short while ago , we had elections in Greece .
I call on the representatives of the Council and the Commission , on the one hand , and on the Member States , on the other , to lend support to Prime Ministers Papandreou and Gruevski , these courageous two men , so that they can finally find a solution and so that the FYROM can join the large family that is Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Council to be held on 11 and 12 December will sum up a fruitful Swedish Presidency .
I would like to congratulate the minister and the entire government , because they finalised the very difficult ratification process .
Secondly , implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon is beginning .
It also introduces new institutions , such as President of the European Council and High Representative for Foreign Policy .
We know that these appointments have caused discussion and controversy , including here in this Chamber .
We wish the nominees well , but we would like to say that the real test will be , amongst others , the quality of Eastern policy and the process of setting up the European External Action Service .
We regret , however , that there is no one in the team who would represent Central and Eastern Europe .
I think another reshuffle could certainly fulfil this requirement in the future .
The Copenhagen Climate Summit is to approve , among other things , the ambitious objectives which have been put forward by the European Union .
This , too , is a matter for the forthcoming Council .
So is the Stockholm Programme , which is important from the point of view of security , and the citizens , and the new provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In addition , there is everything connected with the economic crisis .
Our expectations connected with the introduction of the Treaty of Lisbon are , above all , a more efficient EU , able to carry out further enlargement and bringing benefits both to citizens and Member States .
We expect the Treaty of Lisbon to bring a new start to the common market by eliminating the gulf between political and economic integration .
We would also like appointment of the new European Commission to be done with respect for the European Parliament and its rights , as well as implementation of the new role for national parliaments while preserving the principle of subsidiarity , and discussion of how to build Europe after Lisbon .
However , practical implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon means an acknowledgement that solidarity and energy policy are also matters governed by current legislation , such as the regulation on security of gas supply .
( ET ) Mr President , first I would like to talk about the High Representative appointed last week .
Some previous speakers have criticised both the President and the High Representative , which I consider quite inappropriate .
No one is ever entirely happy , but personally I see the appointment of both Representatives in a positive light , since a balance has been found between everyone 's interests : between small and large countries , between men and women , and between the different political poles .
Perhaps the only thing that annoys me personally is that no Representatives from the new Member States got any of these posts , although perhaps this will be possible next time .
In any case , I want to thank every candidate from my area , especially the Estonian President , Toomas Hendrik Ilves , and the Latvian President , Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga .
I think , though , that now we should go on with the essential work and stop occupying our time with personalities .
The second important point I wish to talk about is dealing with the financial crisis , which I believe the Council has made a priority .
The citizens of Europe expect us to deal with the problems of unemployment and the financial supervision package .
As far as this is concerned , it is very important what kind of Commission the new Commission will be , and how effective it will be .
This is also true for my country , Estonia , because for us , the most obvious aim is to secure new economic growth in order to become an enfranchised member of the euro area , which we are very close to doing , as there is a large possibility that we will fulfil the Maastricht criteria . Thank you .
( SL ) I am pleased that the first meeting of the Council to be held according to the rules of the Treaty of Lisbon is upon us .
I wish Mr Herman Van Rompuy , the first President of the Council , every success .
We have quite similar views on how we should act in unity , while having regard to our diversity .
The new institutional arrangements have been adopted in order to bring our decision making closer to citizens and to make it simpler , more democratic , more transparent and more effective .
In this respect , we have heard much talk of a powerful Europe .
However , the essential question which needs to be asked here is what concept of power we should develop , or on what foundations we can build a powerful Europe .
The European Union 's power and success hitherto stem from two key ideas of Europe 's founding fathers : the first being respect for human dignity and the second cooperation .
This means that , whilst working to safeguard our interests , we should also consider others , whether that means individuals , peoples , minorities or countries .
Today , we need to ask ourselves once again in all seriousness what it means to respect human dignity and what it means to put the human person at the centre of our concerns .
This question is very closely linked to the Stockholm Programme .
Many of you here have called attention to the fundamental freedoms and the need to protect them , but we appear to have quite divergent opinions about where human rights actually begin .
I hope that we can , at least , agree that human rights begin before a person is granted citizenship of a given country .
I am with those who firmly believe that Article 1 of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights ought to apply to human life in its entirety , i.e. from the beginning to the end of a person 's life .
In particular , we need to protect those who cannot protect themselves .
Before we can protect human freedoms , we must protect human life .
I was pleased to hear so many of you use the words ' acting together ' and ' acting in partnership ' .
Europe 's power lies in its joint efforts , whether we speak of the humanitarian or the intergovernmental method .
We might be facing increasing challenges which demand that we show joint political will , but more cooperation does not mean losing our identities .
( SV ) Mr President , we are hearing criticism that two quite unknown politicians have been appointed to top positions within the EU .
I think that this criticism is unfair .
We in Parliament at least have come to know Mrs Ashton as an excellent leader .
However , the criticism needs to be dealt with , for many are now concluding that the Member States want to see the EU function merely as an intergovernmental coordinating body , rather than a separate political level with the task of finding common solutions to major challenges such as growth , jobs , peace and the environment .
If it were true , it would be quite absurd .
Against this background , it is worrying that the Commission and the Council have found it so difficult to demonstrate any ability to act in respect of one of the greatest internal challenges that the EU is facing , namely the reform of the EU 's long-term budget .
We now need to provide the necessary resources in order to invest in the internal market .
It is transport and infrastructure for energy that are at issue .
We must provide the resources necessary to be able to back up what we are saying in the new Lisbon strategy with a view to 2020 .
We need to resolve the issue of climate financing at least to some extent through the EU 's budget and we need to prepare for forthcoming enlargement .
My question to the Presidency and the Commission is therefore : when will we see tangible proposals for a mid-term review that will have an impact on the non-existent budget margins for the remaining three years of this financial perspective , where the current ceilings prevent any reasonable action being taken to tackle the challenges that cannot wait until after 2013 and also a proposal drawing up guidelines for a long-term budget reform ?
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to say a few words on behalf of Ireland on this historic occasion for the European Union .
The Lisbon Treaty coming into being , particularly on the foot of the 67 % vote in favour by the Irish people , is a great boost to everybody in the European Union .
I think this is reflective of the support there is amongst the citizens for the good work that the European project has done over many years .
Unfortunately , the appointment of the President and the High Representative has brought a lot of negative criticism which I think is somewhat unfair .
Firstly , when people are appointed to office , they should be given some time to settle in and they should be judged by results and not by preconceived notions of their ability to do the job .
In the case of Mr Van Rompuy , it has been said of him that he is a consensus builder and an effective negotiator , as if these were negative attributes .
These are very important attributes in the times we live in .
What do we want ?
A presidential-style guru strutting the world stage , causing trouble ?
A destroyer , a disrupter ?
No , what we need now is a good , effective , sensible chairman and I think we have got that .
I wish him well .
As regards Baroness Ashton , it has been said she was never elected to office and that is true , but that in itself does not reflect one way or another on her qualities as a person or as an effective politician .
I only saw her in action here since I came here and , in particular , I questioned her on the trade agreement with South Korea and I thought she acquitted herself very well .
I think some of the comments made today unfortunately by Mr Farage were over the top , but at this stage I am becoming aware of the fact that Mr Farage is like a long-playing record .
He keeps repeating the same political agenda , harking back to the days of Rule , Britannia ! and nation fighting nation .
Those days are over .
The European Union is the greatest peace process ever known .
It shall continue to do so and we parliamentarians must work hard to ensure that that is the way it is going to be from now on .
( PT ) Mr President , this is an important debate , since I believe that it is the last in which we will be discussing names .
It is , in fact , time to turn the page , to discuss policies and to discuss the challenges facing the European Union .
I would like to highlight one such challenge : the issue of tackling the crisis .
It is one of those issues on which the European political institutions have been most united .
It is time to congratulate the Council on its concern and , in particular , the Swedish Presidency .
It is time to congratulate the Commission and its President , who has always been very concerned about tackling the crisis , and to highlight that Parliament itself has shown great readiness to discuss this issue by setting up a special committee .
However , it is also a time when there have been discrepancies between what is said by political leaders and what has been said by the governors of the central banks , at both national and European levels .
Firstly , we need to be cautious about the end of the crisis .
This is not the time to withdraw support measures for state economies and companies .
It is also time to plot the route ahead .
The leaders of the central banks have alerted governments to an ambitious plan to correct deficits .
Times change .
Moreover , they have revealed their opposition to some policies , such as those that aim to lower taxes , in a message addressed to several governments .
I am sorry that the Portuguese Government is not going down the route of lowering taxes .
The route has to be that of competitiveness , and the message of this concept has to be clear : more competitiveness , more stimulus , more growth , more support for companies , more Europe to support growth and jobs .
( HU ) Mr President , the Copenhagen conference features as the fourth item on the European Council 's agenda .
There are two important controversial points preventing the European Union from reaching a united stance on this .
One concerns the sale of carbon dioxide quotas after 2012 .
The Commission and some of the old EU Member States want to ban the sale of quotas after 2012 .
However , nine countries - the Czech Republic , Poland , Hungary , Romania , the three Baltic States , Slovakia and Bulgaria - are insisting on being able to sell their quotas after 2012 as well .
The countries mentioned , including Hungary , have fulfilled , failed to fulfil and overfulfilled their Kyoto commitments .
Hungary , for example , which committed to an 8 % decrease , has achieved a 23 % decrease .
This is why Hungary finds the Commission 's stance totally unacceptable and is insisting as firmly as possible on being able to sell its carbon dioxide quotas after 2012 as well .
I would also like to call on my fellow Members from Bulgaria , Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and the Baltic States , irrespective of party affiliation , to stick just as resolutely themselves to this viewpoint .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to offer you , Mrs Malmström , my sincere congratulations on moving , so to speak , from Parliament into government and from government into the European Commission .
I wish you all the best .
We are having the last meeting under the Treaty of Nice and we are talking about the first meeting under the Treaty of Lisbon .
This quantum leap , this change , this new chapter must be noticeable at the first summit .
Europe has changed .
The debate about the institutions is over and the debate about staffing as well , I hope .
We are moving over to policy making in a new context .
Citizens ' rights and parliaments will be strengthened , the European Union 's and the institutions ' ability to act will be reinforced and we , all three institutions , will be given rights which will make it easier for us to represent our continent in the world .
You can write anything you like on paper .
However , whether we can convince the people that we have the political will to take action , formulate new objectives and involve citizens in projects will depend on all these meetings in the next few weeks .
I am expecting this summit to generate a new dynamic , a new sense of responsibility and a more serious approach to handling different topics .
What we have seen over the last few days was the search for the lowest common denominator : nationalisation and politicisation .
The Treaty of Lisbon , on the other hand , is a call for Europeanisation and for policy making .
This is why I expect that we know what we will do with the model of the social market economy .
How will we handle the financial and economic crisis ?
We cannot do this by defending existing rights , but by searching for global solutions .
I also expect us to review our finances .
It is essential for us to know how much money we have to spend on our policies .
The summit must pass the responsibility for this financial review to the Commission .
We must discuss the various themes seriously , honestly and openly and set ourselves new objectives .
I wish you all the best .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we should be happy today , as we are emerging from an institutional difficulty .
We have the Treaty of Lisbon , we have parity , we have faces , and yet how can I explain to you this uneasiness that I feel ?
Today , in this almost empty Chamber , I sense no life ; we are taking part in a disappointing debate with regard to the preparation of this European Council .
I cannot explain this sense of uneasiness regarding the preparation of this final European Council under a rotating presidency .
What a difference from the joy of the peoples in 2004 , when the former Communist countries joined the Union !
What a difference from the celebrations to mark the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall !
Yes , we know now that the solution will not come from the Member States .
The solution will come from the peoples , it will come from the European Parliament .
So I look to the Commission , which ought not to take sides , but to establish a political alliance with the European Parliament so that the alliance of the peoples ensures that we can dream of what we desire for this European Union , the Union of peoples .
( DE ) Mr President , I agree with the majority of the previous speakers that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon represents a new historic phase in European integration .
However , the people , the citizens throughout Europe are not always in the mood to celebrate when they think about it .
Many people are afraid that the Treaty of Lisbon could result in increased centralism in Europe .
Many people fear that the small EU Member States , for example , my home country of Austria , will have less influence , because the large Member States will be able to decide everything as a result of the new voting methods .
People also have the feeling that the choice of the people to fill the top positions in the European Union was based on the weakest and lowest common denominator .
That is not to say anything against the personal qualities of Mr Van Rompuy and Baroness Ashton .
However , people realised that the process did not involve democratic choice .
If we want to lead the European Union into a productive future , we in this Parliament must push for more democracy , including in the process of choosing people to fill the top positions .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union returned to growth in the third quarter of 2009 , which could lead us to believe that the worst is behind us .
However , a worrying situation remains , that of the explosion in unemployment , and we must therefore continue to be extremely cautious .
Moreover , the Commission , in a report dated 23 November , states that the financial crisis wiped out more than 4 million jobs between the second quarter of 2008 and mid-2009 .
It is vitally important today that , at the next European Council , the issue of employment be discussed within the context of the post-2010 Lisbon Strategy .
The latter absolutely must include bold targets and innovative measures .
I believe that , from now on , the debate must focus on adapting this Lisbon Strategy to this confused period .
Our fellow citizens expect Europe - and we see it every day on the ground - to provide solutions to the employment crisis .
Let us not disappoint them .
However , my observation and my disappointment are akin to those of my colleague , Mr Audy , in the face of an almost empty Chamber , in the face of an extremely worrying situation for our fellow European citizens .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I wish to thank the Swedish Presidency for the great efforts it has made during these months , which have led , amongst other things , to the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Finally , after 10 years of institutional impasse , the European Union can resume its trajectory of growth , which was unexpectedly cut short some time ago , by strengthening the codecision procedure .
Quite apart from any debate over the qualities of the individuals chosen , the appointments made in recent days have certainly shown that the appointment procedures are far removed from the principles of transparency and responsibility in respect of its citizens that the European Union upholds .
This House must undertake to ensure its greater future involvement in negotiations , which cannot and must not be conducted in secret by the States within the Council .
Lastly , I hope that we will be able to conclude 2009 by reaching an ambitious agreement at the Copenhagen conference , where the European Union must speak with one voice to express its opinion on climate change .
( PL ) Mr President , the most important work of the Swedish Presidency was , more than anything , the Lisbon Treaty , which opens up new possibilities for Europe .
We need to establish a road map for its introduction .
Filling vacancies is only the beginning .
Secondly , we need to adopt a plan for economic renewal .
We need to remember , not only about help for the banks , but also about help for ordinary people , especially in the area of limiting unemployment .
Thirdly , we are working on a strategy for combating climate change - and this is good .
We are deciding what should be done in this area , but let us remember that , in terms of financial aid , the fight with the crisis comes first .
Fourthly , the Stockholm Programme means a safe and open Europe , a Europe of freedoms - only then is it a common Europe .
A certain kind of balance between these important values is essential here .
Finally , development of the Baltic Sea region requires greater cooperation of the Member States in the region , and Sweden has done a great deal in this area .
( RO ) I want to begin by congratulating the Swedish Presidency for the way in which it has made the preparations for the transition to the Treaty of Lisbon .
This priority on the Swedish Presidency 's agenda has been successfully achieved .
I believe that the Council in December must work on finding solutions aimed at tackling the two-fold challenge Europe is facing : the economic crisis and climate change .
At the moment , confidence needs to be restored in the financial markets by setting up a monitoring system designed to manage and prevent the occurrence of a similar crisis in the future .
On the subject of climate change , I think that the drafting of the environmental protection policy must not affect other types of policies , or the allocation of European funds for policies such as regional development .
Mr President , I will answer a few short questions .
There was a question about Turkey .
We are , of course , pleased that Turkey continues to have European integration as an overarching objective .
The negotiations with Turkey are progressing - perhaps not as quickly as we would like , but progress is being made and we hope to be able to open the environment chapter at the end of the year .
Naturally , we also support the negotiations between Turkey and Cyprus and the talks that are being held on the island to find a solution to its division .
It is the parties concerned who are responsible for this process and the UN is providing assistance , but the EU , of course , supports this and I was in Cyprus very recently to talk with the various parties involved in this matter , as it would be fantastic if a solution could be arrived at soon .
There will also be a debate on enlargement in respect of Turkey and other candidate countries this afternoon with the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Carl Bildt , when Members will have the opportunity to ask questions about this and other issues .
I will say a brief word about the Baltic Sea Strategy .
I would , once again , like to thank the European Parliament for the support it has shown to the Swedish Presidency with regard to this matter .
It was , of course , here in Parliament that the idea of the Baltic Sea Strategy was born , so we are very pleased that it is now in place and in force .
It will be a very important factor in being able to tackle the environmental problems in the region , but also in increasing cooperation for prosperity , innovation and security , among other things .
The European External Action Service is one of the biggest and most important changes resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon .
At the summit in October , the European Council approved a general framework for this Service .
Mrs Ashton will now continue to work on this framework together with the European Parliament and will submit a final proposal by April next year at the latest .
The External Action Service will , of course , be phased in gradually and it is important for this to be carried out in a competent and constructive manner .
The European Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the form that this will take .
As regards the budget review , Mr Färm , I fully share your view that , now that we will finally have the Treaty of Lisbon in place in a week 's time , with new modern ground rules for the European Union , we clearly also need a modern budget that is able to meet the challenges involved .
I hope that the new Commission will be able to table such a proposal as soon as possible .
I believe that President Barroso also mentioned this yesterday during question time .
Eight years after Laeken , we are now on the threshold of a new treaty .
It is an historic moment , the start of a new era for the European Union .
I am very pleased that the Swedish Presidency has been able to play a part in putting this in place .
We can now put the institutional questions behind us to a certain extent and concentrate on the major political challenges that we know the citizens of Europe - because it is , of course , the citizens ' Europe that we are all fighting for - are concerned about .
Many of these issues will be discussed at the European Council meeting in December .
With regard to the climate - the key issue for our generation - the European Council meeting will be held at the same time as the climate meeting in Copenhagen , and the summit will give us the opportunity , where necessary , to fine-tune our negotiation position in Copenhagen .
As regards the financial issues and the economic crisis , we can put a number of instruments in place and also draw up long-term guidelines for how we can make Europe competitive once again to provide prosperity and social cohesion and , in particular , look ahead to the new Lisbon strategy which , in the long and medium term , could be very helpful to Europe in this regard .
Finally , the Stockholm Programme will bring safety and security to Europe 's citizens , and it is extremely important that we get this programme in place .
All of these issues will remain after the summit and on all of these issues we will need very close cooperation with the European Parliament .
Prime Minister Reinfeldt will be here for the December sitting and will then report the outcome of the summit and also provide a general summary of the Swedish Presidency .
Thank you very much for a very good and constructive debate .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , on this same day that we are celebrating the fact that the next Commission will apparently have at least nine women - and I also see that as a victory for all of us who have actively fought for this - we hear from news reports this morning that , in France alone , 156 women were killed last year by domestic violence .
As this is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , this is something that should make us stop and think and , hopefully , also act in the future at European level , as well as at international level .
Perhaps we should also bring this up in different meetings during the rest of today .
This is an important step forward .
It also says a lot about the procedure from now on , which should be more open when we appoint Commissioners .
I hope that , in the future , Member States and governments will nominate both a man and a woman .
I think that is an excellent idea .
Let me also comment on the appointments of a new High Representative and a new Council President .
Mrs Cathy Ashton was nominated to the Commission with the full confidence of the UK Government .
She was actually voted for here in the Parliament a year ago with a very large majority - with 538 votes , if I am correct .
As we have heard from several of you , she has been working very closely with Parliament and has always looked for Parliament 's involvement on different issues .
She was appointed unanimously by 27 Heads of State or Government , so I think she has all the legitimacy to fulfil her job and to gain the respect of the European Union 's foreign partners .
I liked the metaphor that was presented here that instead of having somebody who would stop the traffic , or mean red traffic lights , you would have a smooth operator , somebody that would actually help the traffic flow or decisions to be made in a democratic and good way in the European Union .
I have got to know her as a very good colleague , and I would say that she is also a convinced European .
That is indeed an important starting point .
We have already had good comments in the debate here .
I think it has been a fruitful and constructive discussion , and thanks for all your contributions .
May I also comment on the direct question by Göran Färm about the budget review .
I can only repeat what the Commission President has already told you , that this will be handed over to the new Commission .
This is firstly because the new Lisbon Treaty will contain provisions that require a new institutional set-up , so it will also have a good basis for decisions on the budget .
Secondly , the new Commission will have to decide on the political priorities and then put its money where its mouth is in order to actually have the budget to accompany the political priorities .
I would say that is an important innovation and an opportunity for the next Commission . It will also be handed over to Cecilia Malmström with warm hands from all of us .
What the Commission can say is that a proposal for the budget review will come early next year and will be the immediate task for the next Commission .
I would just like to comment on one thing concerning the Stockholm Programme .
The adoption of the Stockholm Programme coincides with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , where the European Parliament will have a crucial role in the development of these policies .
This will again increase the democratic legitimacy of the important decisions to be taken on justice and home affairs issues .
This is good news for European citizens and also for all EU institutions .
On climate change , I can hear that there is a common view here on the active role that the European Union should play in Copenhagen and from now on .
So , again , thank you very much for the debate .
With the new Lisbon Treaty , we now have a text that will help us deal with all the important issues that have been raised here - climate change , fighting the financial crisis and its social and other effects - and , of course , also make sure that we have a democratic European Union in the future .
That concludes the debate .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The forthcoming European Council is intended to lay the foundations for the future of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
It is doing so at a time when unemployment in Europe is reaching historic levels and the economy is in recession , foundering in a deep crisis .
Eight years on , we must bow to reality : the stated objectives have completely failed .
The causes behind this failure lie in what soon showed itself to be the true agenda of this strategy : deregulation of labour relations and the associated devaluation of work , an attack on social rights , dismantling of essential public services , privatisation and liberalisation of key sectors of the economy and imposing the market as supreme in increasing areas of public life .
Workers and people have every reason to hope for a radical move away from this agenda : a change of direction that it is vital to implement .
Among other things , such a change calls for : recognition of education as a right , not as a service or just another market sector ; democratisation of access to knowledge and culture ; valuing of work and workers ' rights ; protection of productive sectors and of micro , small and medium-sized enterprises ; quality public services for all ; and a fairer distribution of wealth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the forthcoming European Council meeting , Member States are expected to agree on the main basic principles being represented at the Copenhagen climate conference .
I think that it is important that the issue of energy efficiency does not get sidetracked by emission quotas and the financial support being granted to developing countries .
In other words , the European Union tends to forget about this easy prize .
The reason why this would be particularly detrimental is because in some regions of Europe , we can reduce emission levels more cheaply by improving energy efficiency than with any other solution .
Two conclusions can be drawn from the above .
Firstly , the European Union must endeavour to ensure a global convergence of energy efficiency standards with the adoption of the new climate protection scheme .
Secondly , energy efficiency subsidies must be given a more significant role in the EU 's future long-term budget , with particular consideration for the former socialist countries ' building reconstruction programmes . This is due to the fact that in this area , it is possible to achieve spectacular savings with a relatively modest financial expenditure .
The key theme of the Stockholm Programme is ' Building a Citizens ' Europe ' .
What this means to me is that , starting from now , European institutions alongside Member States must make progress towards abolishing the borders inside the EU , as citizens continue to face administrative and legal obstacles which seem to prevent them from exercising their right to live and work in the Member State of their choice .
This is why the Stockholm Programme must make this key theme become a reality and come up with clearly defined instruments for facilitating access to the Community labour market for all workers in the EU , which is a major symbol of European citizenship .
In addition , the current economic crisis highlights even more the need to promote the full exercising of the right to free movement .
Improving mobility within the EU , in a common area of freedom , rights and obligations , entails consolidation of the Schengen Area and , as a result , the need to integrate the remaining Member States as soon as possible .
Furthermore , this also involves good management of the EU 's external borders , which must be performed in as consistent a manner as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank the Swedish Presidency for its work drafting the new Justice and Home Affairs work programme .
Thanks to the Stockholm Programme , the European Union will be able to improve the everyday existence of all EU citizens .
Security , well-being and equality are the result of consistent adherence to the rule of law , solidarity and non-discrimination in different areas of policy and when legislation is being drafted .
I would like to see far more attention given to improving the everyday existence of immigrants , minorities and those who , for one reason or another , face discrimination .
This is not just about marginal phenomena : according to a new Eurobarometer survey , one in six Europeans said they had experienced discrimination in the last five years .
In this connection , I would like to stress the importance of the directive now being discussed by the Council on the prohibition of discrimination in the supply of goods and services .
Unfortunately , the directive 's progress in the Council has been very sluggish , and it has met with considerable opposition from some Member States .
The European Union 's value base is structured around a respect for the principles of human rights and equality .
These principles must also be fully implemented at the level of European-wide legislation .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 )
( From 11.45 to 12.05 , Members gathered for the award of the LUX prize )
( The sitting resumed at 12.05 )
1 .
2007 discharge : EU general budget - Council (
Before the vote :

Mr President , I rise under Rule 173 , regarding Rule 2 of the Rules of Procedure . I quote : ' Members of the European Parliament shall exercise their mandate independently ' .
At the debate on the Council and Commission statements this morning , you , Mr President , said that Mr Farage 's remarks were unacceptable .
As a new Member of this House , I would like you to clarify , with respect to Rule 2 , whether a Member of this House is free to express his or her opinions without any censorship .
With your permission , I will have a meeting with Mr Farage and we shall have a friendly talk about it .
That is what I propose . Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , I also took part in the debate this morning .
I did not have the impression that you were unfair or abused your office in any way .
On the contrary ...
( Uproar )
I would like to say , on the contrary , that you listened with great patience and respect as the chairman of this so-called group demonstrated to us that he is a professional slanderer .
That was the reality of Mr Farage 's speech .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to request a roll-call vote on the discharge of the Council 's budget 2007 .
I think that it is important that the Council can see the broad support from this Parliament behind our demands to the Council on more cooperation with Parliament and its competent committees on the next discharge procedure .
2 .
Labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency (
rapporteur . - Mr President , briefly , I would just like to thank the Swedish Presidency for the excellent cooperation .
I think this agreement is ambitious as well as realistic .
It will convince us to opt for fuel efficiency , for low noise and also , of course , for safety .
My thanks also go to the Commission and the shadow rapporteurs , Matthias Groote and Jorgo Chatzimarkakis , for the terrific job they have done .
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Belgium - textile industry ; Ireland - Dell (
4 .
Adaptation of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the Lisbon Treaty (
( FR ) Mr President , my machine is not working , but that is not the main thing that I wanted to say .
This report , Mr President , included an amendment that has been withdrawn , Amendment 86 .
My point of order is based on Rule 24 ( 2 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
As I have had the honour of explaining to you on behalf of a number of my colleagues , this Rule provides for the non-attached Members to appoint one of their own as a delegate to the Conference of Presidents .
Following the blocking by the administration , this obligation has not been met since July .
However , it was envisaged , under this Amendment 86 , that this provision would be changed in order to let you decide which of the representatives of the non-attached Members should sit in the Conference of Presidents .
This , Mr President , is a real disgrace , and I choose my words carefully .
It is seen as such by all our colleagues .
It would seem that we are the only ones to have the appointment of our representative to the Conference of Presidents imposed on us .
I hope , Mr President , that you will be intent on refusing this option afforded to you by the Socialist Group and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) to which you belong .
I understand what you are saying .
Would the rapporteur like to say something about this ?
May I ask the rapporteur to comment ?
rapporteur . - Mr President , we do not have to spend a lot of time on this because the Non-Inscrits are not worth spending a lot of time on .
We are not voting on this .
If they bothered to turn up at the committees to which they are entitled to turn up , they would know that we are not voting on this today but we are going to vote on this in January .
I will be sticking to my recommendation that you , Mr President , invite a Non-Inscrit to attend the Conference of Presidents .
5 .
Preparation of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change ( vote )
Mr President , on the voting order between Amendments 43 and 54 , my group sees that this voting order in this list is the wrong way round .
Adopting Amendment 43 should not make Amendment 54 fall , because in 54 there are also other issues which are not covered by 43 .
If some of this makes another amendment fall , then 54 should be voted on first and then 43 after that .
This is not on the first vote but a vote on the second page .
I just wanted to announce this so that you know when we come to that place in the vote .
Would a representative of the Committee like to say something about this ?
Perhaps Mr Leinen ?
Are you proposing a change to the voting order ?
I have to say we were not expecting this change .
No such proposal has been made .
Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , yes , Mrs Hassi is right .
We can follow the procedure that she has proposed .
( DE ) Mr President , just now the interpreter asked for Article 20 and not for Article 22 which makes it difficult to do what you intend .
Therefore , I hope that the interpreters now translate the Polish numbers correctly .
Maybe it was my fault .
I am sorry .
( DE ) Mr President , an official delegation is representing Parliament in Copenhagen .
You will also be attending and , for the first time , we do not have to rent an office in the city . Instead , we will have an official presence in the EU pavilion .
This is good and we are grateful .
Therefore , Article 61 is not needed .
The Treaty of Lisbon ensures not only that Parliament will be listened to with regard to international treaties , but also that it has to agree to them .
This is the beginning of a new era for us and , therefore , we are asking , in accordance with Article 60 , to be admitted to the EU coordination meetings and not to be left standing outside the door .
The Commission must treat us in the same way as it does the Council when it provides information about treaty negotiations and we are asking it to begin with the Kyoto agreement .
This is our request to the Commission .
Perhaps Mrs Reding would like to say something on this subject .
( Applause )
Mr President , I have taken the message on board and I will pass it on to the Commission President and the other commissioners .
Mr President , I would like to ask you very kindly to speed up a bit because , if we continue at this pace , we will end up voting in plenary at midnight .
6 .
Multi-annual programme 2010-2014 regarding the area of freedom , security and justice ( Stockholm Programme ) ( vote )
( DE ) Mr President , what Mr Ferber rightly complained about has happened again .
We have heard three different numbers relating to the paragraph that we are just about to vote on .
I do not know whether this is because the numbers were not read out correctly or were not translated correctly .
I heard 33 , then 30 and then 43 , making it very unclear .
Thank you for that remark !

( IT ) Mr President , the subject is an oral amendment to paragraph 131 , on which I am in agreement with the other two rapporteurs , Mr López Aguilar and Mr Berlinguer .

The current text states : ' calls on the Council , the Commission and Member States to evaluate and review current international , European and national laws and policies on drugs and to promote harm reduction policies , notably with a view to the conferences on those issues held at UN level ' .
The oral amendment proposes inserting the words ' prevention ' and ' recovery ' , meaning that the call to evaluate and review laws would concern ' harm reduction , prevention and recovery policies ' .
7 .
The state of play of the Euromed Free Trade Area ( vote )
8 .
Passenger compensation in the event of airline bankruptcy ( vote )
9 . ' made in ' ( origin marking ) ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , the first duty of any assembly is to hold the executive to account .
We are here as the people 's tribunes .
There should be a creative tension between us and the executive - that is , the Commission .
But when it comes to these budgetary questions , the European Parliament , uniquely among the elected assemblies of the world , sides with the executive against its own constituents , in the cause of deeper integration .
Every year the European budget grows ; every year we have the report from the Court of Auditors that shows tens of billions of euros being lost or stolen .
And yet we do not do the one thing which we are empowered to do , which is to withhold supply , in other words , to say that we will not hand over any more money until the accounting procedures have been put in order .
Yet again we are waving through this budget despite all the errors in it and thereby betraying those who put us here , who are our constituents and also our taxpayers , because the majority of people in this house take a ' Europe right or wrong attitude ' and would rather see things being badly done by Brussels than competently done by the Member States .

Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left voted in favour of the mobilisation of EUR 24 million to support workers made redundant in Belgium .
We voted in favour because we are on the side of those who are in need , those who devote their sweat and their brains to companies and who , ultimately , are victims of an unfair economic system and unchecked competition for profits , which have devastating social effects .
That being said , the role of this Adjustment Fund must be assessed .
In 2009 , only EUR 37 million were mobilised , out of a possible EUR 500 million .
The fund is not reflecting the reason for which it was set up .
Secondly , instead of supporting the unemployed directly , this fund supports national employment security systems .
As they are very different from each other , the fund ends up reproducing the obvious inequalities among our own distribution systems .
In Portugal , the fund provides an unemployed person with EUR 500 of support . In Ireland , it provides an unemployed person with EUR 6 000 of support .
Thirdly , the case of Dell shows how it is possible simultaneously to support workers who are made redundant in Ireland and the very multinational that made them redundant , which is currently receiving another kind of public funds in Poland .
Dell was given money to set up a new factory in Poland while it was gaining new positions in US markets and , in the third quarter of this year , announced profits in the region of USD 337 million .
All aspects of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund therefore need to be carefully assessed .
Mr President , I have said it many times before and I will no doubt say it again : whatever the motives of its founders , the European Union has long since ceased to be an ideological project and it has become a racket , a way of redistributing money from people outside the system to people within it .
Hence , the thing we are talking about today - these bungs to selected favoured companies .
Let us pass over the suspicious timing of the grant to Dell in Ireland that was announced with questionable procedural propriety in the run-up to the Irish referendum on the European Constitution or Lisbon Treaty .
Let us just make the wider point that we have tried this before as a continent : in the 1970s , we went down the road towards propping up uncompetitive industries , with disastrous consequences .
We know where that road leads .
It ends in stagnation , inflation and ultimately in collective bankruptcy .
Let us not go there a second time .
Mr President , I was interested to read the first sentence , where it says that the fund has been created in order to provide additional assistance to workers suffering from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
But have we not always had major changes in world trade patterns ?
In my constituency of London , we had textile companies that responded and prepared for globalisation by outsourcing some of their functions to poorer countries , thereby creating jobs in developing countries , but keeping high-value research and development and marketing jobs in London , in the constituency , in the European Union .
Why then , if these companies can respond , are we rewarding inefficient textile and IT companies who bury their heads in the sand and hope that globalisation will go away ?
Surely this money should be returned to taxpayers so they can spend it as they see fit .
Surely it is time for governments to focus on creating the right conditions so that , when jobs are lost , entrepreneurs can come along and create new jobs .
( FR ) Mr President , I return to this real abuse of authority that has very nearly been committed , precisely under the pretext of an amendment to the Rules of Procedure that is designed to adapt them to the conditions of the Treaty of Lisbon , this Amendment 86 by which the administration granted itself the right to appoint the representative of the non-attached Members to the Conference of Presidents .
It is completely scandalous that this appointment , which should have taken place , as in all of our Parliament 's bodies , either by election or by consensus , by election failing consensus , has not yet taken place due to deliberate manoeuvring by officials who are opposed to it .
Furthermore , it is alarming that these officials should have won over to their cause political groups which are hostile to us and which , clearly , ought not to give a de facto or de jure opinion on the appointment of our representative .
We shall challenge this decision , if it is discussed again , before the Court of Justice .
Mr President , in order to ensure that we have genuine and binding results in the fight against climate change , there are four principles that must be guaranteed , and I would like to highlight them .
They have also been voted on here today .
The first is that we need to reach a legally binding agreement .
The second is that strict political targets need to be guaranteed , including targets for reducing emissions .
We need to have ambitious targets in this regard .
I believe that we could have gone further than we did today .
The third point is that the necessary public funding should be guaranteed to enable us to tackle this problem of climate change .
The fourth and final point - which I believe is very important to consider - is that it should be a global agreement , and not just an agreement among certain regions , and this has to happen by means of a process rooted in democratic participation involving all countries .
I believe that the resolution we have adopted here today is not as good - shall we say - as the one that was previously adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
However , I believe that what should be safeguarded here is really the result achieved and the efforts made throughout this process and so we leave for Copenhagen with a rather good job done within Parliament .
I sincerely hope that we fight hard and that we can fulfil what we have adopted here today .
Mr President , I supported this resolution .
Climate change is a global political priority at the Copenhagen Summit .
It should deliver not merely political commitments but binding agreements and sanctions for non-compliance .
The fight against climate change is a global action , and the active involvement of both developed and developing countries is necessary .
However , the rich countries have to play the leading role .
They must agree on mandatory targets to cut their emissions and , at the same time , find money to help developing countries deal with climate change .
( CS ) With today 's adoption of the resolution on the Copenhagen Summit on climate protection , Parliament has given a clear signal that it attaches enormous importance to this issue .
This is reflected in an authentic approach under which Parliament sets out the principle of shared but differing responsibilities .
In accordance with this , the industrialised countries are to take a leading role while the developing countries and economies such as China , India and Brazil will be provided with adequate support through technology and the building up of capacity .
On the other hand , I must say that the assumption that a deal in Copenhagen might provide the impulse for a green new deal initiative is , in my opinion , overly optimistic and ideological one-sided .
We must not put blinkers on our eyes and walk over the corpses of industrial enterprises in an idealistic effort to reduce CO2 emissions .
I would not consider such an unrealistic approach to be a sustainable alternative for the whole of Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , the report that has just been adopted in our Chamber definitely toes the ' politically correct ' line that reigns supreme here , unchallenged by established dogmas .
However , just because something is said a thousand times does not mean that it is justified .
There has always been global warming .
There has been global warming since the last glaciations , for example , and , after all , it was not the cars used by Neanderthal Man that caused the previous instances of global warming .
There is no dispute , there is no question about what is repeated to us a hundred times , a thousand times , and for what reason ?
We can clearly see that there is at least one very important reason : to prepare for the advent of world government ; and the second reason is once again to instil a sense of guilt in Europeans and in Westerners , who are considered , wrongly , as being responsible for all the world 's ills .
I shall stop there , Mr President , because I am not entitled to sixty-one seconds .
Thank you for having taken notice of what I have said .
Mr President , at his first press conference as the new President or as the appointee , Mr Van Rompuy declared that the Copenhagen Process would be a step towards the global management of our planet .
I cannot be alone in being alarmed at the way in which the environmental agenda is being piggybacked by those who have a different agenda about the shifting of power away from national democracies .
Environmentalism is too important to be left to just one side of the political debate to apply its solutions .
As a Conservative , I consider myself a natural conservationist .
It was Marx who taught that nature was a resource to be exploited , a doctrine that found brutal realisation in the smokestack industries of the Comecon states , but we have never tried the free market solutions of extending property rights , of having clean air and clean water by allowing ownership , rather than the tragedy of the commons , where you expect state action and global technocracies to achieve these ends .
Environmentalism is altogether too important to be left .
( IT ) Mr President , the resolution on the Stockholm Programme on which our Parliament voted today is the outcome of a great cooperative effort and a brand new procedural formula , of which we do not have much experience as yet .
This formula in fact sets truly ambitious goals , but if we are to have a Europe that is open yet also safe , we must be able to strike the right balance between increasingly effective cooperation in the fight against crime and terrorism , on the one hand , and a strong commitment to safeguarding public privacy rights , on the other .
We are committed to implementing a common policy on asylum , to respect for the safeguarding of fundamental human rights and to a common immigration policy through greater control of our borders .
The next task is to set up a European judicial area .
To achieve this goal , we must promote all forms of cooperation with the aim of disseminating a common European judicial culture .
Examples of this include the mutual recognition of common judgments and rules , abolition of the exequatur procedure and the implementation of measures aimed at facilitating access to justice and fostering exchanges between magistrates .
Then , there is the multi-annual programme , which stresses the concept of European citizenship , which should be considered to complement , not limit , national citizenship .
I believe that these are goals requiring a greater commitment by all ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , I have , today , voted in favour of the EU 's strategy for freedom , security and justice , in other words , the Stockholm Programme , but when the Council 's actual legislative proposal comes back to Parliament via the Commission , I intend to be very strict and tough when it comes to the question of openness and transparency in legislative work .
This is particularly important with regard to the asylum procedure .
The option to apply for asylum is a fundamental right , and European cooperation is about tearing down walls , not about erecting them .
The Member States must therefore respect the definition of a refugee and an asylum seeker in accordance with the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and I have now tabled an amendment to this effect .
In its final form , the Stockholm Programme must stand for European values such as freedom and respect for human rights .
These are worth fighting for , and that is exactly what I am going to do .
( ES ) Mr President , I would first like to thank you and your officials for your patience during these explanations of vote .
Mr President , a former British Home Secretary , Willie Whitelaw , once told a successor in that office that it was the best job in the Cabinet because one did not have to deal with any foreigners .
No Home Secretary in any Member State could say that today .
There has been the most extraordinary harmonisation in the justice and home affairs field .
On everything from immigration and asylum , visas , civil law , criminal justice and policing , we have effectively given the European Union that ultimate attribute of statehood : a monopoly of coercive legal force over its citizens , that is to say , a system of criminal justice .
When did we ever decide to do this ?
When were our voters ever consulted ?
I accept it has not been done in secret .
There was no conspiracy about it , or at least it was perhaps what H. G. Wells called an open conspiracy , but at no stage have we had the courtesy to ask people whether they want to be citizens of a state with its own legal system .
( NL ) Like many European citizens who were not given a chance to have their say on the Treaty of Lisbon , I , too , have become quite concerned about developments in the areas of freedom , security and justice .
More and more asylum and immigration powers are being siphoned away to the European Union , and these issues are increasingly being excluded from the ambit of citizens ' democratic control .
The outcome of this will be even more immigration and all the problems which that leads to .
The issue of conferring rights without imposing any obligations , which is another thing that emanates from this resolution , gives immigrants an excuse for not adapting to the norms of their host countries .
An example of what annoys me is the passage which deals with what has been phrased as ' the multiple discrimination faced by Romani women ' , because it fails to mention that , in many cases , such discrimination is self-imposed .
Just consider the fact that many Romani women and underage children are being required to go ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , I had asked to talk about Stockholm .
Mr President , as has been said , this report includes two objects of concern .
The first is its very distinct pro-immigration perspective .
The second is not disclosed by the content of the report or by the conclusions .
We came to know about it simply through the intentions of Commissioner Barrot : it is the criminalisation of freedom of expression , research and thought .
In many European countries today , there are people who are being prosecuted , arrested , severely punished and detained , simply because they want to express a critical point of view , on the history of the Second World War , for example , on contemporary history , or on the phenomenon of immigration .
They are being denied this right and they are being hit with very heavy punishments .
This is a major reason for concern since it is completely contrary to the European spirit .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some months ago , we witnessed the sudden and unexpected collapse of some low-cost airlines , such as Myair and Sky Europe , with the consequent immediate cancellation of all their scheduled routes .
This caused untold inconvenience for thousands of passengers who were denied the right to board duly booked flights .
More serious still is the fact that the same consumers were also denied the possibility of obtaining a refund for flights that were cancelled due to the bankruptcy measures affecting these airlines .
For these reasons , it seems more necessary than ever for the Commission , which counts the prosperity and well-being of consumers among its principles and values , to urgently adopt appropriate measures so as to prevent similar situations from occurring to the detriment of European citizens .
In particular , we need to speed up the process of revising Directive 90 / 314 / EEC on package travel , just as we need , on the one hand , to equip ourselves ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Over the past nine years , 77 airlines have filed for bankruptcy .
That is not just one , two or three , and not just yesterday : I repeat , this is over the past nine years .
As a result of this , thousands of passengers have been staying in foreign airports without any protection .
They have not obtained any compensation , or at least have not obtained the appropriate compensation in time .
On account of this , I voted for this resolution , and I agree with the idea that in the airline sector , we must also regulate this gap in our legal system , something which has prevailed today .
I also support the concrete deadline put forward in the resolution , which is 1 July 2010 - quite soon , therefore - when the European Commission must come forward with concrete , real proposals to solve this problem , and in future , air passengers ' rights should also be protected ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , this is a very important issue and I voted for this resolution because I believe that we need to have a piece of legislation protecting our citizens in case of airline bankruptcies .
Millions of our citizens use low-cost airlines every day .
However , the high number of low-cost airline bankruptcies in the European Union since 2000 , and the recent case of Sky Europe , have clearly demonstrated the vulnerability of the low-cost carriers to the changing oil prices and the current difficult economic conditions .
We must rectify this situation , and we ask the Commission to consider the most adequate compensation measures for our passengers .
( IT ) Mr President , in the wake of recent cases involving the suspension and revocation of the licences of many airlines , a substantial number of passengers and holders of tickets that were neither honoured nor reimbursed have suffered considerable losses .
I therefore believe it necessary to propose a specific regulation that defines the best solutions to problems arising out of the bankruptcies in terms of both financial loss and repatriation .
It is thus important to provide compensation for passengers in the event of bankruptcy and also to define the associated financial and administrative procedures .
I refer to the principle of mutual liability to protect the passengers of all airlines that fly the same route and have available seats .
This would allow the repatriation of passengers left stranded in foreign airports .
In this sense , suggestions of a guarantee fund or a compulsory insurance for airlines could represent plausible solutions that would have to be weighed against the trade-off , which would be an increase in prices for consumers .
( FI ) Mr President , it is very important to talk about the security of airline passengers and , above all , compensation in situations in which companies go bankrupt , as Mrs Oviir just mentioned .
There have been 77 bankruptcies in the past nine years , and it is alleged that the airline industry is facing more turbulence than ever .
Fierce competition is a kind of playoff .
A new phenomenon is the cheap airlines , which at the moment seem to be doing well and making huge profits .
This has driven many other airlines into an unhealthily competitive situation .
As has been said , it is very important to ensure that there is no repetition of the earlier unfortunate cases and that airlines take some sort of responsibility for their passengers and that they should be liable for compensation if a flight is cancelled due to bankruptcy .
To ensure that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) With the Lisbon Agenda , the European Union aimed to strengthen economic union .
It is therefore important to improve the competitive strength of the economy as well .
However , it is essential in this matter that fair competition should prevail in the market .
This means that clear rules should operate for every manufacturer , exporter and importer .
I supported the proposal in this resolution because imposing an obligation to identify the country of origin of goods imported from third countries in the European Union is an infallible way to obtain transparency , to give the consumer the appropriate information and also to secure compliance with international trading rules . Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , the debate on origin marking absolutely does not prioritise the interests of one or a few Member States , as is sometimes mistakenly believed .
Instead , it embodies the fundamental economic principle of levelling the playing field .
This principle , in line with the Treaty of Lisbon , aims to implement European competitiveness at international level by promoting clear and balanced rules for our producing companies and companies that import products from third countries .
We are therefore discussing matters that concern Europe as a whole .
For this reason , I believe it is essential to reach an agreement on origin marking that goes beyond individual national interests or those of political groups and leaves room for the will to implement a single market by promoting competitiveness and transparency .
Submitting to Parliament the proposal for a regulation on origin marking , as it was formulated by the European Commission in 2005 , represents a step forward in this regard .
In line with the Treaty of Lisbon , the process of codecision between Parliament and the Council will therefore make it absolutely possible to speed up the approval of a regulation that is so important to the economy and European consumers .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - British Conservatives have been unable to approve discharge of the 2007 European budget , European Council section .
For the 14th consecutive year , the European Court of Auditors has only been able to give a qualified statement of assurance for the accounts of the European Union .
We note the auditors ' remarks that around 80 % of the transactions of the EU are carried out by agencies working within the Member States under joint management agreements .
The auditors consistently report that levels of control and scrutiny of the use of EU funds within the Member States are inadequate .
In order to address this ongoing problem , the Council entered into an Interinstitutional Agreement in 2006 which obliged them to produce certification for those transactions for which they are responsible .
We are dismayed to note that , to date , the majority of the Member States have not satisfactorily delivered on their obligation and therefore , despite the traditional ' gentleman 's agreement ' between Parliament and Council , we will not grant discharge until such time as the Member States fulfil their obligations under the Interinstitutional Agreement .
I voted in favour of granting financial discharge to the Council for the 2007 budget whilst emphasising the fact that I disagree with the way in which the Committee on Budgetary Control has managed this situation in which the rapporteur , Mr Søndergaard , has produced two contradictory reports ; the change in position between the proposals for postponing discharge in April 2009 and for granting discharge being justified by the assertions resulting from meetings without any audit work , whilst the European Court of Auditors has made no comment on the management of the Council .
I regret that there has been no legal study to ascertain the powers held by the European Parliament and , consequently , those held by the Committee on Budgetary Control , in particular , concerning the Council 's external and military activities .
At a time when we will be negotiating political relations with the Council as part of the application of the Treaty of Lisbon , it is important for the work of the institutions to be based on rules of law .
At the end of the last legislative term , in April , Parliament decided to postpone discharge of the Council in respect of the implementation of the budget for 2007 due , essentially , to a lack of accounting transparency concerning the use of the Community budget .
In particular , Parliament felt it was important for there to be greater transparency and tighter parliamentary scrutiny of the Council 's spending on the Common Foreign and Security Policy / European Security and Defence Policy ( CFSP / ESDP ) .
The report adopted today finally discharges the Council , since it considers that Parliament has obtained a satisfactory response from the Council to the requests made in the resolution of last April .
However , it provides some warnings for the next discharge procedure .
In particular , it will verify progress made by the Council with regard to the closing of all its extra-budgetary accounts , the publication of all administrative decisions ( when they are used as the legal basis for budget items ) and the transmission to Parliament of its annual activity report .
Although the Council has taken a small step forwards in its presentation of accounts on the use of the Community budget , we believe that , in terms of CFSP / ESDP expenditure , the available information is still very far from adequate , which is why we still have reservations .
I voted for this regulation regarding the fuel efficiency labelling of tyres .
Energy efficiency is vitally important as regards environmental sustainability and as regards conserving finite resources .
Clear , informative labelling will help European consumers make better choices from now on .
Not only will these choices be based on cost , but they will also be based on fuel efficiency .
Another advantage of this type of labelling is that the labelling of wet-grip tyres will increase road safety .
I voted for Mr Belet 's report on fuel efficiency labels for tyres , which endorses the common position of the Council .
In view of the fact that 25 % of overall CO2 emissions come from road transport and that 30 % of the overall fuel consumed by vehicles is related to their tyres , the introduction of an obligation to label tyres represents a key instrument in the fight for a healthier environment .
The decision taken today by Parliament will result in a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions of up to four million tonnes a year .
For the purposes of illustration , this is equivalent to removing 1 million cars from EU roads .
The unquestionable benefit of the approved legislation comes from improving the quality and therefore the safety of tyres .
This should not lead to any increase in prices , which consumers will certainly appreciate , especially those who decide what to buy based on the price of a product .
In my opinion , this confirms the results of market research showing that consumers are interested in buying more environmentally friendly products .
In my opinion , the advantage of the approved regulation for producers is that , thanks to the unified standards for conveying information on the efficiency of tyres , there will be a better chance for customers to compete on the basis of factors other than product price alone .
The new regulation on the labelling of tyres is part of the Community strategy on CO2 , which sets targets to be achieved through vehicle emission reductions .
From November 2012 , tyres will be labelled in the EU according to their fuel efficiency , wet grip and noise emissions .
Tyres are responsible for 20 to 30 % of the energy consumed by vehicles due to their rolling resistance .
By regulating the use of energy efficient tyres that are safe and have low noise emissions , we are helping both to reduce environmental damage , by lowering fuel consumption , and to increase consumer protection , by means of market competition .
I therefore welcome the creation of another instrument that represents one more step in the direction of a sustainable Europe in terms of energy .
Mr President , I approve Parliament 's decision to finally adopt a regulation that increases safety as well as the environmental and economic efficiency of road transport .
The aim is to promote the use of safe , quieter tyres .
According to some studies , it is possible to significantly reduce ( by up to 10 % ) the proportion of fuel consumed by a vehicle that is dependent upon tyre performance .
In line with my commitment to consumer protection , this regulation establishes an effective regulatory framework through clear and precise labelling and information .
This makes it possible to safeguard transparency and makes consumers more aware of their buying options with the support of brochures , flyers and web marketing .
I welcome the fact that , instead of a directive , we have a regulation on the labelling of tyres , which is the result of a suggestion by Parliament .
From November 2012 , tyres will be labelled according to their fuel efficiency , wet grip and noise emissions .
European citizens will have more information to select the right tyres so as to reduce fuel costs and to help reduce energy consumption .
They can thus make a more environmentally friendly choice and reduce their carbon footprint .
Moreover , labelling will lead to increased competition among manufacturers .
This labelling is beneficial from an environmental point of view .
It should be noted that road transport is responsible for 25 % of carbon dioxide emissions in Europe .
Tyres can play an important role in reducing CO2 emissions because they are responsible for 20 to 30 % of the total energy use of vehicles .
For passenger cars , more energy efficient tyres can save up to 10 % on fuel costs .
I therefore voted in favour .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the compromise package on tyre labelling .
This Parliament deals with many issues which appear extremely technical and , at first glance , are not high on many people 's political agenda ; this is perhaps one such issue .
However , closer examination reveals that almost a quarter of CO2 emissions come from road transport and that tyres play a significant role in determining fuel efficiency .
This proposed legislation therefore plays an important part in wider EU efforts to tackle global warming .
I voted in favour of this report in particular because it contributes to two essential points : improving the information available , which facilitates a more environmentally friendly choice of tyres , and the fact that , by making such a choice , we will be contributing to greater energy efficiency , given that tyres are responsible for 20 to 30 % of the total energy use of vehicles .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a regulation on the labelling of tyres approved today by this House is a crucial step towards marketing safe and quiet products that also allow fuel consumption to be minimised .
The fact that the legal form of the proposal has been amended from a directive to a regulation is particularly welcome .
This will allow us to achieve the equal and immediate application of all the provisions in all Member States , ensuring more effective harmonisation of the European tyre market .
Moreover , the effort put into the negotiations by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy concerning flexibility in displaying the label will offer consumers adequate protection while simultaneously ensuring that manufacturers are not burdened with excessive bureaucracy .
The interim provision of exempting tyres manufactured before 2012 from the obligations of the regulation also constitutes a necessary measure for the purposes of ensuring a gradual phasing-in of the new European regulations in the market .
For these reasons , we can therefore say we are satisfied with the common position achieved , in the certainty that it corresponds to the aims of the Commission 's initial proposal .
I voted for the regulation on the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency .
This regulation is part of the legislative package concerning energy efficiency and will help cut polluting emissions produced by the transport sector .
According to this regulation , tyre suppliers must use labels and stickers to provide users with information about fuel consumption and running resistance , wet grip and external rolling noise .
In practical terms , the label will indicate for these parameters the level from A to G which the tyre is classified as .
Tyre suppliers also have the duty to provide explanations on their website about these indicators , as well as recommendations concerning driver behaviour .
These recommendations include the need for eco-driving , checking the tyre pressure regularly and complying with the stopping distance .
Member States will publish by 1 November 2011 all the provisions laid down by law and administrative actions required to transpose the regulation into national legislation .
The provisions of this regulation will be enforced from 1 November 2012 .
The transport sector is responsible for approximately 25 % of polluting emissions .
This is why this regulation will help reduce these emissions .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGAF ) aims to support workers personally affected by redundancies resulting from major changes in world trade .
More specifically , the EGAF finances job-search assistance , tailor-made retraining , entrepreneurship promotion , aid for self-employment and special temporary income supplements .
In the longer term , these measures aim to help these workers find and hold on to a new job .
My country , Portugal , has benefited from the EGAF twice : in 2008 , following 1 549 redundancies in the car industry in the Lisbon region and in Alentejo , and in 2009 , following 1 504 redundancies in 49 textile companies in the northern and central regions of the country .
The crucial role of this fund is clear .
However , the question asked by Mrs Berès highlights that there is a situation that should be clarified by the European Commission .
We must prevent the allocation of funds or State aid in a Member State resulting in job losses in other areas of the EU .
I therefore agree with the need to guarantee effective coordination of European financial aid , preventing companies from seeking to profit by creating and cutting jobs .
in writing . - I support this allocation of € 14.8 million of European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGAF ) support to the 2 840 workers of Dell in Limerick who have lost their jobs following the closure of their plant because , rather than Dell , it will benefit the redundant workers directly .
Indeed , it appears that while Dell was closing its manufacturing plant in Ireland , it received € 54.5 million in State aid from the Polish Government to open a new plant in Lodz .
This State aid was approved by the European Commission .
What consistency is there at the heart of this policy followed by the Commission ?
It effectively exempts Dell from facing the social consequences of its strategy and allows companies to engage in a race to the bottom supported by both Member State and EU funds .
Clarity on the coordination of the European Commission 's policy on State aid and social policy is urgently needed .
As I have had occasion to say before , even before the emergence of the current financial crisis , which has increased and exacerbated some of the earlier symptoms , the serious impact of globalisation and the resulting relocation of businesses on many people 's lives was already clear to see .
The unique challenge of the times in which we are living and the exceptional need to use mechanisms , themselves exceptional , to assist the unemployed and to promote their reintegration into the labour market become clear when we add to these problems the present lack of confidence in the markets and the shrinking of investment .
In this respect , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has already been used several times , always with the aim of mitigating the impact on European workers caused by their exposure to the global market .
The cases described in Mr Böge 's report are once again worthy of consideration , although some doubts remain as regards knowing if everyone really will qualify .
It would therefore be better if applications were submitted separately in future .
I would restate my belief that the European Union must take steps to promote a more robust , free and creative European market that will generate investment and jobs .
I voted in favour of this report because , since the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGAF ) is an instrument to respond to a specific European crisis caused by globalisation , this applies to the current situation .
This fund provides individual , one-off and time-limited support directly to workers made redundant .
It is argued that , in allocating this fund to workers , there should be no disproportionality as has been seen .
Moreover , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) supports the European Employment Strategy and the policies of Member States on full employment , quality and productivity at work , promotes social inclusion , particularly access to employment for disadvantaged people , and reduces employment inequalities at national , regional and local levels .
This is a crucial fund for strengthening economic and social cohesion .
The current situation calls for robust , proper and swift implementation of the ESF .
It is clear that the EGAF and the ESF have different , complementary objectives , and that neither one can replace the other .
As the extraordinary measure it is , the EGAF should be financed autonomously , and it is a very serious mistake for the EGAF , a short-term measure , to be funded at the expense of the ESF or any other structural fund .
in writing . - I welcome the decision of the European Parliament to approve aid for the Dell workers under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The redundancies at Dell have seriously affected the local Limerick economy and surrounding areas .
We must put in place appropriate re-training measures to ensure that the people who lost their jobs at Dell can secure employment in the near future .
The approval of the Irish application for aid under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will contribute to the re-training and up-skilling of the workers in question .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the cases of Belgium and Ireland , as I consider that we should use all possible means to help employees who are victims of the damage caused by globalisation and the economic and financial crisis .
I nevertheless wonder about the consistency of European policies when , alongside the mobilisation of this fund , the European Commission permits Poland to grant State aid to Dell to open a plant in its country , even though the company is closing one in Ireland .
How can European citizens have faith in the ' benefits ' of Europe when it authorises this kind of ' trick ' ?
One might doubt the legitimate use of public funds in this context and regret the lack of social responsibility of our companies , which are guided by an exclusive concern for profitability , regardless of the jobs destroyed .
The Dell group , yesterday number one , today number three in the world in the field of information technology , with an estimated stock market value of USD 18 billion , posting a USD 337 million profit for the third quarter of 2009 , and predicting an even bigger profit for the fourth quarter ...

Yes , I am behind Dell 's employees !
Yes , I hope they find a job and get back to living a dignified life as soon as possible !
But , no , I will not contribute to the plundering of European taxpayers .
I will not , under any circumstances , join in showing any more contempt for employees who are in a state of utter disarray .
It is up to the guilty to pay and up to Europe to implement a strong industrial policy that meets the needs of the populations before dividends are allowed to be distributed !
in writing . - Today the European Parliament endorsed a € 14 million fund which is to go towards the training of 1 900 Dell workers who were made redundant by the decision to move the plant from Ireland to Poland .
This fund can provide for those who have lost their jobs to retrain and acquire qualifications to get back into the workforce .
The fund will act as a hand-up rather than a handout , as the money will be forwarded to third level colleges in the Munster region to pay the tuition fees of former Dell employees .
The approval of this fund represents a key example of Europe 's commitment to helping Ireland out of the recession .
The fund should help slow the trend of increasing unemployment in Munster and will provide a major boost for the local economy as those affected by the closure of the Dell plant return to the workforce .
It is in thinking of the Irish and Belgian workers as victims of neo-liberal globalisation that we are voting for this report and for the granting of aid under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
However , we vigorously denounce the reasoning that the social and human tragedies experienced by European workers should be regarded simply as ' adjustments ' necessary for the smooth running of neo-liberal globalisation .
It is totally unacceptable for the EU to support the very parties who bear the responsibility for these tragedies by giving its political and financial backing to the relocation and transfer processes that they are carrying out for purely profit-making purposes .
The commercial appetites of capitalist predators such as the Texan company Dell , the world number two in telecommunications , cannot be indulged independently of the general interest of the citizens of Europe .
At any rate , this is not our vision of Europe .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund falls within this concept .
This support is fundamental for helping the unemployed and victims of the relocations that have occurred as a result of globalisation .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of the lower labour costs in a number of countries , particularly in China and India , with damaging effects for countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGAF is intended to help workers that have fallen victim to company relocations and it is essential for helping them to have access to new jobs in the future .
The EGAF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , in particular Portugal and Spain , and it is now time to provide such aid to Belgium and Ireland .
The EU has established a legislative and budgetary instrument to be able to provide support to those who have lost their jobs on account of ' major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market ' .
We are convinced that free trade and the market economy benefit economic development and we are therefore , in principle , opposed to financial assistance for countries or regions .
However , the financial crisis has hit the Member States ' economies very hard and the economic downturn is deeper this time than any downturn that Europe has experienced since the 1930s .
If the EU does not take action , the unemployed will be very severely affected in those regions in Belgium and Ireland that have applied for assistance from the EU .
The risk of social marginalisation and permanent exclusion is very great , which is something that , as Liberals , we cannot accept .
We strongly sympathise with all those affected by the consequences of the economic downturn and would like to see measures such as training that will help individuals overcome this .
We therefore support the assistance for the unemployed affected in the textiles sector in the Belgian regions of East and West Flanders and Limburg and in the computer manufacturing industry in the Irish counties of Limerick , Clare and North Tipperary , as well as in the city of Limerick .
I endorsed mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , because mass redundancies are , without doubt , a negative consequence of the economic crisis , and despite popular opinion , the crisis is still with us .
There is no doubt that those in the countries concerned who have lost their jobs should be helped .
Losing their jobs is a huge tragedy in the lives of these people and their families .
This is why I think the role of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is especially important in the difficult times of the crisis .
In my opinion , the budget of the Fund should be significantly increased in the future , so that it will be able to meet social needs .
The economic crisis continues to take its toll in the form of group redundancies , which often lead to human dramas , a growth in social problems and many other unhelpful phenomena .
Therefore , I think we should do everything possible to help , in the most effective way , the people suffering the effects of the economic crisis .
I welcome the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure on account of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I should like to emphasise one of the aspects that I consider to be of the utmost importance at the moment , as we witness the negotiations for the new agreement that will replace the Kyoto Protocol in January 2013 .
The Treaty of Lisbon makes the international fight against climate change a specific objective of EU environmental policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon adds support for international action to fight climate change to the list of objectives that make up its environmental policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon also gives Europe new powers in the fields of energy , scientific research and space policy .
Energy is now a joint responsibility , paving the way for a common European policy .
I voted in favour of Mr Martin 's report on the adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the Treaty of Lisbon , because it is necessary to amend some of Parliament 's internal rules , in view of the increased powers resulting from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , particularly the increased legislative power , which will enable it to legislate on an equal footing with the Member States ' governments on a greater number of issues .
The amendments on which we voted today will be incorporated into the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament because the Rules need to be brought into line with the heralded entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , scheduled for 1 December .
I believe that the significant stepping up of Parliament 's powers , which calls on all MEPs to tackle new challenges , is an important test of its ability to propose legislation and of its sense of responsibility .
As a result , I can only welcome a change in the Rules of Procedure that will bring the way the House works more into line with the provisions of the treaties .
I am particularly pleased with the increasingly important role played by national parliaments and Member States ' initiatives in terms of European integration .
I hope that the subsidiarity principle , which is subject to special attention from the European legislator , is increasingly fulfilled and respected by all European decision makers .
I voted in favour of David Martin 's report on the reform of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure insofar as it will allow our House to adhere to the new ground rules accompanying the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The reform involves , in particular : welcoming new ' observers ' who should be able to become MEPs in their own right as soon as possible ; introducing rules relating to the new role of national parliaments in the legislative procedure , by examining the respect shown for the principle of subsidiarity , a reform I gladly welcome insofar as it helps deepen the democratic debate ; and , above all , granting the European Parliament an enhanced role in the drafting of European laws .
Finally , this text clarifies the types of action to be taken by the European Parliament in the event of a ' breach by a Member State of fundamental principles ' , which is especially positive in its defence of fundamental rights .
in writing . - Under the old Rule 36 of this Parliament , we were required to ' pay particular attention to respect for fundamental rights ' .
In the new Rule 36 , we must ' fully respect ' those rights as laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is a subtle change but one which I consider to be important and which binds all MEPs to upholding the rights of all citizens .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December 2009 means it is necessary to adapt the Rules of Procedure to bring them into line with Parliament 's new rules and powers .
With these amendments to the Rules of Procedure , Parliament is preparing itself for the increased powers that it will have when the Treaty of Lisbon enters into force , taking account of the arrival of 18 new MEPs , increased legislative powers and the new budget procedure .
Future cooperation with national parliaments is also important here .
There is very little to be seen of the much-vaunted increase in democracy and stronger voice for parliaments which the Treaty of Lisbon was supposed to introduce .
There are merely a few new procedures .
The procedure for evaluating respect for fundamental rights must not , under any circumstances , be misused for the mandatory imposition of political correctness or for anti-discrimination mania .
The lack of democracy within the EU remains unchanged after the Treaty of Lisbon .
Not much has changed when the European Parliament has to choose the Commission President from a pool of failed politicians who have lost elections .
The fact that the Stockholm Programme is being pushed through so quickly that we cannot bring up our data protection concerns demonstrates how strong our voice really is .
In reality , the changes to the Rules of Procedure brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon have not resulted in any increase in transparency or a stronger voice for parliaments .
For this reason , I have voted no .
The Treaty of Lisbon will bring more speed , legitimacy and democracy to the decision-making process in the European Union , which is responsible for measures that affect us as citizens every day .
In particular , Parliament will see its legislative power increased , as it will share responsibility equally with the European Council on most issues handled by the institutions .
In fact , under the Treaty of Lisbon , so-called codecision will become the rule and the normal legislative procedure .
For my part , as an elected MEP , I am mindful of the challenge that this change brings .
This report , in particular , takes up the work undertaken and almost finished in the previous parliamentary term , to adapt the Rules of Procedure that govern Parliament 's work in light of the new treaty , which should enter into force at the start of next month .
Some amendments are purely technical in nature and others concern updates that Parliament has taken the opportunity to implement on this occasion .
As a whole , the report represents a compromise that satisfies the political family to which I belong , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , by incorporating , in a balanced way , issues such as subsidiarity and proportionality , as well as strengthening cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments .
For those reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
The Greek Communist Party is opposed to and voted against the amendments to adapt the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The amendments maintain and strengthen the reactionary and anti-democratic character of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , which forms an asphyxiating framework for every voice which rises in opposition against the sovereignty of the political representatives of capital .
It is a lie that the Treaty of Lisbon ' gives the EU a more democratic dimension ' , because it allegedly upgrades the role of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament is a component of the reactionary construct of the EU .
It has proven its devotion to the reactionary policy of the EU , its support for the interests of the monopolies , its role as the body which gives allegedly legal credence to the anti-grassroots policy of the EU .
The European Parliament does not represent the people ; it represents the interests of capital .
The people 's interest lies in opposition , in breaking with the anti-grassroots policy of the EU and the European Parliament which supports it and in overturning the euro-unifying construct .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which seeks an ambitious and legally binding international agreement in Copenhagen , since I believe that concluding this agreement can lead to a new , sustainable model that stimulates social and economic growth , fosters the development of environmentally sustainable technologies , as well as renewable energy and energy efficiency , and reduces energy consumption and enables the creation of new jobs .
I believe that approval of this resolution - which stresses that the international agreement should be based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibility , with the developed countries taking the lead in reducing their emissions and accepting responsibility for providing developing countries with financial and technical support - will contribute to a certain global balance .
It is therefore essential that the Union takes the lead on the issue so as to safeguard the well-being of future generations .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Copenhagen Summit , since it is our responsibility , as elected members , to protect the planet for future generations .
The world is staking its future on the months to come .
It is unthinkable that the international community should fail to reach an agreement that binds States to the path of reason .
Heads of State or Government , you hold in your hands responsibility for tomorrow 's Earth .
Be capable of setting aside your national interests and short-term issues because humanity has no time to lose .
in writing . - ( NL ) In the resolution adopted by the European Parliament today , a specific chapter stresses the great importance of regions and local authorities , especially in the consultation process and in disseminating information about and carrying out the implementation of climate policy .
Up to 80 % of adaptation and mitigation policies will be implemented at a regional or local level .
Several regional governments are already leading the way and pursuing a radical approach in fighting climate change .
As a member of the European Free Alliance representing European nations and regions , I fully support the direct involvement of regional governments in the promotion of sustainable development and an efficient response to climate change .
In this context , the work of the Network of Regional Governments for Sustainable Development ( nrg4SD ) must be emphasised .
This Network has already set up a close partnership with the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) and the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) .
Members of the EFA therefore call for the explicit recognition of regional governments in the context of the Copenhagen agreement , recognising the role which they are playing in mitigation and adaptation policies .
It is crucial that the Copenhagen conference results in a politically binding agreement .
This agreement must contain operational elements that can be implemented immediately and a schedule that will allow a legally binding agreement to be drawn up during the course of 2010 .
The agreement must involve all the countries that signed the Convention , and it is vital that any commitments , whether in terms of reducing emissions or in terms of funding , are clearly set out .
While , on the one hand , industrialised countries should lead the way in reducing greenhouse gas emissions , economically more advanced developing countries also have a role to play , contributing in accordance with their responsibilities and respective abilities .
Industrialised countries and emerging countries with more advanced economies should be subject to comparable efforts .
Only then will it be possible to reduce distortions in international competition .
It is also crucial that we define the structure of the funding so that this will be sustainable in the medium and long term .
The funding must come from the private sector , carbon market and public sector of industrialised countries and economically more advanced developing countries .
in writing . - It is extremely important that the EU takes action and becomes a world leader in reducing carbon emissions approaching the Copenhagen Summit .
The Parliament has already shown more ambition than the Member States in relation to a reduction in carbon emissions , and today 's resolution is to be welcomed with calls for real financing , calls for strong targets in the high end from 25-40 % in line with the science , and the insistence on a legally binding agreement .
I abstained , firstly because Amendment 13 , which considers nuclear energy to be an important factor in reducing carbon dioxide emissions , was approved and , secondly , because Amendment 3 by my group , calling for developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 80 and 95 % by 2050 compared with 1990 levels , was rejected .
There are numerous positive points in the resolution , such as the EU 's commitment to granting EUR 30 billion a year up to 2020 to meet the requirements of developing countries in the field of moderating the impact of and adapting to climate change .
However , I consider that a return to nuclear energy as an antidote to the greenhouse effect is not the solution in the fight against climate change ; on the contrary , it is a dangerous choice .
The three camps of developed , developing and underdeveloped countries and the three camps of governments , basic movements and people will clash in Copenhagen , given that climate change largely undermines efforts to reduce poverty and hunger in the world .
The Copenhagen Summit is a real challenge to which we must rise and we must not allow the industrial and nuclear lobby to be the glorious victors .
The German Free Democratic Party members of the European Parliament have abstained from voting on the Copenhagen resolution for the following reasons .
The resolution contains statements about financing for climate protection measures in third countries without defining the specific criteria or purpose of the financing .
We cannot justify this to taxpayers .
In addition , we believe that blanket criticism of the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) is wrong .
The ICAO is the organisation which deals with aviation matters at an international level .
Both the criticism and the statement about the alleged failure of ICAO negotiations are incorrect and inappropriate .
The call for specific arrangements for a CO2 trading system for the aviation industry goes against current EU legislation and overburdens the EU 's negotiating position in an international climate agreement with unrealistic demands .
in writing . - The effects of climate change are being felt now : temperatures are rising , icecaps and glaciers are melting and extreme weather events are becoming more frequent and more intense .
The UN estimates that all but one of its emergency appeals for humanitarian aid in 2007 were climate related .
We need a global energy revolution towards a sustainable economic model , which provides for environmental quality to go hand in hand with economic growth , wealth creation and technological advancement .
Ireland 's per capita carbon emission is 17.5 tonnes per annum .
By 2050 , this will need to be reduced to 1 or 2 tonnes of carbon .
Clearly , this means radical change in the production and consumption of energy .
The first step is a comprehensive agreement in Copenhagen binding the international community to mandatory reductions and providing for sanctions at international level for non-compliance .
Indeed , the international community should show commitment exceeding that shown to tackle the financial crisis .
The response to climate change lies in strong international governance and financial commitment .
Aid to the developing world must be in addition to Overseas Development Aid or risk not attaining the Millennium Development Goals .
Indeed , climate change will require increased investment in the public sector .
The joint resolution which has just been adopted by Parliament sends out a clear signal .
The Union needs to speak with one voice and act jointly following Copenhagen , no matter what the scope of the outcome of the conference .
We must aim for an actual 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
When I say ' actual ' , this means that it will eventually be necessary , one day , to raise the issue of derogations and emissions trading .
Parliament hopes that the Copenhagen Summit will be an opportunity to present a European Union that is strong and that also makes a firm financial commitment to developing countries , because we owe them .
In Copenhagen , from 7 to 18 December , nearly 200 nations will negotiate a new international treaty to combat climate change , a post-Kyoto treaty that will enter into force from 2013 ...
The resolution voted on will serve as a road map for negotiation for the European Union .
As a current member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I made my contribution via amendments supporting , in particular , the legally binding nature of the agreement .
My requirements , when voting , are to reach a global political agreement that is ambitious and binding and that quickly paves the way for a genuine legal treaty ; to achieve a 30 % reduction in relation to the 1990 greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 , with an ambitious , quantifiable yet flexible commitment from other polluters such as the United States and China , and an 80 % reduction by 2050 , in compliance with what the experts are demanding ; and to clarify the crucial collective commitment by industrialised countries in terms of finance and aid for developing countries .
In a crisis context , it is difficult to determine the exact amount , but it will be necessary to ensure that it at least corresponds to the commitments undertaken !
Failure in Copenhagen would be an environmental , political and moral disaster !
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the Copenhagen conference on climate change , since I believe that it sets out a good parliamentary compromise on the fundamental aspects that should guide negotiations on a future international agreement on this matter , especially with regard to the issues of adaptation , funding mechanisms and deforestation .
I would reiterate that reaching a legally binding international agreement in Copenhagen that is ambitious , realistic and involves all parties is also a matter of social justice .
in writing . - In the resolution adopted by the EP , a specific chapter stresses the great importance of regions and local authorities in the consultation , information and implementation of the climate policy .
Up to 80 % of mitigation and adaptation policies will happen at the regional and local level .
Several regional or sub-State governments are leading the way on radical policies to fight climate change .
As Members of the European Free Alliance representing European nations and regions , we fully support the direct involvement of sub-State bodies and regional governments in the promotion of sustainable development and the efficient response to climate change .
In this context , the work of the Network of Regional Governments for Sustainable Development ( nrg4SD ) has to be underlined .
This Network has already set up a partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme .
We therefore call for the explicit recognition of regional governments in the context of the Copenhagen agreement , recognising the key role they are playing in mitigation and adaptation policies .
As I have said before , it is vital that a legally binding , global , political agreement on climate change is adopted so as not to put European industry in an anticompetitive situation .
The European effort must be aimed at seeking an agreement that requires a joint effort , and not just an effort by the EU .
In my view , the idea of a tax on international financial transactions as a solution to fund adaptation to climate change and mitigation of its effects by developing countries is not appropriate , given that it will be at the expense of the economy ( particularly in crisis situations such as the one we are currently experiencing ) , trade and wealth creation .
The cost that such a tax would have for society in general ( increasing the tax burden , with consequences for all taxpayers and consumers ) and its impact on the financial market ( decreasing the necessary liquidity and flow of credit to businesses and households ) cannot be ignored .
I believe that this is not the way to regulate the market and that other alternatives that are less damaging to the global economy can be devised .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution because I believe that the EU should continue to lead by example in the fight against climate change .
It is worth noting that the EU has surpassed the goals drawn up in Kyoto .
I believe that the Copenhagen agreement should be binding .
In this regard , I have tabled an amendment to Parliament 's resolution on this matter , requesting an international set of sanctions to be included in the final text .
I believe that the agreement should be global , ambitious and with a clear timeline .
If we are not ambitious , we will end up with a token instrument that will be even less effective than the Kyoto Protocol , which already provides for international sanctions .
Let us therefore hope that there will be effective regulation and that the agreement will include a review clause so that it can be easily updated .
I also believe that China and India cannot be exempted from all responsibility when they produce a large percentage of global emissions , while our industries are going to great lengths to reduce their emissions .
The US has a great responsibility for ensuring the success of this summit .
I hope that the President of the United States , Barack Obama , will show that he deserved the Nobel Peace Prize , because combating climate change will contribute to peace and happiness for all nations .
The adopted resolution contains positive aspects , such as : the importance of maintaining an international post-2012 commitment ; the need to align reduction targets with the latest scientific data ; the call on the US to make binding the targets promised ( although not committed to ) in the last election campaign ; the emphasis on the historic responsibility of industrialised countries for greenhouse gas emissions ; the promotion of energy efficiency and the enhancement of RD & D activities .
However , the importance attributed to so-called market solutions , and to carbon trading in particular , is indisputable .
This is fundamentally a political and ideological choice , which not only does not guarantee that we will meet the established reduction targets , but is itself the most serious threat to achieving the stated environmental goals .
The experience of how the European Union Greenhouse Gas Emission Trading System has functioned since 2005 is an illustration of this .
Carbon trading aims to commercialise the Earth 's capacity to recycle carbon and , thus , to regulate the climate .
As a result , this capacity - which is what guarantees life on Earth as we know it - is at risk of ending up in the hands of the very corporations that are defiling the planet , its natural resources and the climate .
I abstained from the vote on the climate change resolution because the European Parliament , as is its wont , displays worthy sentiments without taking the realities into account .
The European Union produces approximately 11 % of worldwide CO2 emissions .
It cannot set an example and pay for the rest of the world too .
It is illogical to restrict Member States in the use of clean development mechanisms ( CDMs ) , albeit provided for by Kyoto , and , at the same time , ask for EUR 30 billion a year in aid for developing countries , without conditions or proper judgment , to mention only one incongruity in the resolution .
On the climate change issue , there is an urgent need to act and not to leave developing countries powerless .
They are the ones that are affected in the first place , but they lack resources suitable for influencing the phenomena created by developed countries !
Future generations will be powerless in the face of the effects of climate change if no global action is taken today .
That is why it is essential for our governments to show political leadership so as to encourage other States , such as the United States and China , to reach an agreement .
This commitment must also include the introduction of a tax on financial transactions that is used to finance not banking sector supervision , but rather developing countries and worldwide public goods , such as the climate .
in writing . - Next month , the eyes of the world will be on Denmark .
Across the North Sea , in a country of similar size , the Scottish Government is making a vital contribution to climate change efforts .
According to the official website of the Copenhagen Summit , Scotland has taken on ' world leadership on climate protection ' .
The efforts of the Scottish Government are to be fully supported and we must hope that other nations add their weight to global efforts next month .
I voted for this resolution on the European Union 's strategy for the Copenhagen Summit on Climate Change as I am convinced that a comprehensive international agreement can actually alter the trend of uncontrolled growth in greenhouse gas emissions .
Environmental policy in general , and climate policy in particular , are also a driver of technological innovation and may generate new growth prospects for our companies .
I am very glad that Europe is playing a leading role by providing for an energy and climate policy that aims to reduce emissions by 20 % in 2020 compared with 1990 .
I am firmly opposed to additional restrictive targets without a comprehensive , international agreement .
On the one hand , Europe , which is responsible for 11 % of the world 's emissions , does not carry enough weight to reverse the trend on its own and , on the other , I fear the relocation of energy- and CO2-intensive industries .
Only a comprehensive agreement focusing on the medium and long term will provide the predictability necessary to be able to embark on major research and development projects and to commit to the substantial investment required to dissociate economic growth from the growth in greenhouse gas emissions on a permanent basis .
It is very important that an ambitious and legally binding agreement on climate change is reached at the Copenhagen conference .
However , it is also important that everyone is involved , particularly China , India and Brazil , in view of their significant economic role and intense industrial activity .
These countries must also commit to pursuing ambitious targets and goals , comparable to those of other countries , though with aid , as far as possible , from other richer , more industrialised countries .
It is also essential that the United States plays its part in this extremely important matter .
in writing . - ( DE ) For far too long , the EU has been attempting to reduce the concentration of greenhouse gases single-handedly while energy-hungry emerging economies and wasteful industrial countries were not even prepared to implement the Kyoto Protocol .
We will have to wait and see to what extent the Copenhagen conference will change this .
Against this background , rules are needed for the financing process , together with sanctions for non-compliance .
In order to bring about change , we need to restructure our environmental policy so that it does not merely involve millions being transferred to and fro as part of the certificate trading process , but also enables the promotion of real alternatives , such as renewable energy , and the reduction in the transport of goods all over Europe which is subsidised using EU money .
This report does not deal with this problem in sufficient detail and , therefore , I have voted against it .
I voted for this resolution as a mandatory , global legal agreement must be reached in Copenhagen , based on which developed countries or developing countries as well will commit to targets for reducing emission levels comparable to those of the EU .
We can achieve the objective of maintaining global warming at a gradient of 2 ° C and of cutting greenhouse gas emissions only if we invest in clean technologies and in research and innovation .
Additional funds must also be allocated , taken from the contributions made by the states signing the global agreement , which reflect the economic development and solvency of these states .
in writing . - This resolution represents a clear and realistic strategy for dealing with the key areas which must be addressed in order to achieve an effective agreement in Copenhagen next month .
We have a text which balances ambition with realistic targets , and which deals with the difficult issues that the negotiators must resolve .
The European Parliament has now called on the EU negotiating team and the Member States to press for action on the following : emissions trading ; a global carbon market ; a fair system of financing for adaptation and mitigation ; forests ; and aviation and maritime transport .
The Parliament has kept to its earlier commitments regarding emission reductions by 2020 , and has now set out even more ambitious targets for 2050 in the light of new recommendations from the scientific community .
The willingness of the EU to lead on this issue may well prove to be a key factor in establishing an internationally binding agreement to deal with climate change .
The European Parliament resolution on the EU strategy for the Copenhagen conference on climate change is a significant legislative document and an important voice in the international debate and the negotiations preceding the climate summit , and is intended to supplement the European Union 's position on this question .
If the European Union wants to remain a leader in combating climate change , it should continue to set itself ambitious reduction goals and to meet previously made reduction commitments .
In this way , it would give an example to other countries , despite the difficulties involved .
The voice of the European Parliament , as the only democratic institution of the EU , is crucial in this debate , which is also why our resolution should show the right direction to take , and should formulate priorities which are truly of importance .
The text of the resolution itself must not be just a collection of demands and wishes without any basis , but should be the coherent and , above all , united voice of the citizens of the EU , based on the principle of joint , but differentiated , responsibility of Member States on the question of combating climate change .
The European Union , as a serious partner in negotiations , must take its seat in Copenhagen as a united body which gives consideration to the interests of all its Member States .
The European Union should show a readiness to increase reduction goals to 30 % , provided other countries also express a readiness to set themselves such high reduction targets .
It should also be remembered that the EU has not accepted any unconditional obligations , only conditional ones .
I voted in favour of the resolution because the European Parliament is calling on EU negotiators to make EUR 30 billion available to developing countries for their fight against climate change .
Parliament is thereby sending out a clear signal to the negotiators who will be attending the climate summit in Copenhagen on Europe 's behalf in a fortnight 's time .
Up until now , they have always been vague about what their financial input at the summit will be .
Now , however , Parliament has called on them to be more explicit about actual amounts and percentages .
And that puts the ball back in the United States ' court .
There are signals that the Americans are busy drafting a CO2 emissions target which they want to table .
This resolution ramps up the pressure on President Obama to come up with specific proposals , because that will do little to increase the chances of success in Copenhagen .
It also increases the chances of countries like China , India and Brazil joining the global fight against climate change .
Like my colleagues in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , it was therefore with a great deal of enthusiasm that I voted in favour of this robust resolution .
Its only drawback is that the production of nuclear energy has somehow crept in .
However , what is important now is that the Commission and the Member States drive a hard bargain in Copenhagen .
In today 's vote on the EU strategy for the climate conference in Copenhagen , the European Parliament adopted a radical and unrealistic position .
In demanding a doubling of restrictions on CO2 emissions in EU countries , Parliament is undermining the climate package which was recently negotiated with such difficulty ( point 33 calls for a 40 % reduction ) .
While demanding an expenditure of EUR 30 billion annually for clean technologies in developing countries , Parliament expects countries with coal-based power generation , such as Poland , to pay double for CO2 emissions : once in the form of a fee under the system for emissions trading , and a second time in the form of a contribution to help developing countries in the area of combating climate change ( point 18 talks about the contribution , which should not be less than EUR 30 billion annually ) .
While demanding that calculation of Member States ' contributions towards clean technologies in developing countries be based on CO2 emission levels and GDP , Parliament has overlooked the criterion of ability to bear these costs .
This means a cost to Poland of EUR 40 billion over the next 10 years ( this is a consequence of rejecting amendments 31 and 27 ) .
This is the reason why the Polish delegation alone voted against the whole resolution on the EU strategy for the Copenhagen conference on climate change ( COP 15 ) .
The enhanced risks to the environment and health and particularly dangerous climate changes , with the overheating of the planet , are the result of industrial development based on capitalist profit and commercialisation of land , air , energy and water .
These phenomena cannot be properly addressed by the leaders of capital , the very people responsible for creating them .
The road to the Copenhagen Summit is blocked by the escalation in imperialist infighting .
With proposals for ' a viable green economy ' and an economy of ' low carbon ' growth , the EU is trying to pave the way for even more investments by the euro-unifying monopolies and , at the same time , to satisfy the speculative expectations of capital with a ' pollution exchange ' .
In order to plan and implement a development course which will help to balance the relationship between man and nature and satisfy grassroots needs , we need , in the final analysis , to overturn capitalist relations of production .
The Greek Communist Party voted against the European Parliament resolution .
It proposes combined satisfaction of grassroots needs in accordance with the wealth produced in our country .
The political preconditions to the implementation of this objective are socialisation of the basic means of production and central planning of economic life , with control by the grassroots and working classes , in other words , power of the people and an economy of the people .
I have voted against the motion for a resolution because it determines in advance that the EU will make large amounts of funding available from the start without waiting for the other partners .
I cannot justify to my voters using their money in this way .
Climate protection is an important objective , but the panic-mongering before the Copenhagen Climate Summit is outrageous and does not reflect the scientific facts .
I voted in favour of this resolution , since it addresses priorities in fundamental chapters such as freedom , security and justice , particularly with regard to the conditions for the reception and integration of immigrants , fighting discrimination , particularly on grounds of sexual orientation , access to justice , and combating corruption and violence .
Fighting discrimination is vital , whether on grounds of gender , sexual orientation , age , disability , religious affiliation , colour , descent and national or ethnic origin , as is fighting racism , anti-Semitism , xenophobia , homophobia and violence .
Freedom of movement should also be guaranteed for all EU citizens and their families .
In conclusion , the protection of citizens against terrorism and organised crime should also be guaranteed , and the regulatory framework should therefore be strengthened to deal with these highly topical threats , given that they have a global dimension .
The Greek Communist Party is categorically opposed to the Stockholm Programme , just as it was opposed to previous programmes to implement the misleadingly entitled area of freedom , security and justice .
Its objective , the demagogic pronouncements of the EU notwithstanding , is to harmonise or homogenise national laws in order to achieve the uniform application of the EU 's anti-grassroots policy and to strengthen existing and create new mechanisms for prosecution and repression and EU level , on the pretext of terrorism and organised crime .
The top priorities of the Stockholm Programme include stepping up the anti-communist hysteria in the EU which is already proceeding full steam ahead , culminating in the historically inaccurate and unacceptable equation of communism with national socialism .
The EU area of freedom , security and justice and the programmes to implement it are not in the people 's interests ; on the contrary , they form a set of measures which strangle individual and social rights and democratic freedoms , intensify authoritarianism and repression at the expense of workers , immigrants and refugees , safeguard the political system and the sovereignty of the monopolies and aim to strike at the working class and grassroots movement , this being prerequisite to the implementation of the savage attack by capital against the employment and social rights of the working classes and grass roots .
I am convinced that the protection of children 's rights is a very important aspect of the Stockholm Programme .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that in recent years , violence against children , including the sexual exploitation of children , sex tourism involving children , trafficking of children and child labour have been of increasing concern .
Given that the protection of children 's rights is a social priority of the European Union ( EU ) , I call on the Council and the Commission to dedicate more attention to protecting the rights of those who are most vulnerable .
Children 's rights are part of human rights , which the EU and the Member States have pledged to honour in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights and the United Nations ( UN ) Convention on the Rights of the Child .
The EU must increase its commitments to help the situation of children in Europe and the whole world , so that it can properly ensure the promotion of children 's rights and their protection .
I would like to underline that only a strategy based on coordinated and joint action can encourage the Member States to honour and adhere to the principles of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child throughout the European Union and beyond its borders .
In order to properly ensure children 's rights , I would propose adopting standards of an obligatory nature in all EU Member States .
Sadly , respect for children 's rights has not yet been universally ensured .
Therefore , by implementing the Stockholm Programme , I call on the Council and the Commission to take concrete measures to ensure that children 's rights are properly protected .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution because it indicates the right way to strengthen European unity around the fundamental values that constitute its very identity .
We cannot fool ourselves that it will be possible to achieve agreement on so-called common values .
We may nevertheless hope that the application of reason can help the various political components to look more closely at what is right and fair where progressing along the road to European unity is concerned .
The clear distinction between the right to free movement and the principle of non-discrimination , on the one hand , and the value of the family as a natural society founded on marriage , on the other , has led to the formulation of the paragraph that upholds the independence of individual States in family law and the ban on discrimination against any human being .
Those who , like me , fully promote the principle of equality , affirming equality between children who are born and those who are not yet born , can only support the principle of non-discrimination against people with different sexual tendencies , but cannot accept the destruction of the concept of marriage or of the family .
The significance of this concept , as recognised by Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , is fundamental to the succession of generations and the educational capacities of heterosexual couples .
I voted against the motion for numerous reasons ; my main reasons are outlined below .
In essence , its basic dimension is the philosophy of ' security ' and fear , at the expense of basic rights and freedoms .
However , it is precisely by protecting and respecting these rights under the rule of law that security is safeguarded .
It reinforces the perception of and the facility to implement fortress Europe , which treats immigrants as potential terrorists and criminals and , in the best case scenario , ' accepts ' their presence not as people with equal rights , but depending on the needs of the EU labour market .
It promotes disgusting mass redundancies , it does not strengthen the right of access to asylum , it paves the way for the active participation of the EU in refugee camps outside its borders and for the imposition of leonine agreements with third countries , but is indifferent to the safeguarding of human rights .
Finally , even though much more could be pointed out , the resolution introduces policies which multiply the various bodies which monitor , collect and exchange personal data on citizens , infringing their collective and personal dignity and trampling the right of freedom of speech underfoot .
This resolution is addressed to a society which only has enemies and in which everyone is a suspect .
That is not the society we want .
We believe that it is vital that women are not subjected to violence or the sex trade .
Similarly , it is self-evident that we should respect human rights and observe the international conventions that are in place for refugees .
For us as EU citizens , having a stable legal system with everyone being equal before the law is a given , as is the fact that we can have confidence in the way authorities treat our privacy .
Many of the 144 points in the motion for a resolution and the 78 amendments to Parliament 's resolution that have been tabled were , of course , worthy of support .
The resolution and the amendments also include a number of points , concerning human rights , discrimination and privacy for example , that are already covered by previous programmes as well as the Treaty of Lisbon .
We have chosen to vote against a number of amendments in order to obtain a resolution that is even stronger on the issues that are not already covered by previous programmes and treaties .
Even though there are points in the resolution that was voted through that should not have been included , we have chosen to vote in favour of the resolution , as the benefits far outweigh the negative aspects .
It is more important to send a clear message of support for the Stockholm Programme from the European Parliament .
In itself , the European Parliament resolution calling for an area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen is a progressive resolution and one which puts a check on the desire of the Council of Ministers to allow the free exchange of citizens ' personal data .
It is also a resolution which guarantees the protection of refugees and migrants .
This resolution is a step towards progressive European lawmaking on migration .
Some of its crucial amendments , including those concerning the establishment of the principle of non-refoulement , the diminution of the role of Frontex , which will have no role to play in the resettlement of migrants in third countries , a positive attitude to ' en masse ' regularisation of illegal immigrants and the assertion that security should serve the interests of freedom , are of decisive importance .
The paragraphs about combating illegal migration are open to several interpretations , although , to my mind , they do not err on the repressive side .
I deeply regret the fact that the resolution has been watered down as regards the anti-discrimination dossier .
So far , progress has been slow with regard to some aspects of the area of freedom , security and justice , whereas the right to move and to reside freely within the EU is now granted to more than 500 million citizens !
It is important to manage this , and the European Parliament resolution passed today helps in this respect .
I welcome the resolution , as it primarily concerns the citizens and ties in with my priorities : a Europe of law and justice ( protection of fundamental rights and the fight against all forms of discrimination ) ; a Europe that protects everything whilst not acting like Big Brother ( strengthening of Europol and of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters both operationally and administratively , improvement of inter-State cooperation between the police and information services , construction of a European criminal justice area based on the principle of mutual recognition , protection of personal data ) ; and a Europe that is united , responsible and fair with regard to asylum and immigration through true solidarity between all the Member States , and the fight against the trafficking in , and the sexual and economic exploitation of , human beings .
The next stage : the European Council on 9 and 10 December 2009 !
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the Stockholm Programme , since I believe that the proposals it contains clearly and precisely establish the priorities for the coming years in terms of European legislation in the areas of freedom , security and justice , in the light of application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is vital to strike a better balance between the security of citizens and the protection of their individual rights .
Consequently , I would like to stress the importance of applying the principle of mutual recognition to same-sex couples in the EU , as well as setting up a European Court of Cyber Affairs and adopting measures that give prisoners new rights .
It has been common practice in this Parliament to promote divisive issues , which go far beyond the competences of the European Union , by including them in texts on broader issues that would normally warrant widespread support .
I must condemn the application , once again , of this surreptitious method , which only goes to discredit this House and widen the gap between MEPs and voters .
Fortunately , matters concerning family law fall within the competence of the Member States , and it is therefore absolutely illegitimate and a blatant attack on the subsidiarity principle for Parliament to seek to coerce them towards a common understanding on these issues by seeking to promote radical agendas .
Recognition by Parliament of same-sex unions - which are effective only in four Member States - cannot be imposed on the rest , and it represents a crude attempt to influence legislators and national public opinions , which deserves to be condemned in the strongest terms .
When the Charter of Fundamental Rights was adopted , it was feared that it would be invoked abusively in the future and that it would clash with national law .
The current situation confirms that these predictions were right .
This resolution ultimately affirms some important principles : common responsibility in the fight against illegal immigration , in the distribution of asylum seekers and in the repatriation of foreign detainees .
On the other hand , I feel that the part that refers to respect for the rights of minorities , and particularly the Roma minority , is very inadequate and overly politically correct .
The text completely overlooks the situation of degradation in which the Roma communities live , in certain states such as Italy , not due to lack of integration policies but , quite the contrary , due to a deliberate decision to reject any rule of civil living .
There is no condemnation of the illegal activities ( thefts , bag-snatching , tiresome begging and underage prostitution ) that are increasingly connected with illegal Roma settlements in the outskirts of major cities in Italy and elsewhere .
There is no mention , even in the section on the protection of minors , of the need to safeguard those very children against the actions of enslavement perpetrated against them by some Roma heads of family .
There is no mention even of how Directive 2004 / 38 / EC on the removal of Community citizens who are unable to demonstrate a certain level of income after a three-month stay in an EU State should actually be applied .
Integration cannot happen without respect for the rules , and the Roma minorities are not exempt from compliance with this principle .
The majority in Parliament has approved the main thrust of the European Commission 's proposal for the so-called Stockholm Programme , which is a powerful attack on such a key element of Member States ' sovereignty as justice .
Increasing joint actions in the area of political and judicial cooperation and cooperation between secret services , as well as introducing an internal security strategy and new measures for exchanging data within the EU , come at the expense of the rights , freedoms and guarantees of all those living in EU countries .
Development of a joint migration policy based on the classification of immigrants according to a scale of desirability , and in its most repressive form , the use of Frontex , violates migrants ' rights and ignores the human tragedy taking place in many countries .
The growing use of surveillance and monitoring of people is worrying , as is the practice of profiling , based on data mining techniques and universal data gathering , irrespective of whether citizens are innocent or guilty , for the purposes of so-called prevention and control .
Also worrying are the huge funds channelled to the military-industrial complex and its investigation activities in the area of internal security .
Mr President , political strategy concerning the area of freedom , security and justice - the Stockholm Programme - will be adopted by the Council in December this year , straight after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
At this special moment , when the decision-making powers of the European Parliament will increase significantly , the role of national parliaments in the process of making Community law will also increase .
The citizen 's voice , strengthened in this way , will also have a stronger mandate to bring about realisation of the principles of the Stockholm Programme .
Particularly significant and urgent , in my opinion , is the need to take action to ensure equal treatment of all citizens of the European Union , irrespective of gender , sexual orientation , age , disability , religious association , world-view , skin colour , background or ethnic origin .
To do this , it is essential that the Council adopt a comprehensive directive on non-discrimination , one which would encompass all the areas I have just mentioned .
The EU does not have such a law , as we have often said in the European Parliament .
I hope this loophole will be filled as part of realisation of the Stockholm Programme .
However , just making a law is not enough .
If the Stockholm Programme is to be successful , EU citizens have to know their rights .
The job of the new European Commission will , therefore , also be to raise public awareness of antidiscrimination legislation and of gender equality .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it enables a better balance to be struck between respect for individual freedoms and a predominantly repressive outlook accompanied by security measures of which it is difficult to gauge the effectiveness today .
Through this programme , we are reaffirming our attachment to a Europe of solidarity and values that has a duty to defend freedom of religion , equal opportunities , the rights of women , the rights of minorities and the rights of homosexuals .
That is why I strongly support the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Directive , which is currently being held up within the Council and which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) did not want during the last parliamentary term .
The PPE Group has restated its opposition to the text .
I also welcome the adoption of amendments calling for a request to remove the obstacles to the exercising of the right to family reunification and demanding a ban on placing foreign minors and unaccompanied minors in detention .
However , I regret that the objectives of the migration policies have been ignored again and have taken a back seat behind the issue of combating illegal immigration and strengthening the Frontex Agency .
On the subject of asylum , the proposals on a common asylum system will be examined by the European Parliament in its capacity as colegislator , and it will closely monitor the genuine political will to make progress in this area .
in writing . - Whilst the ECR Group supports much of what is contained in the Stockholm Programme , such as cooperation and solidarity over issues of policing , fighting cross-border crime and corruption , protecting fundamental rights , and finding solutions for immigration by seeking to assist those countries in southern Europe that face serious immigration problems , we do not support proposals for a European Security Strategy , or measures which would hand over control of our criminal justice system and asylum policy to the EU , or calls for ' compulsory and irrevocable solidarity ' .
We believe in cooperation rather than compulsion ; and therefore we voted against this report .
The Stockholm Programme is concerned with strengthening security , particularly in the fight against cross-border crime and terrorism , while respecting citizens ' rights .
The effort , which is also a result of the new reality of the Treaty of Lisbon , would lead you to expect a responsible discussion about the essential points of an area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen .
Regrettably , there were some who wanted to contaminate the discussion of such a fundamental issue as the Stockholm Programme with the issue of same-sex marriages , which is irrelevant and unrelated to the subject , with no regard even for the legitimate differences in the internal legal solutions of each country of the European Union .
Those who acted in a such a way , merely for the sake of political manoeuvring , were not bothered about the fate of the Stockholm Programme .
Conversely , my vote reflected the importance of discussing the needs of this area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen .
It was also an expression of condemnation of the strategy of those who wanted to contaminate this discussion with a divisive agenda which had nothing to do with it .
In itself , the European Parliament resolution calling for an area of freedom , security and justice serving the citizen is a progressive resolution and one which puts a check on the desire of the Council of Ministers to allow the free exchange of citizens ' personal data .
It is also a resolution which guarantees the protection of refugees and migrants .
This resolution is a step towards progressive European lawmaking on migration .
Some of its crucial amendments , including those concerning the establishment of the principle of non-refoulement , the diminution of the role of Frontex , which will have no role to play in the resettlement of migrants in third countries , a positive attitude to ' en masse ' regularisation of illegal immigrants and the assertion that security should serve the interests of freedom , are of decisive importance .
The paragraphs about combating illegal migration are open to several interpretations , although , to my mind , they do not err on the repressive side .
I deeply regret the fact that the resolution has been watered down as regards the anti-discrimination dossier .
I would like to share a few comments on the multi-annual programme 2010-2014 regarding the area of freedom , security and justice ( the Stockholm Programme ) .
Ensuring the citizens of the European Union freedom , security and justice is one of the main responsibilities of Member States .
The countries of the European Union must increase cooperation in judicial matters , without detriment to the traditions and fundamental laws of Member States .
We need to increase mutual trust between Member States concerning the appropriateness of decisions made by the authorities of another Member State , especially in areas related to legal and illegal immigration , and also concerning the cooperation of police and courts in criminal matters .
The EU must intensify efforts related to fighting transborder crime and terrorism .
To this end , steps should be taken to improve the efficiency of information exchange while not forgetting the matter of the protection of privacy , personal data and fundamental freedoms .
Security in Europe is our common affair , as is the common , single market , and we should do everything possible for every citizen to feel safe within the borders of the EU , because this is one of our fundamental values .
I welcome the adoption of the motion for a resolution on the Stockholm Programme .
It is important for this Parliament , as the representative of the citizens of Europe , to propose a route to be taken by the justice and home affairs policy .
We have achieved a good result .
In addition , the Treaty of Lisbon gives us security .
In future , the European Parliament will not only be playing an advisory role in these policy areas , but will also be part of the decision-making process .
We have found a good balance between security and citizens ' rights .
The population needs increasing levels of security .
However , we must repeatedly answer the question about whether and to what extent citizens ' rights and freedoms can be restricted by the introduction of security measures .
I think we have chosen a good middle way .
However , to ensure that this middle way really does feed into the justice and home affairs policy , we are calling for more control rights for this Parliament and for the national parliaments in the EU as part of the implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
Unfortunately , plenary did not support my call for police access to Eurodac .
This would have been another useful tool in the fight against terrorism and crime .
However , my motion calling on the Commission to present proposals for combating the abuse of the asylum system throughout Europe was successful .
Every abuse of the asylum system makes it more difficult to grant asylum to those who have a legitimate claim to it .
I voted in favour of this motion for a joint resolution on the state of play of the Euromed Free Trade Area .
In spite of some progress made , I regret that the main objectives of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership have not been reached , jeopardising their planned achievement by 2010 .
It is vital to ensure that the Euro-Mediterranean integration process is restored as a political priority of the EU , since the success of this process and of the free trade area could contribute to peace , prosperity and security throughout the region .
The Mediterranean is the cradle of civilisation as we know it .
Along its shores , ideas and institutions that define the essence of European civilisation and form an integral part of its history and its future plans were born , have developed and have grown powerful .
Deep divisions have also appeared along its shores , often resolved by force of arms , which have led to a painful political separation , a widening gap between its peoples and development divorced from , if not opposed to , what was previously the centre of the world .
The EU , which wants to open itself to the world and to promote dialogue between its members and third countries , must cherish the idea of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area that makes it possible to build closer relations again between both sides of the Mediterranean and which also promotes greater South-South convergence .
It is essential to acknowledge that the results achieved up to now do not tally with the ambition behind this idea .
There are many economic and financial obstacles , although it is clear that the more serious sticking points are distinctly political in nature .
We must persist and help make it possible to recreate a market on a Mediterranean scale that brings with it increased contact between peoples and restoration of the ties that have , in the meantime , been broken .
I regret that there is still a striking economic , social and demographic imbalance between the two sides of the Mediterranean .
That is why I have voted in favour of giving new impetus to the integration of the countries of the south and the east of the Mediterranean in international trade so that they can diversify their economies and share the associated benefits fairly .
We must reduce the gap separating the north and the south sides of the Mediterranean in development terms .
Moreover , this free trade area should be supplemented by the gradual and conditional introduction of free movement for workers , with account being taken of the current discussions on the links between migration and development .
I voted against the Euromed report because it is not possible to dissociate the issue of trade from that of political dialogue in the Union for the Mediterranean .
This report focuses on the hard core of the European Union 's interest in the Union for the Mediterranean .
I refer to the establishment of a free trade area across both regions .
I am against implementing such a free trade area .
The trade chapter must be based on the principles of fair trade , taking account of the imbalances between the countries of the European Union and the Mediterranean countries .
As regards the political chapter , however , we cannot agree with the award of the Advanced Statute by the European Union to Morocco whilst the latter continues to violate human rights .
As far as the European Union is concerned , the Sahara conflict must be a priority issue for the Union for the Mediterranean , with support for the process of conducting a referendum on self-determination pursuant to UN resolutions .
It follows that we also cannot accept the so-called upgrade that the Union has granted Israel .
This is because of Israel 's continual violation of international law , and because of our political commitments to Palestine .
I very much welcome the fact that multilateral contacts with the Mediterranean region and , in particular , with the southern and eastern Mediterranean countries ( SEMC ) will be improved and strengthened .
I also support the European Union 's efforts to start the process of modernising the economies of these countries and , therefore , to help the population .
However , I doubt very much whether this can be achieved by means of the planned Euromed Free Trade Area .
A sustainability impact assessment carried out by the University of Manchester warns of the negative social and environmental consequences for the SEMC involved .
I fear that this agreement will bring new sales markets for the EU countries , but will seriously damage the economies of the SEMC .
The parallel introduction of freedom of movement for employees called for in the motion for a resolution would also result in a huge wave of migration to Europe and lead to the drain of workers urgently needed in the SEMC .
In order to help ensure a positive future for the SEMC , I have therefore voted against this resolution .
Mr President , following the Barcelona Conference in 1995 , not all of the potential intrinsic to the natural relations between countries lining the Mediterranean basin has yet been developed .
The ambitious plan of forging new and closer political , social and cultural links between the northern and southern shores of the Mediterranean must remain one of the priority goals of the European Union in order to achieve the desired and strategic implementation of a free trade area .
This Euromed area may make a significant contribution to peace , prosperity and safety throughout the region .
I support measures and efforts aimed at removing barriers and obstacles to trade and I realise that the success of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership does not depend only on the will of European countries .
The implementation of a free trade area requires the determined , ongoing and synergetic contribution of all parties .
The UFM must also step up forms of cooperation existing within the Euromed framework to allow all partner countries to participate in European Union regional programmes and corresponding policies .
On the subject , I note that the drawing up of plans within the framework established in Paris in July 2008 in strategic sectors such as new infrastructures , cooperation between SMEs , communications and exploitation of renewable energy sources may contribute positively to development and the facilitation of exchange and investments , because the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean sorely need this .
All these conditions promote the achievement of peace and the establishment of friendly relations .
For all these reasons , I approve the resolution and hope that the roadmap drawn up by the Commission can be respected and offer the benefits that we all expect .
in writing . - The ECR rejected the motion for a resolution tabled by other groups in the Transport Committee concerning passenger compensation in the event of airlines bankruptcy .
We in the ECR tabled our own motion for a resolution which would have rectified a number of key weaknesses in the adopted text for the following reasons .
Although supporting passenger rights is , of course , of vital importance , there are more efficient measures that can be taken without passengers being burdened with even higher costs .
1 .
We should await the impact assessment that was proposed by Commissioner Tajani during the plenary session on 7 October .
2 .
The text that has been supported calls for the establishment of a ' guarantee ' fund that would be used to compensate passengers in case of airlines bankruptcy .
However , the establishment of such a fund would inevitably have to be funded by the consumer , meaning passengers would be required to pay even more for their tickets .
At this stage , this unnecessary step would add to the sizeable list of existing airport taxes , security charges and other duties that they are already forced to pay .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 )
I supported this motion which asks the Commission to review the current legislation , and also to draft new legislation to ensure that passengers will not be left in dire straits as a result of airline bankruptcy .
At the moment , there are no provisions under European legislation to protect European passengers in the case of the bankruptcy of an airline with which the passenger has made a reservation .
I strongly support the position of the chairman of the transport committee who has said that many passengers do not have the resources to cope with losses of this sort .
As such , a support mechanism or a compensation fund should be set up to help those left in a predicament as a result of this type of bankruptcy .
Rules regarding passengers ' rights must be updated and strengthened to give protection and help in the case of airline bankruptcy or incidents of that type over which passengers have no control .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on passenger compensation in the event of airline bankruptcy , since I believe it is necessary to increase protection of European passengers in the event of airline bankruptcy by introducing new legislation or revising existing legislation , and by creating a reserve fund for compensation .
Commercial airlines have been contending with a serious crisis since the attacks of 11 September 2001 , which has been exacerbated by the current economic and financial crisis .
Bankruptcies and unpleasant situations in which passengers , many of them in transit , find themselves truly stranded , are on the increase .
This lack of consumer protection is truly unacceptable , and it calls for a European response that provides for the assessment of airlines , promotes assistance for passengers caught in these situations and sets out compensation for damages .
In view of this , these measures must take account of the financial fragility of airlines and , therefore , should not be unnecessary obstacles to their operation .
They must confine themselves to what is strictly necessary to ensure the protection of consumers / passengers .
Seventy-seven airlines have filed for bankruptcy in the European Union since 2000 .
Admittedly , European legislative provisions relating to price transparency and compensation in the event of denied boarding do exist , but the EU must close the loopholes regarding cases of insolvency , especially when tickets have been bought on the internet .
There are still too many passengers who are finding themselves trapped in situations which they do not have the means to do anything about , having spent all their savings on a family holiday for themselves .
I am in favour of rules to guarantee that passengers do not remain stranded at their destination , with no alternative means of travelling home or alternative accommodation .
I am voting for the resolution , in particular , with regard to Regulation No 261 / 2004 establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights and repealing Regulation No 295 / 91 , which has already been adopted .
The right steps have already been taken in this regulation and strengthening and protecting passengers ' rights is simply a logical development of this .
We are voting in favour of this resolution in the hope of preserving as many of the interests of airline passengers as possible given the current state of affairs ( liberalisation of transport services , increase in the number of airlines ) .
We would stress , however , that the compensation system proposed in this report is merely a stopgap that does nothing to change the fundamental problem .
The real solution lies in the creation of a European public air transport service .
A public service that is concerned with the general interest and thus , with rationalising the journeys made , in order to reduce the impact on the environment .
A public service that is concerned with the general interest and thus with the safety , freedom of movement and well-being of its users and employees alike .
We must , as a matter of urgency , put the Europe of exclusive interests behind us and build a Europe of the general interest .
The growing number of bankruptcies that has been seen among airlines , affecting thousands of citizens in the Member States , has made it necessary for the EU to take measures to protect them .
In fact , it is important to safeguard the rights of those who use air transport on a daily basis .
I therefore voted in favour .
I voted in favour of the resolution on passenger compensation in the event of airline bankruptcy .
Indeed , at present , the only passengers covered by European legislation in the event of airline bankruptcy are those who book a package holiday .
However , it is clear that consumer habits have changed a great deal in recent years where booking holidays is concerned : there has been an increase in the use of low-cost European airlines , a sharp fall in the number of package holidays sold and an increase in the number of direct and individual on-line sales and seat-only sales .
If we add to that the crisis that the sector is currently going through , we can easily imagine the number of European passengers who find themselves stranded at their holiday destination , sometimes without any accommodation and desperately awaiting a return flight , following the collapse of the airline that they were meant to fly with .
Afterwards , they will receive only a nominal amount of compensation for the inconvenience suffered , and even obtaining that will be a struggle ...
The Commission must urgently take a legislative initiative to address this worrying situation .
A compensation fund financed by the airlines should be put in place at the same time in order to finance these compensation payments .
European regions that are distinguished as tourist destinations must provide users of services in this sector with the highest level of service and quality .
Madeira is an example of this , having been classed last week as one of the best tourist destinations in the world by the World Tourism Organisation , which awarded the region the highest rating on 13 of its 15 assessment criteria .
In order to maintain this position in a highly competitive market , it is necessary to continue the work done by public and private bodies with a view to environmental , economic and social sustainability .
This objective also involves providing tourists that visit the island with the utmost guarantees regarding their air travel and accommodation conditions .
The motion for a resolution on which we voted today is a step in this direction , as it aims to protect passengers of bankrupt airlines by establishing compulsory insurance and guarantee funds for these airlines , as well as optional insurance for their customers .
Also positive is the call on the European Commission to present a proposal with the aim of compensating passengers of airlines that go bankrupt and ensuring their repatriation if they are stranded at an airport .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on passenger compensation in the event of airline bankruptcy .
There are currently several European regulatory acts governing the following situations : compensation and repatriation of customers in the event of bankruptcy of travel companies which have provided package holidays ; accountability of airline operators for accidents and arrangements for compensating passengers ; compensation and provision of assistance to passengers who are denied boarding or whose flights are cancelled or subject to long delays .
However , there are no legal provisions to protect consumers in the event of the airline operator going bankrupt .
Over the last nine years , 77 European airline companies have gone bankrupt .
This is why I believe that this directive is absolutely necessary .
The European Parliament has therefore asked the Commission to strengthen the position of passengers in the event of airline bankruptcy .
In fact , the European Parliament has asked the Commission to come up with a legislative proposal by July 2010 , which should award compensation to passengers with airline companies that go bankrupt , introduce the principle of mutual responsibility for passengers of all airlines flying to the same destination with available seats , provide compulsory insurance for airlines , establish a guarantee fund and offer voluntary insurance services for passengers .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on origin marking since it is based on the principle that consumer protection requires transparent and consistent trade rules , including origin marking .
In this respect , I support the intervention of the Commission , together with the Member States , to defend consumers ' legitimate rights and expectations whenever there is evidence of use of fraudulent or misleading origin markings by non-EU importers and producers .
In view of the need to guarantee consumers appropriate information when making a choice to purchase certain products , particularly with regard to their country of origin and the respective safety , hygiene or environmental protection standards applicable to their production - information that is necessary to make a conscious and informed choice - I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , which calls on the Commission to resubmit its proposal to Parliament so that it can be debated in accordance with the legislative process established by the Treaty of Lisbon .
However , I must mention that , during evaluation of the Commission proposal on origin marking , I shall pay close attention to the appropriate support given to traditional products , so that better consumer protection - which is both necessary and desirable - does not irreparably harm small producers of traditional products .
I shall also pay special attention to the mechanisms used to establish origin , so that this does not become a competitive disadvantage for European producers against their competitors .
We believe that the adopted resolution falls well short of what , in our view , origin marking should be , which is to say , among other things , an instrument to protect industrial jobs in Europe , particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises , and an instrument to tackle social and environmental dumping .
That is why we abstained .
Furthermore , this resolution overlooks the consequences that liberalising world trade has for jobs and the industrial fabric in the various Member States .
It overlooks countless relocations in search of easy profit and their consequences , such as the deindustrialisation of vast regions , rising unemployment and worsening of economic and social conditions .
This resolution only goes as far as calling on the Commission and the Council ' to take all necessary steps to ensure a level playing field ' .
Lastly , we regret that the majority in Parliament has rejected the proposals we tabled , which , among other things , sought to preserve jobs , respect workers ' and consumers ' rights , fight child labour or slavery and oppose the importing of products from occupied territories , and which insisted on the need to withdraw European aid from companies and investors that relocate their production .
Against a backdrop of economic crisis that is hitting our European businesses , the European Union must now , more than ever , equip itself with a mandatory system of origin marking , if only for a limited number of imported goods , namely textiles , jewellery , clothing and footwear , leather goods and handbags , lamps and lights , and glassware , because this is precious information for final consumers .
It would also enable European consumers to know exactly which country the goods they buy come from .
They will thus be able to identify these goods by the social , environmental and safety standards commonly associated with that country .
In other words , our citizens , as responsible consumers , will have as much transparency as they require .
The ' made in ' concept must not simply be about marking , but must quickly become a powerful concept of respect for the most advanced rules in relation to knowledge , employee rights , sustainable development and environmental protection , and the expression of a responsible economic attitude .
With the introduction of a ' made in Europe ' concept , we could enable consumers to make an informed choice , to take action to gain new rights .
However , once again , we have limited ourselves to statements of good intentions , as though simply saying that we are the best and the strongest will make it come true .
That is a shame and that is why I will abstain .
I understand the need for a discussion about the creation of a European legislative framework for origin marking of commercial end products , in particular , against the background of consumer information and transparency between trading partners .
The use of a standardised marking system will result in improved and more accurate information for consumers and will indicate the social and environmental standards that the products comply with .
In addition , origin marking is an important step towards producing coherent trading regulations with third countries .
However , it is important to find the right balance from the perspective of producers and consumers .
The transparency offered to consumers must not be created at the expense of the manufacturers .
No additional costs must be involved for small and medium-sized businesses .
As part of the ongoing discussions , it is important to establish clear guidelines and to defend them , including on behalf of Austria .
One possible solution would be to create a voluntary European origin mark for commercial end products , taking into account existing national and regional quality labels .
I voted in favour because the ' made in ' marking is essential for market transparency and for giving consumers the necessary information regarding the origin of the products they buy .
It is necessary to strengthen the Community economy by improving the competitiveness of EU industry in the global economy .
We will only succeed in having fair competition if it operates with clear rules for producers and for exporters and importers , while also keeping sight of common social and environmental requirements .
I very much welcome the introduction of origin marking by the European Union .
From now on , the country of origin must be specified on certain products imported into the EU from third countries .
The particular purpose of origin marking is to give EU consumers unrestricted information about the country of origin of the goods that they buy and to allow them to make a connection between the goods and the social , environmental and safety standards in the country in question .
This represents the first stage in a war against goods from the Far East , which are often produced by workers in exploitative conditions and which are then sold on the European market at dumping prices .
Mr President , today Parliament forcefully reiterated an opinion it had already expressed on several occasions during the previous Parliamentary term : Europe must introduce a regulation that establishes the origin marking of many products that enter its territory .
The decision arises out of a need to guarantee more information for , and therefore the protection of , consumers so as to enable them to make informed choices .
The regulation on origin marking will finally enable European business to compete on an equal footing with companies in third countries where laws on the origin marking of products entering their territories have already existed for some time .
The market is free only when rules are clear , mutual and applied .
The aim of the approved resolution is to call on the Commission , after the fruitless attempts at mediation with the Council , to reiterate the proposal in the light of the new responsibilities that Parliament has acquired with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are sure that agreement between the political groups of the European Parliament will be instrumental in establishing a definitive legal framework with the Council .
I take this opportunity to emphasise that the commodity categories envisaged in the current proposed regulation must be respected and extended with regard to fastening products , in other words , products for which it is essential to ensure quality and compliance with European regulations in order to guarantee safety in the construction of bridges , cars , electric household appliances and any other item that involves the use of fastening products .
Guaranteeing safety is a priority for us .
Today 's vote is an important success that we dedicate to European consumers and producers at a time of new political momentum for Parliament , due to the codecision procedure that has finally made up for the democratic shortfall that we have had to put up with for so long .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
The list of Members wishing to present an explanation of vote has now been completed .
I should like it minuted that Mr Brons made a request for the floor , on a point of order , because he felt he had been alluded to in some of the words uttered by Mr Martin .

Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , Mr Burns was going to be given the floor now .
I should therefore like it to be minuted that Mr Brons was given the opportunity of taking the floor , but was unable to make use of it as he was absent .
( The sitting was suspended at 14.10 and resumed at 15.00 )

Telecom ( signature of acts )
We have before us an important event , because in a moment , Mrs Torstensson and I will sign some very important documents related to the ' Telecom ' package .
Mrs Torstensson , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fellow Members , the legal acts which constitute the ' Telecom ' package were enacted in a codecision procedure .
Electronic communication and the internet have become the main tools of our modern societies .
This legislative package is a good example of how our work can help people and how it can affect their everyday lives .
In particular , we have the revised framework directive for electronic communications networks and services .
Its rapporteur was our fellow Member , Mrs Trautmann , who is with us today .
The directive was adopted at third reading , which shows how much work was required so that we could achieve the best deal for our citizens .
The elements of this directive which remain are a more efficient and , to a greater degree , strategic management of radio frequencies , greater competition and easier investment in the internet in the future .
The directive on universal services and users ' rights , whose rapporteur was our fellow Member Mr Harbour , also represents an important step towards offering better services .
We wanted to improve consumers ' rights , protect privacy and personal data , and also to make it easier for every citizen to keep the same mobile telephone number when changing operator , and that this should not take longer than one working day .
Finally , in order to bring these principles into being in a better and more cohesive fashion , Parliament and the Council decided to establish a European organisation bringing together 27 national operators .
The rapporteur for Parliament on this matter was Mrs del Castillo Vera .
I would like , therefore , to express great esteem for the rapporteurs , of course , who are always key people .
I would also like to thank all those whose hard work on these directives has contributed to today 's success .
The effort of many people combined to produce this success .
In particular , it was successive presidencies , and principally the Czech Presidency and the current Swedish Presidency , as they were responsible for the second and third readings .
I would like most of all , at this particular moment , to thank the Commissioner and the European Commission very much for preparing this package , which was not the only good result produced during the last five-year term of office .
We would like to offer our congratulations .
Your cooperation is of great help to us , and it also affects the way the citizens perceive what we do .
Of course , the three rapporteurs are most deserving of credit , as also is the Chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , our fellow Member Mr Reul , and Vice-President of Parliament , Mr Vidal-Quadras , who chaired the EP delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
So it was quite a group of people who contributed to today 's success .
I would like , speaking from this seat and on behalf of all of us , fellow Members of the European Parliament but , above all , citizens of the European Union , to express great respect and esteem , because this is the best example of how we can do something which the citizens will perceive as a great success , something which will make their lives easier .
I congratulate you all .
Mr President , I would like to start by emphasising how pleased I am that we are able to sign the telecoms package together today .
The package strengthens competition and the protection of consumers in Europe .
We will have modern and up-to-date regulations in an area where development is very rapid .
I would also like to take the opportunity to thank all of those involved for their incredibly solid and constructive work and very creative cooperation .
I would like to extend a special thank you to the European Parliament 's Vice-President , Alejo Vidal-Quadras , the Committee Chairman , Herbert Reul , and the three rapporteurs from Parliament , Catherine Trautmann , Pilar del Castillo Vera and Malcolm Harbour , who , like my colleagues in the Council , have done some extremely important work to enable us to put the telecoms package together .
This cooperation meant that we succeeded in reaching an agreement that clearly indicates the major and crucial importance of the internet for the freedom of expression and the freedom of information , and in so doing , we have not contravened the treaty .
The telecoms package is a major victory for all consumers in Europe .
Once again , I would like to thank everyone for the work that has been put in to achieve this agreement .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Enlargement strategy 2009 concerning the countries of the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on enlargement strategy 2009 concerning the countries of the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , honourable Members , this is a truly important debate on a truly important subject .
Still , if I wished , I could limit my intervention today to just saying that the Presidency is in full agreement with the motion for a resolution that has been put forward by Mr Albertini on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
It is important that Parliament and the Council , as well as the Commission , stand together on an issue as critical as this one .
In retrospect , perhaps the most crucial of all the Articles in that treaty that was signed on the Capitol Hill in Rome more than half a century ago was what today is Article 49 in the Lisbon Treaty : any European state which respects our values and is committed to promoting them may apply to become a member of the Union .
It is by this that 19 of the countries of our Union today have become members and part of the historic undertaking of our Union .
It is by this Article that we have managed to promote peace and prosperity and further the rule of law and representative government in ever larger parts of this once so conflict-ridden part of the world .
Sometimes you need to go to other parts of the world , as I have the duty to do quite often , to be reminded of how enormous this achievement really is .
During more than half a century , our Europe exported wars and totalitarian ideologies across the rest of the globe .
Two world wars ; two totalitarian ideologies ; strife and suffering .
Now , we are instead exporting the idea of peaceful reconciliation , of integration across old borders , of common rules and regulations as the common way to better governance .
Add to this all that has been achieved by Article 49 and it also makes our Union stand taller in the world .
A Europe of 6 , of 9 , of 12 , of 15 or even of 25 would have been smaller in every single respect - in ambition , in standing , in possibilities , in respect across the globe .
Your resolution is surely right to say that enlargement , and I quote , ' has proven to be one of the most successful of all European Union policies ' .
This is , if anything , an understatement .
We all know that the process has not been entirely easy .
I remember coming in a different capacity to an earlier European Parliament representing a country seeking accession and also meeting those who feared that further enlargement from the then 12 would risk diluting the political ambitions of the Union .
There have been both the difficulties of the new members implementing our ever increasing policies and acquis and our difficulties in adjusting to our own success in the form of new members , but when we look back , it is easy to see that periods of enlargement have been periods in which we have also deepened our cooperation .
During the past two decades , we have more than doubled the number of Member States and , in rapid succession , we got the Treaties of Maastricht , Amsterdam , Nice and Lisbon .
The previous three decades did not even succeed in fully implementing the Treaty of Rome .
Article 49 is as important , I would argue , to our future as it has been to our past .
Our magnetism is still there .
During the last year , we have had new membership applications from Montenegro , Albania and Iceland , and there are others that we all know that are equally keen on reaching the position where an application can be handed in .
After the last enlargement that brought in approximately 100 million new citizens to our Union , our attention is now focused on the countries of south-eastern Europe - perhaps up to 100 million citizens as well .
This will be neither fast nor easy .
The different challenges we face in the different countries of the western Balkans are well known , and the magnitude of the transformation of Turkey has not escaped us either .
We are all aware that there are those in our respective public opinions that would prefer just to shut the door to all of them , hoping that the issue will go away , and who opt for a more closed idea of Europe .
I belong to those who are convinced that this would be a mistake of historic proportions , the consequences of which would haunt our Europe for a very long time to come .
Their door to our Union might sometimes be a very distant one .
Some of them will have to travel a long and difficult road of reforms , but , were that door to be shut , other doors would immediately open up to other forces , and we might well see those parts of Europe moving off in directions which , over time , will have negative consequences for us all .
That is why Article 49 remains of such fundamental importance .
It is the beacon of reform and reconciliation that also inspires and guides the regions of Europe that are not yet members of our Union .
Commissioner Rehn will go into more details concerning the Commission 's assessment of the progress of all these countries concerned , and the Presidency does share the assessment made by the Commission .
It remains our ambition to move all of the countries of the western Balkans forward in the accession process , knowing that they are at very different stages of it .
We expect , somewhat related to this , a decision to be taken that from 19 December , there will be visa-free access to our Union for the citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Montenegro and Serbia .
That is a major and most important step forward .
Along with Parliament , we share the hope that Albania and Bosnia will catch up and will be able to join this most important step as soon as possible .
The accession process of Croatia has been unblocked and is now moving forward .
This is important for Croatia and for the entire region .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been given a very positive report by the Commission , and it is my hope that the Council in December will be able to concretely indicate further steps in its accession process .
The applications of Montenegro and Albania have been forwarded to the Commission and I believe we can expect its opinion within a year or so .
In Bosnia , it is our hope that the political leaders will be able to agree on the reforms necessary in order to make it possible for that country as well to contemplate an application for membership .
Indirect talks facilitated by the European Union and the United Sates in close cooperation are under way as we speak today .
Serbia has been making good progress on its unilateral implementation of the interim agreement , and we will obviously look very carefully at the upcoming report by the ICTY Chief Prosecutor concerning its cooperation with its efforts .
It is our hope that he is satisfied with the current level of efforts , although it is , of course , also critical that these efforts are maintained .
Moving further to the south-east , I would like to pay tribute to the fundamental reforms under way in Turkey on the Kurdish question .
The success of these would bring the country much closer to our European standards in areas of fundamental importance .
There are numerous other issues which I think the Commissioner will go into .
Not directly related but also of obvious significance in this regard are the ongoing talks between President Christofias and Mr Talat on the reunification of Cyprus .
We can only urge them to move forward towards a comprehensive solution on the basis of a bi-communal , bi-zonal federation with political equality in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions .
The importance of this can hardly be exaggerated .
We will move either towards a new era of reconciliation and cooperation in this part of Europe and the entire region of the eastern Mediterranean , or towards a situation where it is easy to see that we will be faced with rapidly mounting problems .
Much of our attention is on the challenges of south-eastern Europe , but the application of Iceland is adding to the reasons we have to focus more of our attention on all the issues of the Arctic and the wider high North .
This is an area where our Union must also be more present and engaged in the future .
Its importance is coming more and more into the focus of all the significant global actors and the application of Iceland should also be seen from that perspective .
With a democratic tradition that reaches back a thousand years or so , and with its membership in our single market through the European Economic Area , it is obvious that Iceland has already travelled quite a bit on the road to membership , although we will have to assess the further progress when we get the avis from the Commission .
Mr President , this is what the Swedish Presidency has so far managed to achieve in the important area of enlargement .
We still have some important weeks in which I expect further progress , but let me conclude by saying that I do not believe that we have completed the building of our Europe .
I do believe that we must remain an open Europe and that we should remain committed to an enlargement process that brings good governance , the rule of law , reconciliation , peace and prosperity to larger and larger parts of our Europe .
This is obviously of key importance to them , but we should recognise that it is of key importance to us as well , and let us not forget that it will also make it possible for us to stand taller in the world and for our voice to demand even greater respect in the future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first thank the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and its Chair , Gabriele Albertini , for a balanced and comprehensive resolution .
I would also like to thank all of you for your excellent cooperation over the past five years .
The European Parliament has greatly helped to shape our enlargement policy and you have set an example of democratic accountability .
I look forward to continuing our excellent cooperation in the future , whatever the portfolio in my case .
The EU will take a long-awaited step forward next week when the Lisbon Treaty enters into force .
This will start a new era in the EU 's foreign policy .
Indirectly , it will also cement the EU 's renewed consensus on enlargement based on the three ' C 's of consolidation , conditionality and communication , combined with an approved capacity to integrate new members .
This will enable us to continue our gradual and carefully managed accession process .
As your draft resolution illustrates , enlargement is one of the EU 's most powerful foreign policy tools today .
This was also the spirit of Carl Bildt 's message , and I do agree with this message based on empirical evidence during the Swedish Presidency and over the years and decades .
It is also true that the EU 's credibility as a global actor stands or falls by our ability to shape our very own neighbourhood .
It is here that we have achieved our most remarkable successes over the past 20 years of transforming the European continent by reunifying East and West and thus building a stronger European Union .
Enlargement has been a key driver of this process and it continues to transform south-eastern Europe today .
Albania 's and Montenegro 's applications for EU membership underscore the Union 's continued power of attraction .
Iceland 's application adds a new political and geo-economic dimension to our enlargement agenda .
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia are both considering submitting an application .
Given the economic crisis , all these countries might easily have turned inwards .
Instead , they continue to pursue European orientation with all the tough choices and bold reforms this entails .
Croatia is nearing the finishing line after four years of intense accession negotiations .
Zagreb now needs to intensify its reform efforts , especially in the judiciary and the fight against corruption and organised crime , so that negotiations can be concluded .
ICTY cooperation remains a must .
We have seen steady progress in Turkey as well .
Turkey plays a key role in energy security and in the dialogue between civilisations .
Ankara 's commitment to normalise relations with Armenia is historic , as is the democratic opening to resolve the Kurdish question , but Turkey still has a long way to go .
Besides reforms , we expect Turkey to ensure full implementation of the Ankara Protocol and to make progress towards the normalisation of relations with Cyprus .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made convincing progress recently and substantially addressed the key reform priorities .
The country sufficiently fulfils the Copenhagen political criteria .
These factors enabled the Commission to recommend the opening of accession negotiations .
I have the impression that the government in Skopje has rightly seen our recommendation as an encouragement to finally settle the name issue with Greece .
There is now a new context , a new debate and a new window of opportunity that I trust both Skopje and Athens will indeed capitalise on .
There has been good news in Serbia too .
Belgrade has demonstrated its commitment to EU integration , not least by implementing the interim agreement with the EU unilaterally , and I assume that the ICTY should now be satisfied with Serbia 's efforts .
I agree with your draft resolution to unblock the agreement .
It is high time to allow Serbia to move to the next stage of its European journey .
Bosnia and Herzegovina presents its own serious challenges , partly due to its wartime history , but let me be clear that there can be no discounts in EU enlargement .
Bosnia 's application for EU membership can only be considered once the OHR has closed .
Bosnia also needs to undertake constitutional changes in part to comply with the European Convention on Human Rights .
Respect for human rights is a founding principle of the European Union .
Together with the Presidency and the United States , we have proposed a package of reforms to achieve this .
I hope , for the sake of the citizens and for the region as a whole , that the Bosnian leaders will rise to the occasion and reach an agreement .
The EU and the US are engaged at the highest levels because we want Bosnia to succeed , and I believe it can succeed .
As for Kosovo , stability has been maintained but still remains fragile .
The Commission has presented a study on how to promote Kosovo 's socio-economic development and anchor it to Europe .
We identify eventual visa facilitation and trade as flagships once the conditions have been met .
To conclude , we set out together an ambitious but , in retrospect , realistic agenda five years ago when I started my mandate as Enlargement Commissioner .
During my hearings , I told this Parliament that by 2009 , we wanted to see an EU of 27 Member States with Bulgaria and Romania in , the accession process with Croatia reaching its final stage , the other Western Balkan countries anchored in the EU through association agreements , Turkey firmly on a European track , Kosovo 's status settled and Cyprus reunified .
I am glad and proud that , with the important exception of Cyprus , where settlement talks are still ongoing , nearly all our ambitions have materialised .
We have worked together for these very worthy goals and together we have made a difference .
Even Cyprus might still happen , to the benefit of all of its citizens and the European Union .
Besides , though I hoped for it , I did not dare to forecast progress on visa liberalisation five years ago .
Yet here we are , one month away from turning the dream of the citizens of Serbia , Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia into reality .
We hope to do the same for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina next year once they meet the conditions .
It is therefore a very important reminder to all of us who work with south-eastern Europe of how attractive the European dream remains for millions of citizens in our immediate neighbourhood .
Let us keep that dream alive and , in time , make it a reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Monday 's vote within the Committee on Foreign Affairs provided additional evidence of the complexity and , at the same time , of the benefit of extending the geographical and political borders of the Europe that we know today .
Thanks to the work and efforts of my fellow rapporteurs and the contribution of individual political groups , we have achieved a text that expands on the original and has refined many aspects that were initially only mentioned in passing .
The debate in committee and also within the groups themselves was not lacking in disagreements , sometimes lively , which are typical of an across-the-board confrontation that transcends the respective political positions .
Historical events within each nation and the current state of their relations were at odds with applications made by candidate countries or aspiring candidates .
In less than a year , another three applications were submitted to open membership negotiations : Montenegro in December 2008 , Albania in April 2009 and Iceland in July 2009 .
It is a sign that the European project can still boast plenty of appeal and is considered a major factor of stability , particularly following the meltdown in financial markets .
The text obtained as a result of the votes within the Committee on Foreign Affairs more forcefully underlines the need for the countries who wish to join the European Union to face up to this transition conscientiously , aware of the duties and implications that this process involves .
Their entry requires them to respect European parameters , not only economic and political , but also cultural , social and legal , to ensure that the end result is more than the sum of its parts .
I hope that the text that the plenary session will vote on tomorrow will address all aspects of the general strategy on enlargement in a more balanced and concise way .
It will obviously benefit from the contribution of specific resolutions on each country .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the enlargement strategy paper and the resolution we are going to adopt tomorrow show our strong commitment to the enlargement policy , which has proved to be one of the most successful of all EU policies and has benefited both existing and new Member States .
Enlargement has contributed to an unprecedented extension of the area of peace , security and prosperity in Europe and now we prepare the further extension of this area to encompass in the years to come the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey .
The Alliance of Socialists and Democrats remains one of the most pro-enlargement forces in this Parliament , while underlining that no compromises can be made with the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria and all the important benchmarks on which the preparedness of the candidates is evaluated .
We hope to see the negotiations with Croatia concluded as early as possible next year .
We expect that the Council will confirm the proposal of the European Commission to start negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia next year so that the process can begin next year .
We hope for new dynamics in the negotiation process with Turkey including opening of the energy chapter .
And we believe that the EU can keep up the momentum reinforcing the positive developments in all enlargement countries .
The visa liberalisation is an excellent step to demonstrate to the people in the western Balkans that they move in the right direction .
Let me also express the hope that the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty will further increase the capacity of the EU to integrate new members , finalising the institutional reforms within the Union .
As Chair of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I have friends , acquaintances and comrades in all of the countries that form the subject of today 's report .
I would like to begin by wishing Commissioner Olli Rehn every success with what he has been working on over the past five years and , in particular , to compliment him on those efforts .
He merits our full recognition .
As I was saying , I have friends and acquaintances in all of these countries and I can say , with a certain degree of pride , that , to my knowledge , we are the only large political family which has come to an agreement on the statute for Kosovo .
We reached a unanimous position on this as early as 2006 and have maintained it ever since .
Do not think that this was merely coincidence , because it was something which we put a great deal of hard work into .
You can therefore imagine how disappointed I am , firstly , to see that Kosovo has not been included in the Visa Facilitation Agreement .
It seems to me that the Kosovars are being punished for the fact that a number of EU Member States have not yet been able to reconcile themselves with the fact that Kosovo is now an independent state .
That is a great pity , in my opinion .
President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner , allow me to also raise a few questions about what seems to be the current state of things in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
I fear that I am less optimistic about a positive outcome on a number of fronts than you are , if only because it is possible that the people there might get the impression that , all of a sudden , everything has to proceed incredibly swiftly and that there is no time for adequate consultation , at least not with any political parties other than the largest ones , with which you are in touch .
Finally , I would like to make it clear , on behalf of my group , that we absolutely insist that the candidate countries respect all of the Copenhagen criteria , without any exception whatsoever being made for absolutely anyone .
Nor should you think that we are indifferent to the absorption capacity of the European Union .
However , what we are unhappy about is the fact that some of our fellow members seem to wish to use this notion of absorption capacity in order to postpone the accession of new countries indefinitely .
We do not approve of that .
Let me conclude . Commissioner , I do think that the past five years have indeed been a success .
I wish you every success for the future .
I am sure we will meet on these benches again , even if it is perhaps in a different capacity , but many thanks , anyway .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of the European Greens and the Free Alliance , I have to say that I am very pleased that this joint resolution again says that there is a strong commitment by the European Parliament to enlargement , and that the momentum for enlargement , about which we had a discussion in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , is to be kept up .
That is especially true for south-eastern Europe .
I hope that the history of armed conflict , of cruelty beyond imagination , in that part of Europe will be over once and for all , and I think the European Union plays an essential part in that .
In that sense , too , I am very pleased that the strong commitment is being kept up in this resolution .
There has been progress , as has already been said , on many issues .
There has been progress on some of the conflicts we have there and , as rapporteur for Kosovo , I am very pleased that the Spanish Presidency has announced during its presidency that it will invite Kosovo to take part in the western Balkans conference , which I hope will be an opportunity for progress on the status issue .
There is one thing about Kosovo that the speaker before me has already said .
I would have preferred Kosovo to have been part of it , but at least we have ensured that there will be a start to visa dialogue with the objective of visa liberalisation .
I would like to comment on one amendment that we will propose for tomorrow .
It is about one of the minorities that have a very difficult status in many regions of south-eastern Europe , and in other parts of Europe as well , but especially in Kosovo , that is , the Roma minority .
At the moment , some 12 000 Roma people , mostly children , are about to be sent back from Member States , mostly to Kosovo , where we know the conditions are such that they will be unable to have a humane life .
So I would ask Members of this Parliament to vote tomorrow for the amendment that we propose in order , at least for the winter time , to stop sending Roma people back to Kosovo and to help Kosovo make conditions liveable for Roma minorities there and here .
On the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , I am also very pleased that we have achieved amendments in this text which make it clear that discrimination against women and violence against women are also something that both the governments of the region and also the European Union have to work against .
One last thing : other ethnic minorities and sexual minorities . I find this is an important path towards democratisation .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the ECR Group strongly supports European enlargement .
By extending the benefits of EU membership to those countries that are eligible under Article 49 , we hope to see develop the looser , more flexible Europe in which we believe as a group .
I happen to be the permanent rapporteur for Montenegro , which is a good news story in terms of progress towards membership , and it has just applied fairly recently .
Nevertheless , I will also be visiting that country soon to make up my own mind and have an independent assessment .
I also welcome the fact that Iceland may be a candidate soon .
But , still in the Balkans , Croatia 's bilateral border dispute with Slovenia must not be a barrier to joining the EU , and I hope that Macedonia will also be opening negotiations shortly .
With regard to Turkey , there remain many concerns over human rights , the ongoing blockade of Armenia , religious freedoms and the refusal to admit Cypriot ships to Turkish ports .
It was also regrettable , in my mind , that Turkey recently invited to the OIC Summit in Istanbul President Bashir of Sudan , a man indicted by the International Criminal Court for the horrors of Darfur .
Finally , although Ukraine is a country not directly linked to this debate , I hope also that , regardless of the results of the impending presidential elections in Ukraine , the EU will continue to hold out the possibility of eventual EU membership for Ukraine , if that is indeed the majority view of the people of Ukraine .
By the same token , that should apply to Moldova and , one day , to Belarus , if it becomes a democratic country .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , to start with the question of the enlargement strategy , I should like to say that , judging from enlargements to date and from how we approach new candidate countries , I think that the policy of the European Union does not always help in addressing the economic and social problems of the workers and of the societies which have acceded or will accede and , in numerous cases , assistance , financial and otherwise , is either inadequate or goes in the wrong direction and , as a result , regional and social equalities are either perpetuated or extended .
I should like to mention the case of Turkey .
Pressure needs to be exerted to make Turkey keep its promises and honour its commitments , especially the Ankara Protocol on the recognition of the Republic of Cyprus , whose rights under international law it is challenging .
I would remind the House that there are still problems with respect for democratic rights and trade union freedoms in Turkey , as underlined by the recent prosecution and trial of Turkish trade union members in Izmir .
I should also like to mention the case of Kosovo . Here , the approach must be with respect for UN Security Council resolution 1244 / 99 .
There are still problems such as the status of Serbs in Kosovo , who are living in a state of isolation , and the failure to abide by agreements on the re-establishment of refugees .
Finally FYROM : the problem of the name must be addressed within the framework of the UN and within the framework of a bilateral agreement setting geographical boundaries .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner and Mr President-in-Office , what you think of the latest initiative by the newly-elected Greek Prime Minister for a meeting with the prime ministers of Albania and FYROM ?
Mr President , Article 49 of the Treaty of Rome is not , in my view , a romantic urge to the Member States to participate in the enlargement of a unified Europe .
It is a realistic ambition for as many European countries as possible to adopt the principles of the European Union .
Only then will the basic preconditions apply to the three ' Cs ' of consolidation , conditionality and communication .
Tomorrow , the Council will examine the motion for a resolution by Mr Albertini , in which he expressly states that , although Turkey has made some progress in terms of meeting the Copenhagen political criteria , a great deal still needs to be done , both in the human rights , freedom of speech and religious freedom sectors , and in Turkey 's political conduct in general in the system of justice and so on .
However , it is clear that Turkey has been making an effort recently to impose its rule on the area of the Middle East and the Caucasus in a way that is contrary to the standard principles of the European Union .
Another example is Turkey 's behaviour on the question of Iran , which is totally contrary to EU foreign policy and its commitments under the Ankara Protocol .
There are still eight chapters which need to be examined with Turkey and I therefore believe that this being so , Turkey is not yet ready to be given a start date for negotiations .
As far as FYROM is concerned , I have two things to say : we have noted that recent actions and statements by its Prime Minister are causing problems in neighbouring countries and we should like this behaviour to be toned down .
( NL ) Mr Van Rompuy was , naturally , quite right when , in 2004 , he made the following observation : ' Turkey is not part of Europe and never will be ' .
In that observation , Van Rompuy was emphasising the fundamental values of Europe , which , in his view , Turkey would undermine .
Van Rompuy has thus expressed objections to Turkish membership in principle .
And we , the Dutch Party for Freedom , completely agree with him .
Of course , he cannot now take such principled words back , not even in the interests of securing the plum job of President of the European Union .
Turkey has even shown contempt for democracy and freedom of expression by calling the leader of my party , Geert Wilders , a democratically elected representative of the people , a fascist and a racist .
What an outrageous and baseless comparison !
We should not be denied the possibility of criticising Islam .
But Turkey is showing its true colours here .
Mr Rehn , I put the following question to you : what is your reaction to this outrageous attitude on the part of Turkey ?
There is , of course , only one possible response : to immediately cease all negotiations with Turkey .
Let us be honest with the Turks .
Be honest with the Turks , as Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy have been , and as their great friend Herman van Rompuy has also been .
Cease all negotiations with Turkey and other Islamic countries .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
You seem to be very impressed with what Mr Van Rompuy has to say .
Do you not think that most people would be more impressed by the fact that only 3 % of the land mass of Turkey is in the continent of Europe at all , and this proposition that Turkey should become a full member of the European Union is , on geographical grounds , completely bizarre ?
Well , I did not hear a real question , but of course we agree that there are multiple reasons to say ' no ' to Turkey .
I just mentioned a few , but this is another good reason to say ' no ' , so thank you for that .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Bildt , Commissioner , this is possibly the last enlargement debate that we will have with you , Mr Rehn .
I would like to thank you for the many good debates that we have had with you since 2004 .
I would like to make a few comments .
In my opinion , it is now time for the difficulties being created for Croatia from outside the country to be quickly resolved so that , during the next year , we can rapidly come to a decision with Croatia , complete the negotiations and ratify the accession treaty .
I believe that these bilateral issues , which apply to a number of other countries , including FYROM and Greece , and also the measures continually being taken against Serbia , which I think is an extremely important country in terms of the stability of the region , should be rapidly resolved .
It must be made clear that every country should be judged according to its capabilities and that the promise made in Thessaloniki , particularly concerning the western Balkans , will be kept .
Every country must be evaluated on the basis of its abilities and the tempo of the process must be adjusted accordingly .
However , it is also important to explain that the Copenhagen criteria apply .
I regret the fact that the Social Democrats , the Greens and others have refused to mention the Copenhagen criteria in committee .
I hope that will be reviewed in plenary .
We would be giving completely the wrong message to the candidate countries , in the same way as if we had failed to mention the absorption capacity of the European Union .
The European perspective must be correct in order for the internal reform processes to start .
However , it is also important that the necessary conditions are met so that no false expectations are raised .
For this reason , with regard to the Copenhagen criteria , we must also ensure in Turkey 's case that the political conditions relating to freedom of speech , democracy , the rule of law and freedom of religion are a requirement for accession and that there is no question of a compromise in this area .
Mr President , perhaps the most important lesson of the past enlargement is that we have brought into the Union countries , markets , institutions and industrial assets , but we have left behind the hearts and minds of the people .
I think that we have to avoid repeating this same experience in the future .
We have also to prepare not only the acceding countries but also the existing Member States .
The famous enlargement fatigue says more about the lack of preparation of the present states - of the old Member States , unprepared to live together with the new Member States - rather than the indigestible character of the new Member States .
Next , I think that we should , when speaking about the candidate countries , avoid any conditionality which is not linked directly to their capacity to be interoperable with us from the legal , institutional , political and cultural point of view and to compete with us within the internal market in the broader sense of this concept .
We should not impose conditionalities which are not linked with these criteria .
We should remember that enlargement is about a better future , not about a better past .
We think too much about this past .
Thirdly , each country should indeed come in based on its merits .
But we should also assess their capacity with their accession to contribute to a better situation in the region , more stability and more integration on a regional basis .
Management of expectations is also extremely important and I believe that perhaps in the future , we should be a little bit more imaginative in trying to allow for some kind of gradual integration of a country for which full integration is not to be envisaged in the short term .
My last point is that I believe we have to revisit the problem issue of our identity , our cultural and geopolitical identity , in order to know exactly what the limits of our enlargement are .
( SL ) We are about to adopt a resolution here today which is awaited with much interest and much anticipation in many countries of south-eastern Europe .
This resolution speaks in terms very different from those used in south-eastern Europe only as recently as a few years ago .
It is , in fact , these terms that have provided the impetus for , and a guide to , our debate today .
I think it is important that what can be taken from the words of Mr Bildt , President-in-Office of the Council , and Commissioner Rehn , on the one hand , and from those of Mr Albertini , Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs who has ensured that we can adopt such a rich and substantive resolution , on the other , is that we support the European prospects of all the countries concerned .
Here , I would single out Turkey , in particular .
It is only when we offer the prospect of enlargement and inclusion to all the countries concerned that some issues in this region , such as trends pointing to further fragmentation of some of the successor states of the former Yugoslavia , border issues and occasional incidents involving religious or similar intolerance , become somewhat less dangerous for the wider region .
We can therefore conclude that the project of bringing peace and progress to what was once a volatile part of Europe is set to continue .
( FR ) Mr President , I agree , and so does my group , that the European Union 's enlargement policy is one of its most productive and most convincing policies .
That is why , Mr Rehn , I am a little concerned for your future , because I am not entirely sure how you are going to be able to find a portfolio within the future Commission that is more attractive than that of enlargement .
It is absolutely astounding to see what the prospect of membership can bring about as a force for change , for democracy-building , in a country such as Turkey .
Yes , of course , there are still many things to achieve : the independence of the judiciary , a role for the army , freedom of expression , that all aspects of the Kurdish issue are genuinely dealt with once and for all , of course .
However , I feel it is important to emphasise that this EU enlargement strategy is not just for the benefit of the countries that are going through the accession process ; it is for our benefit and for the benefit of our European decision makers , too .
It is irresponsible to diminish the efforts to change of a country such as Turkey by allowing doubts to remain about the outcome of the negotiation process .
Yes , the outcome of the negotiation process will be that Turkey joins , and we must say so clearly .
( PL ) Mr President , enlargement of the European Union is not only in the interests of the countries which accede to the EU or which aspire to do so , but it is also in the interests of us all .
This is because it increases integration and security .
Therefore , it is with pleasure that we note the progress being made concerning the countries of the western Balkans and Turkey , as well as the fact that Iceland has submitted an application for membership .
There is such a thing as enlargement fatigue , but let us remember that every democratic European country which meets very precisely specified criteria can apply for membership of the European Union .
We should not forget those criteria , but we should not shut the door on the candidates .
Let us also not shut the door on our eastern partners .
We should offer Ukraine a clear possibility of membership .
There is one more thing .
The word ' solidarity ' is very often used in the European Union .
It is a word which attracts other European countries to our Community and , at the same time , obliges us to enlarge the EU further .
Unfortunately , in many cases the EU does not show solidarity in its internal relations .
An obvious example is the Northern Gas Pipeline project , which is directly intended to hit transit countries and Poland in particular , while South Stream is Moscow 's answer to plans for energy diversification related to Nabucco .
It is very disturbing to see how particular countries have so easily allowed Russia to manipulate them .
This is why the realisation of bilateral interests between individual EU Member States and Russia leads to internal conflicts and weakens our position - the EU position .
This is a contradiction of the principle of solidarity .
Enlargement makes sense , but we must have conformity between rhetoric and practice .
( EL ) Mr President , the Treaty of Lisbon is creating an even more negative framework for the peoples of the Member States of the European Union and of the enlargement countries .
Unfortunately , the peoples of the Balkans are in a drastic situation , caused by the consequences of the NATO war , capitalist restructurings , agreements with the European Union , foreign military bases in the area , the capitalist crisis and the competition between major forces on energy .
The accession of these countries serves the interests of big business and imperialist plans , which even include re-defining the borders of the countries in this area .
The accession of FYROM to NATO and the European Union will sharpen the infighting , while the sovereign powers of this country still persist in their redeemed stand .
Turkey is exploiting its geostrategic position and persisting in its occupation of a large part of Cyprus , making claims in the Aegean and holding thousands of trade union members , Kurds , journalists and others in detention .
In Iceland , the myth of the economic miracle has been exposed and pressure can be heard for it to hitch up to the European imperialist chariot .
The Greek Communist Party is against the enlargement of the European Union , because it is against the European Union itself and against Greece 's having joined and remaining in it .
We are fighting together with the people of Europe for peace and social justice and against imperialist unions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European Union enlargement may be an opportunity or a problem , but it still remains a great challenge .
The opportunity is represented by the fact that the new Member States can make a tangible contribution to constructing European policy .
To do this , it is not enough to meet the Copenhagen criteria and merely confirm them formally .
It is essential to increase the European awareness of citizens in candidate countries through a hearts and minds campaign that must involve politicians , intellectuals and the media .
Europe can no longer be seen merely as a great pool of financial resources for resolving economic , social and infrastructural problems but as an institution to which everyone must offer an original contribution in order to establish a policy built on shared values .
Support for enlargement is low in the Member States , particularly with regard to certain States .
Do we wish to shut our eyes to this situation or do we want to involve our fellow citizens and ask their opinion ?
I think a referendum is the best way forward because it is the most direct form of democracy and it would bring Europe closer to its citizens and their freedom of choice .
( NL ) We have to stop putting on this great pretence where the accession of Turkey is concerned .
We must stop obscuring and minimising the problems .
We all need to be brave enough to face the reality .
We have been conducting accession negotiations with Turkey for five years already and what has been the result ?
Turkey is increasingly pursuing an anti-European and an anti-Western foreign policy .
Under the leadership of Mr Erdogan and President Gül , Turkey is becoming increasingly more Islamist in nature .
Turkey still refuses to recognise all the present Member States of the European Union and to honour the obligations it is required to fulfil under the framework of the customs union .
Turkey is still continuing its occupation of one part of the territory of one of the EU Member States .
And I have not even mentioned the structural and persistent problem of Turkey 's lack of respect for freedom of expression yet .
Just now , Mr Bildt said that he rejects the idea of a closed Europe .
Well , as far as I know , none of us here are in favour of the idea of a closed Europe , but we do have some members here , and I am one of them , who are in favour of the idea of a European Europe .
To borrow the words of Herman van Rompuy , president designate of the European Council : Turkey is not part of Europe and never will be !
( RO ) We are talking about enlargement in relation to the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey , which are three very different cases .
Firstly , we have the countries in the western Balkans , which are far from meeting the economic and political criteria expected by the European Union .
However , in these countries , public opinion and political leaders support the objective of integration and are extremely optimistic about accession .
The second case we have is Iceland , a country which meets many of the economic and political criteria , but where public opinion and its leaders are deeply divided about this objective of joining the EU .
What seems to link the western Balkan countries and Iceland , only at the moment , is the fact that the deep economic crisis is giving them the courage to join .
However , lastly , we have Turkey , whose European aspirations are not linked to any kind of economic cycle .
It is one of the countries with the most dynamic economic activity where a great debate is going on .
Very recently , 45 % of Turks supported this objective .
I want us to differentiate between these three situations because the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey present three different scenarios from an integration perspective .
On the other hand , it is also a good idea for us not to deal with these cases according to bilateral policy logic .
In my view , the differences between Member States and the prospective candidate countries cannot be used by Member States or third countries to block a path to European integration .
I believe that the merits of each country and public consensus are the only benchmarks for determining a path towards European integration .
( EL ) Madam President , despite some people 's reservations , the policy of enlargement has brought stability , peace and prosperity to Europe .
Today , we are being called upon to continue negotiation with the candidate countries : the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey .
The integration of the western Balkans is , without doubt , the biggest challenge .
Their integration will put an end to a period of clashes which started in 1990 and will eliminate what is going to develop into a black hole in the heart of Europe .
Croatia will be ready for integration in a few months and the other countries are making dynamic progress .
For Serbia in particular , we all need to recognise how far it has come and support its progress by encouraging it to move towards Europe .
There are , of course , outstanding questions .
The unresolved status of Kosovo , the difficult situation in Bosnia and the dispute over the name of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia are open wounds in the area .
As far as Greece is concerned , the new government is making an effort to find a solution which will put an end to the dispute .
After 17 years of tension , time must be allowed for a solution to be found , at long last , which is acceptable to both sides .
Generally speaking , good neighbourly relations have been demonstrated which , whether we like it or not , are the precondition to integration .
So let us all work on them .
( DE ) Madam President , you have made a good , clear and concise speech , Mr Bildt .
The things which you said about the European Union being a geopolitical stabilising factor and enlargement policy being a tool are all correct .
However , I believe that it is not intellectually or politically satisfying to behave as if the conflict of objectives between the increasingly large union and the increasingly close union did not exist .
This is a question which we have not definitively answered .
You are right when you say that a larger European Union has more influence , but it is also more complex , which has consequences for our ability to act .
Therefore , we must have a new dialogue about enlargement , as Mr Severin from the Social Democrats has proposed , which covers gradual integration and new forms of membership , in order to be able to reconcile these two legitimate objectives .
We need institutional reforms .
For example , I cannot explain to people in Germany why I am standing by Thessaloniki and why the Yugoslav successor states will one day have more commissioners than all the founder members of the European Union put together .
This is not right .
We need to be honest about our enlargement policy so that we once again have the support of citizens for this important policy area .
( NL ) According to a Eurobarometer poll , European citizens have made their opinion clear on Turkey 's accession : 28 % in favour and 59 % against .
These figures speak for themselves and no politicians can or should deny them .
If we do deny them , we will only further widen the gap between citizens and politicians .
Turkey is not geographically part of Europe , nor is it part of European history , whose religious , cultural and political landscapes have been defined by Christianity , the Renaissance , the Enlightenment and the democratic nation state .
On the other hand , a form of privileged partnership would combine the best of both worlds .
In addition to many economic advantages , such a partnership would create a more relaxed relationship between Europe and Turkey and would free us from the unrelenting stress of accession .
Therefore , it is time to make a clear decision : let us bring a halt to the accession negotiations and embark on the process of negotiating a privileged partnership .
Let this be our enlargement strategy for 2010 .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I and many of my colleagues in my group have always seen enlargement as one of the EU 's most important projects and have always supported it .
Despite all our justified criticism of different aspects of enlargement , it has been one of the most successful chapters in the EU 's external development and it represents a complex long-term task for both the candidate countries and the EU .
This has already been discussed today in plenary .
We must ask ourselves whether further enlargement processes are appropriate for us .
With regard to south-eastern Europe in particular , with its long history of the break up of states and empires , it is right and proper that the people in these countries , which form part of a troubled region , have been offered the possibility of membership of the European Union .
The fact that some politicians in the Member States of the European Union have distanced themselves from this promise under the pretext that strengthening the identity and institutions of the EU takes priority over further EU accessions has not only increased the mistrust of the candidate countries , but has also had an inhibiting effect on the democratic opinion-forming process and the reform processes in the region .

( NL ) I still have vivid recollections of Commissioner Rehn saying , at one of our recent meetings , that to be a commissioner in charge of enlargement , you have to be an optimist .
I must admit that , in my opinion , that word describes him very well but , as far I am concerned , the role of optimist is not a fitting one for him .
My personal view is that , in politics , and that also includes European politics , optimism ought to take second place to realism .
I find it downright shocking that Parliament has gone along with such a rose-tinted approach .
Why was it necessary to tone down the clear signal addressed to Turkey and Bosnia in the first version of Mr Albertini 's report ?
Why did we have to pay compliments to Turkey ?
Why did we make desperate efforts to find a positive opening message for Bosnia ?
Is Parliament not fully aware of the fact that we are obliged to represent the peoples of the Member States of the European Union ?
Information campaigns are not going to be of any help in achieving an enlargement process that is supported by the people .
We will only achieve that by honestly and realistically assessing the extent to which these countries have complied with the Copenhagen criteria .
( DE ) Madam President , it is alarming how evident the EU 's democratic deficit is in the case of Turkey 's accession .
The majority of the EU population is clearly against Turkey joining the EU .
Nevertheless , the process of whitewashing , evaluation and negotiation is going on over the citizens ' heads .
It is dishonest to behave as if we were not moving towards full membership .
As an accession candidate , Turkey is already receiving EUR 2.26 billion for the period from 2007 to 2010 .
This is being paid for by the countries which are net contributors and whose citizens do not want Turkey to join .
This is obviously all about US interests .
It would be possible to resolve numerous non-European conflicts following Turkey 's accession .
However , despite Turkey 's participation in the Eurovision Song Contest , I am of the same opinion as the highly respected former German president , Theodor Heuss , who gave a clear definition of Europe .
Europe , he said , is built on three hills : on the Acropolis for Greek humanism , on the Capitol in Rome for the concept of the European state and on Golgotha for the Christian Western world .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the enlargement of the EU to include the western Balkans has been settled since Thessaloniki .
Accepting these countries once they have fulfilled the conditions is not an act of mercy , as many people maintain , but a simple necessity , given their geographical position in the centre of the European Union .
Our stability is determined by their stability as we unfortunately found out in the 1990s .
All the countries must , of course , meet the requirements of the Copenhagen criteria and , as these countries were formerly enemies , they must also take part in regional cooperation programmes .
This also applies to the countries which are the neighbours of these accession candidates .
I expect Slovenia and Greece to help the accession candidates to achieve their objective quickly and easily .
Unfortunately , Bosnia and Herzegovina is in a very difficult situation and I do not believe that I can cover it in one-and-a-half minutes , although I am the rapporteur for this region .
I will not even try .
I only wish , Mr Bildt and Mr Rehn , that the negotiations there could take place close to the people and not be dictated from the outside .
All the countries in the region have different distances to cover and we must help them to overcome their problems .
Mr Lambsdorff , the idea that the accession candidates will have more commissioners than the founding members is a quite pathetic argument .
It is actually not an argument at all ; it is a knock-out argument .
This problem can be resolved , but the people in these countries should not be excluded just because you do not want to resolve the problem .


( SL ) I wish to congratulate both Commissioner Rehn and Mr Bildt , President-in-Office of the Council , on their constructive and positive introductory remarks .
As rapporteur for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , I am particularly pleased to note that this country has made progress in 2009 and that the Commission has recommended that the Council fix a date for the commencement of negotiations .
We also take note of the fact that Prime Ministers Papandreou and Gruevski have begun communicating directly .
I would call on Mr Bildt and Commissioner Rehn , as well as on the governments of all the Member States to whom this issue is of interest , to pick up your telephones and contact Prime Minister Papandreou and Prime Minister Gruevski in the lead-up to the December summit to show them your solidarity and to encourage their determined efforts to find a solution to this dispute which has lasted for 20 years .
This is the only way in which Greece , as a long-standing member of the European Union , will be able to fulfil its ambitions , and honour the responsibilities it has to this region .
( SL ) Serbia has made progress over the past few months and , by fulfilling its criteria for visa liberalisation , it has demonstrated to both itself and Europe that it is capable of achieving more and performing better than it has done to date .
It deserves recognition for this success .
Serbia has hidden potential which it needs to realise on its road to EU membership , and it must do so in its own interest and in the interests of its neighbours , the region as a whole and the European Union .
Given its size and strategic position , it could become a driving force that brings the region closer together .
It is time that it became aware of that role and that it did more for enlargement than it has done so far .
The leadership in Belgrade must devote itself systematically to urgent political and economic reform and cooperation with all its neighbours .
Full cooperation with the Hague Tribunal is not enough because it needs to be brought to a successful end .
Serbia needs to improve its political culture , because its record hitherto on that score might impede the accession process .
It needs transparency and it needs to actively build as broad a public consensus as possible and to overcome divisions between the ruling coalition and the opposition on key EU issues .
However , two important preconditions of a more rapid progress are freedom and independence of the media and putting an end to media manipulation .
Madam President , all I would ask for is more honesty in our dealings with Turkey and a correct and fair interpretation of events , particularly in relation to Cyprus where a distorted version of recent history has unfortunately become the accepted wisdom .
There is a real opportunity between now and the presidential elections in Northern Cyprus in April which should be seized , and this is a matter for all sides .
We should always remember that the Turkish Cypriots agreed the UN plan for reunification in April 2004 .
It was rejected by the South .
We should also remember the May 2004 promise of the European Union to end the isolation of Northern Cyprus , a promise which was never fulfilled .
The EU has a moral duty here .
I fear that if we go on treating Turkish interests in this way , we risk losing a key ally in a strategic area of great importance and encouraging all the wrong tendencies in Turkey itself .
Of course , many of us are deeply concerned about migration problems in relation to our nations .
This is an aspect of our negotiations with Turkey that will have to be dealt with in a particular and robust way .
If I had time , I would also make reference to Croatia and other countries in south-eastern Europe which urgently need to address corruption , organised crime and abuse of certain private property rights before accession , in the case of Croatia , or candidacy can be taken forward with confidence .
Madam President , the countries proposed for EU membership are comparatively poor .
Their European dream , to quote the Commissioner , is that they will receive subsidies .
That is what it is about .
The fact is that rich countries , for example Norway and Switzerland , simply do not want to join the EU .
To make the telling point , Iceland , when it was a rich country , had no interest in joining the European Union .
Now that it is bankrupt , and sadly so , the Icelandic Government is , of course , in the queue to join .
The San Andreas Fault for the European Union is between the seven Member States who are large net contributors , and the rest .
This situation is unstable , untenable and unsustainable .
You think you are enlarging the EU empire by this ill thought-out policy .
In fact , you are driving it towards economic chaos in the future .
( ES ) Madam President , the enlargement process has been a resounding success .
The latest enlargement has allowed us to come together with those countries of Central and Eastern Europe that were unfairly denied freedom and prosperity after the Second World War .
At present , enlargement is focusing on the western Balkans , Turkey and Iceland .
I endorse the ideas that we have identified as the guiding principles of the enlargement process in recent years .
I mean consolidation , conditionality and communication .
That is to say , that we should fulfil our obligations , but not make rash promises on future enlargements .
Secondly , progress in the various accession processes is subject to strict compliance with the conditions .
The candidate countries must make a determined effort to carry out the necessary reforms .
Thirdly , we must all make an effort to communicate with the citizens .
The resolution we are to vote on tomorrow highlights the very important issue of communication .
In this connection , I should like to reiterate the broader proposal I made on previous occasions , namely that it would be appropriate also to enhance young Europeans ' knowledge of the Union by making this a compulsory subject in the upper secondary school curriculum .
Another relevant idea contained in the resolution is the capacity for integration .
Enlargement requires existing Members of the Union to take certain measures .
Regarding finance , for instance , enlargement calls for sufficient financial resources to ensure that essential community policies such as the common agricultural policy or cohesion policy are not put at risk .
I am about to conclude . I should like to point out that as we are all aware , Kosovo is a special case .
Unfortunately , however , there are sections of the resolution where this particularity is not made clear .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider the resolution that we are discussing today in Parliament to be genuinely positive .
To dwell on part of this , I consider that the topic of European enlargement to the western Balkans is , and must remain , one of the linchpins of European action in the coming months .
I would like to compliment the Swedish Presidency and , above all , Commissioner Rehn on their work .
We must nevertheless feel more involved in the process of enlargement .
Some countries must undoubtedly step up their action on the legal front in terms of the fight against crime and reforms .
Yet we must not lose sight of the political aim , which is to consolidate democracy in those countries and have them follow the European path in economic , social and infrastructural terms .
I am thinking , for example , of countries such as Kosovo - and in this regard I agree with the amendment tabled by Mrs Lunacek with regard to the Roma issue - because this is a country we cannot sideline merely because five European countries have not yet recognised its independence .
To sum up , we need the right amount of courage and a far-sighted policy that is up to the challenge that the process of enlargement sets all of us .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am speaking as head of the delegation to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and I will be concentrating on this country .
I would like to offer my very warm thanks to Mr Rehn for his courage .
His report and his green light for this country represent a bold step forward which has generated momentum .
At the same time , elections have been held in Greece and there is a new government in Athens , which gives us a situation and a window in which we can achieve something .
However , I would like to ask my fellow Members to react calmly .
A meeting is being held on Friday between Mr Papandreou and Prime Minister Gruevski , and if we set expectations too high , we may increase the pressure so much that the whole thing falls apart and we do not want to risk that .
We must encourage all sides to continue in friendship along the path that has already been taken .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Thaler , for describing this route so accurately .
I would also like to wish my friend , Mr Rehn , a successful future in the Commission .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , I have a question for Mr Chatzimarkakis , if he will allow me to ask it .
Mrs Pack obviously did not hear me when I said that we are standing by Thessaloniki .
I would like to repeat that here .
I wanted to ask Mr Chatzimarkakis what he believes to be the most urgent steps which the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must take in order to make progress in the dispute over the name and to ensure that the negotiations which are just beginning are as successful as possible .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you very much for the question .
I believe that both sides need to change their spots and it is clear that both sides are ready to take a step forward .
We are now expecting a lasting solution .
For this reason , I expect the name issue to be resolved clearly and definitively in the course of a five-minute discussion .
That is not the problem .
The application of the name , the so-called scope , is the major issue and both sides obviously need time to resolve it .
I would like to see a lasting solution because the alternative is a short-term solution which could lead to disaster .
For this reason , all of us must give both sides friendly encouragement to find a long-term solution with a broad scope and a broad application .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we must consider the statement that enlargement will be a factor of stability very carefully .
Let us think back to what Prime Minister Erdogan said a few days ago .
He said that he could not get along with Mr Netanyahu but felt much more comfortable with Mr Bashir who , if I am not mistaken , is the Sudanese President under investigation because he is accused of crimes against humanity .
On the subject of neighbours , if Turkey joined Europe , we would have Iran , Iraq and Syria as our neighbours .
This does not seem to me to be an ideal neighbourhood .
It would be much better to have Turkey joined to Europe by a bond of privileged partnership .
A somewhat worrying trend of de-westernising Turkey has reached a highly advanced stage under our very eyes .
We need only think of measures affecting communal social living , such as separate swimming pools for men and women , restrictions on freedom of opposition , actually extending to the imposition of a EUR 3 million fine for opposition broadcasts , and so on .
I think we must still consider one fact : there may be a majority in favour in this Parliament , but the majority of Turkish people are against Turkey 's entry .
We are insisting on extending our borders to Turkey when the Turks themselves do not want it .
The President of the Italian Republic has said that pacts must be respected .
I agree , but we must consider that Turks are Turks .
( EL ) Madam President , the report we are debating today wants to send a positive message about European prospects and , ultimately , about the accession of the countries of the western Balkans , Turkey and Iceland to the European Union .
I believe that all of us here in this Chamber , or at least most of us , agree with this positive message .
At the same time , however , it must be made clear that progress is needed before accession .
It is not a path paved with roses .
It is therefore a question of credibility for the European Union to see that the criteria and preconditions which it sets are satisfied with deeds and not just good intentions .
In other words , full adaptation is required for full integration .
Within this framework , the application of good neighbourly relations is very important .
We must not try and hide behind our finger .
The serious unresolved issues in good neighbourly relations between candidate countries and Member States are affecting the progress towards accession of those who want to become members of this family .
The precedent of Slovenia and Croatia confirms this .
That is why the outstanding issue of the name of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia must be resolved before , not after , the start of accession negotiations .
The reason is simple .
If this country is given a start date for negotiations without this having been resolved , then its government will no longer have any strong incentive for taking a constructive stand in order to ultimately achieve a mutually acceptable solution with Greece .
As far as Turkey is concerned , regularisation of its relations with the Republic of Cyprus and a halt to overflights over Greek territory by its military aircraft are two important factors in speeding up its progress towards accession .
It is with these thoughts that we shall decide on our stand in the vote tomorrow .
Madam President , today 's debate and resolution gives the new European Parliament the opportunity to recommit itself to the further enlargement of the European Union , to note the positive developments that there are in the candidate countries , in almost every individual case , and to remind ourselves that freeing up trade , buttressing stability , improving control of our borders and expanding the opportunities for travel and free exchange for our peoples , strengthen - not weaken - our European Union .
The European Conservatives repeat today that they say they favour enlargement but , at the same time , exclude it from the founding document of their new group whose official spokesperson , speaking in this debate , repeats his opposition to Turkey , thus putting them in exactly the same camp as the Far Right as we have all heard this afternoon .
However , I do express my warm thanks to Commission Olli Rehn , whose good humour was reflected by his recent comment that , in future , the Directorate-General for Enlargement should not be an equal distance from either the Council or the Commission , in the middle of rue de la Loi .
I appreciate his good humour and I appreciate his good judgement .
I hope his legacy will be the accession of all current EU candidate countries .
( GA ) Madam President , there has always been a strong link between Iceland and the European Union and as Chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Switzerland , Iceland , Norway and the European Economic Area , I was very happy to welcome the parliamentary delegation from Iceland last week .
I hope that a Joint Parliamentary Committee will be established soon and the Icelandic Government is taking part in close talks with the Commission following the decision of the Foreign Affairs Ministers of the Union last July .
I am sure that European leaders will give the green light so that negotiations can begin between the Union and Iceland at the summit meeting next Spring .
As Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area , it has twenty two of the chapters that need to be fulfilled already covered .
A lot of the work is already done .
I am confident that the other chapters will be dealt with in a positive , directed way and in the spirit of friendship .
( PL ) Madam President , as a Pole , but at the same time a citizen of the European Union for five years now , I would like to express great satisfaction that we are talking here in such illustrious company , including people who are closely involved in the enlargement process , such as Mr Rehn and Mr Bildt .

We are talking about further enlargement of the European Union , and we are doing so in spite of those who are saying that the EU has reached the upper ceiling of its possibilities for territorial development .
The only good news which I have for those opponents of further enlargement is that there will be no enlargement of the EU at all in 2009 .
I would not like us to look at the process of EU enlargement only from the point of view of legal clauses .
I would also like us to view it as an historical process .
History teaches us , after all , that the Balkans , for example , were the source of many conflicts in the 20th century .
They were conflicts which then spilled out over the entire continent , such as the First World War , and conflicts like the war in the 1990s , which also affected other countries , if only because of the migration of many millions of people .
Therefore , admission of the Balkan States to the European Union could , in my opinion , be the EU 's most important contribution ever to stabilisation and peace in our continent .
If I could just say one more thing about what Mr Bildt said concerning open doors , I would like to ask you not to forget that there are still other countries , not mentioned in today 's document , which dream of EU membership .
( NL ) First of all , I regret the fact that right now we are unable to paint a rosy picture of the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The process of reform in this country is still being paralysed by political forces there .
The two entities have not been able to develop a shared vision , as a result of which progress has ground to a halt .
Once again , I would like to emphasise the importance of building the sustainable constitutional framework which is necessary for this country and its institutions to work more effectively .
I therefore call on the political leaders of both entities to work towards this as a starting point .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that I am delighted to learn that Turkey is so close to the hearts and minds of my fellow member Madlener 's party , the Dutch Party for Freedom .
It is precisely because of Turkey 's negotiations with the European Union that this country has made such huge steps forward .
I was , therefore , expecting the Party for Freedom to show greater support for the negotiation process .
Finally , I would like to point out that the accession process ought to be results-oriented and that it should be guided , not by the date of accession , but by the results achieved .
Only once the candidate countries have complied with the requirements set and thereby qualified for fully-fledged membership can there be any talk of accession .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , you rightly pointed out that the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon was going to enable us to enter a new era of enlargement policy , and we have to embark on this new process with realism and a clear head : that is the essence of this resolution .

On the one hand , a new process does not mean going for broke .
That would be the surest way of creating misunderstandings , even suspicion , among the public , and it would also be the best way of creating false ideas among the candidate countries and of encouraging them to take refuge in rhetorical and cosmetic policies rather than in policies aimed at more thorough reforms .
We must be wary of steps , conditions and values on which we cannot compromise , and I believe in particular in cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal .
On the other hand , it must be reaffirmed , in the clearest of terms , that the place of the western Balkans , of all the countries of the western Balkans , including Kosovo , is indeed in the European Union , and that we must encourage them to continue and to increase their efforts .
There is no contradiction between making the demands clear , on the one hand , and showing full support for the process of enlargement to include the western Balkans , on the other , just as there is no contradiction between pursuing this philosophy of judging everyone on merit and having to take important initiatives for all of the countries in the region , such as visa liberalisation .
Finally , allow me to say a word about Turkey .
Before speculating on any very hypothetical future outcome concerning Turkey 's accession process , I will simply say that the Commission has noted , for the second year running , that no progress was made on the Ankara Protocol and that that prevented any new negotiating chapters from being opened .
( DE ) Madam President , I missed the beginning of this discussion , because as rapporteur for Croatia , I had to report to the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee .

I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Bildt and Mr Rehn for their help in bringing about at least a temporary solution to the border dispute between Slovenia and Croatia .
This is a good example of how cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament can help countries to overcome their problems .
I have also made a contribution to ensuring that the treaty has been almost unanimously ratified , at least in Croatia .
However , it is Bosnia and Herzegovina which causes me much more concern .
I was recently in Banja Luka and Sarajevo .
It is true that Mr Dodik made some compromises and offered some changes during our meeting which he can agree to .
However , I would like to pick up on an idea that Mrs Pack has just mentioned .
How can we make contact with broad swathes of the population ?
There is a great deal of interest there in overcoming this lack of a voice and the contradictions which characterise many policies at the top .
We must somehow manage to talk to the people directly , because in contrast to what the Earl of Dartmouth has once again said , there are many people in this region who are not interested in European Union money , but who want to move from a region of hate and war into a union of peace and understanding .
That is what Europe is about .
You do not want to understand that and you will never understand that .
However , the people in Sarajevo and Banja Luka know what Europe means and they are the ones who need our help .
( DE ) Madam President , we must bring Croatia into the European Union next year or at least bring the accession negotiations to an end and start the ratification process .
For 20 years , Croatia has been moving towards joining the European Union and towards freedom .
Artificial obstacles have been put in its way and I am grateful to the Swedish Presidency for helping to remove them .
Croatia has now ratified the agreement with Slovenia with a two-thirds majority and we must do everything we can to ensure that Slovenia also fulfils its obligations to the European Union .
The target date of 2010 is also important because this is a question of the credibility of the European Union itself .
As far as Macedonia is concerned , I hope that the Swedish Presidency will succeed in enabling accession negotiations to begin next year , so that we can finally resolve the bilateral problem which also exists in this case .
I hope that we can change the text of the report which rather one-sidedly places too many obligations on Macedonia and not enough on its neighbours .
Everyone must do their bit , including those in the European Union .
I believe it is crucial for us to include Kosovo fully in the Thessaloniki process and these are important passages in the Albertini report .
This country also needs a European perspective .
I would like to call on all Member States who have not already done so to recognise Kosovo , so that we no longer have any legal or technical problems and so that Kosovo can play a full part in the integration process .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( EL ) Madam President , I noticed that Mr Posselt , like other members , uses the term ' Macedonia ' for FYROM .
It is precisely the term ' Macedonia ' which is causing friction between Greece , which is a Member State of the European Union , and this candidate country .
I would be most grateful if a recommendation could be made to my fellow members to use the actual name of this country .

( DE ) Madam President , I would like to respond briefly by quoting my highly esteemed colleague Mr Cohn-Bendit from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance who once said in this House : ' Macedonia is Macedonia is Macedonia ' .
I am of exactly the same opinion .
Bullying a neighbouring country is never helpful .
( EL ) Madam President , there is only one Macedonia and it is Greek , which is why these games need to stop .
When speaking in this Chamber , we need to use the terms which everyone has accepted and FYROM , the candidate country , has been accepted as ' FYROM ' and not as ' Macedonia ' .

( BG ) I first of all wish to thank Mr Albertini for the work he has done on this difficult report concerning the strategy for boosting the progress of many countries at different stages in their preparations for meeting the criteria for European Union membership .
I understand and support Mr Albertini 's desire to provide the utmost clarity and give a thumbs up to the European Union 's enlargement with the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey .
However , the majority of proposed amendments indicate that this is a complex subject .
Once the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force on 1 December , we must analyse and increase our Union 's integration capacity .
I want to suggest to the Commission that it carries out such an analysis of the European Union 's integration capacity because , without the support of our citizens , the European Union itself is at risk of turning into an empty shell .
I also support the view that a Member State should not impose unfulfillable membership conditions on a candidate country .
All bilateral problems must be resolved in a spirit of European understanding , sharing common values , history and culture .
On this point , I want to call for joint commemoration of historical events and heroes from the Balkan peninsula .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish to speak in connection with Turkey 's interests which , in my opinion , are being handled to the detriment of the interests of the Republic of Cyprus .
I wish to express my dissatisfaction at the fact that issues relating to the Republic of Cyprus are being relegated ; issues on which Turkey should be condemned are being used today to improve Turkey 's position in terms of its accession to the European Union .
Back in 2006 , Turkey committed to recognising the Republic of Cyprus , applying the Ankara Protocol and helping to resolve the Cyprus question .
It has done nothing .
On the contrary , today talks are being used for Turkey 's benefit , crowned by efforts to open the energy chapter , which , of course , is considered to be of benefit to the European Union itself .
However , you will understand that the Republic of Cyprus , as a small state , needs to look after its interests and to request sanctions against Turkey , one of which is , of course , to prevent chapters from being opened .
Madam President , firstly , my group , the Greens , would prefer not to put any date in for the accession of Croatia .
We think that experience has shown that that has not been a good idea in the past , whether Croatia should join as soon as the criteria are fulfilled .
Secondly , Mr Brok , the Copenhagen criteria are , of course , valid .
They are there ; we do not need to mention them time and time again .
We are sticking to the agreements that the European Union made on accession and to the Copenhagen criteria .
The aim of accession progress is the accession itself .
When we are discussing Turkey , we should not forget the amazing progress that has also been made in Turkey in areas where , a few years ago , we thought would not ever have been possible .
This is the clear success of the accession process , which we should not forget .
( RO ) Madam President , Commissioner , please allow me to thank you for your dedicated work on the enlargement of the European Union .
The European Union has had a powerful impact in the western Balkans over the last two years on democratic change and economic deregulation .
The visa waiver for some countries in the western Balkans and the start of the accession negotiations for FYROM mark progress which European citizens will benefit from , both as a result of judicial and police cooperation with the EU and from an economic perspective .
I believe that during the current time of economic crisis , the EU enlargement process offers a solution for revitalising the European Union 's economy .
However , we must not forget the adverse consequences arising from the unfair benefits offered by the European Union to different countries in the western Balkans region .
The Commission must also look closely at including Moldova in the group of countries in the western Balkans as the aid offered to neighbouring countries to help implement the necessary reforms must continue in a fair manner .
Moldova is a potential candidate , prepared to come into line with the European Union as part of the political and economic integration process .
( RO ) The European Union now has a constitution - the Treaty of Lisbon - a President and a High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
We can therefore adopt a different perspective when dealing with the new enlargement process involving the countries of the western Balkans and Iceland , but especially Turkey .
I am aware that there are many within the European Union who hesitate to commit to a new enlargement process , but the experience of Romania and Bulgaria , for instance , shows that accession to the EU has been the most powerful instrument in changing things for the better in our countries .
We need , of course , to cast a highly critical eye at the processes in all these countries wishing to join the European Union .
We must focus , above all , on the sound nature and functionality of democratic political systems .
However , we have adequate instruments for monitoring compliance with accession conditions .
Offering these countries a clearer prospect of accession would be a stabilising factor and would act as a catalyst to internal progress in candidate countries .
Madam President , I am very grateful for this opportunity to share a few thoughts with you .
Enlargement has rightly been called one of the most successful policies of the European Union ; many of us in this debate have said this .
And the idea that the central values of Europe - democracy , human rights , solidarity - should encompass all the states of Europe has been , and will remain , at the heart of Europe 's identity .
The Europe that exists was built around the proposition that , through integration , the states of Europe will gradually accept a peaceful resolution of conflicts , but this process does not come without effort .
The acceding states must undergo a thorough transformation in order to meet the requirements of EU membership .
The process , it should be stressed , is voluntary .
No state is coerced into joining , but , in order to join the EU , certain conditions must be met .
At the same time , precisely because meeting the conditions requires a major effort , acceding states must also be encouraged to make the effort involved and not only that .
The obligations that go with EU membership must be transferred from paper to practice .
Without implementation , the process remains empty .
This is the message that the Albertini resolution is sending to prospective candidates for EU membership .
The EU is ready to accept the states of the western Balkans and Turkey as full members , but it is up to them to meet the conditions that the EU has set .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , let me try to be brief .
First , if this is appropriate from the Presidency point of view , I join those Members who have paid tribute to Commissioner Rehn for the work that he has done over the past five years .
Much has been achieved .
It may be good for your successor that there is still something left to do , but much has been done .
I also express our appreciation for the very broad support for the policy of enlargement that has been expressed throughout this debate by all of the representatives of all of the major political factions here .
I think that is a source of strength .
( Interjection from William ( The Earl of ) Dartmouth : ' Did you listen to the debate ? ' )
I did listen to the debate .
You are not part of one of the major groups .
I am sorry about that .
Mr Severin was one of those who mentioned that this is a process that we must also anchor in the hearts and minds of people .
I do agree with that , but we should also recognise that this requires determined political leadership by each and every one of us .
If you look back on the history of our Union , it is easy to note that very little in the history of European integration has happened because of some sudden groundswell of public opinion demanding it .
Nearly everything has been the result of visionary , far-sighted , often difficult and demanding political leadership , but we have also subsequently won the support of our citizens for what we are doing .
I said that I was Prime Minister of my country when we entered the European Union .
We fought a very bitter referendum campaign .
We won that narrowly .
We had public opinion against the European Union for quite some time .
We are now , if you look at the public opinion polls , one of the more Euro-positive countries in Europe .
It took political leadership to achieve that .
It does not happen by itself .
Let me also say , when we go to the more difficult areas of Europe , that reconciliation is not easy .
That requires a lot of that leadership , and reconciliation has yet to be fully achieved in all parts of Europe .
The western Balkans were taken up by a number of speakers , and rightly so .
Let me assure you that we are aware of the issues of Kosovo , and of the need to move forward with them , taking some of the issues that we have inside our Union into account as well .
Bosnia has been taken up by several people , such as Mrs Pack and Mr Swoboda , and let me just make a couple of remarks there .
I have spent four full days this year engaging with the political leadership of Bosnia , trying to move them forward and trying to tell them the dangers of slipping behind when the rest of the region is moving ahead .
I have probably done too much because at the end of the day , as Mrs Pack said , they have to do this by themselves .
It is their country , not our country , but we also have the duty to tell them that , if they do not do it , the rest of the region will move ahead and that will not be good for their country .
That is what we have been trying to do , and to a certain extent are still trying to do .
Our process of enlargement , as everyone has been pointing out , is performance-based .
It requires reforms .
It requires reconciliation .
And that applies to each and every one .
It did apply to Sweden once upon a time , and we managed .
It applies to each and every one .
As to the gentleman who was interested in engaging in debate , I did notice that there were a number of - mainly - gentlemen from the Far Right up there who had their reservations on Turkey , to put it in the mildest possible terms .
If I understood the argument , it was that Turkey is too large , too complicated and too Muslim .
If you read Article 49 of the treaty , and that is what we have to base our policies on , it does not make any exceptions for big countries , it does not make any exceptions for complicated cases , and it has no religious criteria .
( Applause from the centre left )
So that is what we have to abide by .
I listened to the moving words on the Christian heritage , and there is much truth in that .
All the Catholics and Orthodox or Protestants and Anglicans might interpret that in very different ways , but I would caution against defining the Jewish heritage out of Europe .
They are not Christians , but they are , with all of the problems in our history , also part of our Europe of the past , the present and the future .
I would also argue that it would equally be a mistake to define citizens of Muslim faith , be they inside our existing Member States , be they in Bosnia , be they somewhere else or be they in Turkey , and exclude them from the applicability of Article 49 of the treaty .
I think that would be a mistake .
( Applause from the centre left )
I listened with interest in that respect to Mrs Koppa representing Greece in her comments on both the challenges in the western Balkans and reconciliation with Turkey , and I have noted the steps and statements made by Prime Minister Papandreou lately .
Could I just finally pick up one of my favourite items .
Someone mentioned , as sometimes happens in this debate , the question of absorption capacity - that we simply cannot absorb too many countries .
I do not like the word .
I do not see our Union as ' absorbing ' nations .
I do not know if we have absorbed Britain .
And I do not know if France wants to be absorbed .
And I hope Sweden will never be absorbed .
I see our Union as enriching the countries when we enter , and I have yet to see an enlargement that has made our Union weaker .
Every single enlargement , although it has been difficult , has made our Union stronger , has made it richer , has made it more ambitious , and I for one do not belong to those who believe that history has come to an end .
Article 49 applies .
Finally , one of the gentlemen said there are other countries as well that we have not debated on .
That is true .
Article 49 applies to each and every European country , including those that have not yet been mentioned in the debate today .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank you for a very lively and substantive debate on EU enlargement and our strategy - now , next year and in the near future .
This debate has been in line with the best democratic traditions of this Parliament , and I am grateful for the broad general endorsement of our carefully conducted enlargement policy .
You have rightly underlined the importance of simultaneous and parallel commitment and conditionality in EU enlargement .
I agree , and I want to underline the paramount importance of being both fair and firm at the same time .
We have to be fair and respect the commitments we have undertaken to the countries that are covered by our consolidated enlargement agenda in south-eastern Europe , that is , the western Balkans and Turkey .
At the same time , we can be as firm and as we are fair , and we need to apply rigorous conditionality when dealing with these candidate countries and potential candidates .
These only work together - in tandem , in unison - and that is , indeed , the best recipe for driving reforms and democratic and economic transformation in south-eastern Europe .
It is also the best recipe for anchoring stability in the western Balkans and driving reforms that enhance fundamental freedoms in Turkey .
I think Mrs Flautre is right that there cannot be , by definition , a more attractive portfolio than enlargement .
However , I am a man of moderation - believe it or not - and I believe that there are certain limits to how much attraction and fascination a man can take .
And , as Carl requested , some work will also be left for my successor , for the next Commission and for this Parliament .
Be that as it may , it has been great to work with you .
Together we have made a difference .
Let us recall that EU enlargement has greatly contributed to the fact that Europe today is whole and free .
Let us keep it that way , and let us complete our work in south-eastern Europe .
( Applause )
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I believe that it is extremely important for the European Parliament to be involved in evaluating the enlargement process .
This process has been a major success for the European Union , bringing it peace and stability .
Against this background , we must bear in mind that the countries in the western Balkans are a part of Europe geographically , culturally and historically .
Among the potential candidate countries referred to in the resolution , I would like to highlight the successful efforts and tangible progress made by Serbia .
This country has gone ahead and implemented unilaterally the Interim Agreement on Trade which it signed with the EU , thereby demonstrating that it is determined to move closer to the European Union , in spite of the political and economic difficulties it is facing .
The European Parliament must encourage Serbia to continue on its journey towards the EU .
On this point , we must ask the Council and Commission to show openness and continue the negotiations with this country in a constructive manner .
I believe that progress with the process of Serbia 's integration into the European Union must not be subject to the recognition of Kosovo 's independence .
The stand against Turkey is a most important issue which will be discussed , within the framework of enlargement , at the European Council Summit in December .
We support full integration , considering that this objective must constitute a driving force for reform and policy change on important issues .
We would point out that Turkey has still not honoured its contractual obligations towards the EU and all the Member States .
It must start to honour its commitments immediately , otherwise it will not come through evaluation in December unscathed .
The commitments on which it will be evaluated and the timeline are contained in the conclusions dated December 2006 .
They include the application of the Additional Protocol , improved bilateral relations with and recognition of the Republic of Cyprus and a constructive stand on the procedure for resolving the Cyprus question .
It is absurd that , while seeking integration and a regulatory role in the area , Turkey continues to infringe international law and the principles on which the EU is founded by maintaining occupying troops in a Member State .
Finally , the energy chapter cannot be opened as long as Turkey prevents the Republic of Cyprus from exercising its sovereign rights in its exclusive economic zone .
The EU is like a building under construction and therefore , the notion of halting its enlargement would run counter to the very principle it is based on .
According to Article 49 of the EU Treaty : ' Any European State ... may apply to become a member of the Union ' .
This is precisely why the Enlargement Strategy for the western Balkans , Turkey and Iceland is receiving increased attention as part of our activities .
I unreservedly support this close interest .
Croatia , Turkey and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have candidate status , having embarked in a responsible manner on the road to integration .
Iceland , Montenegro and Albania have applied for accession , with the first two currently being evaluated by the Commission .
There are certainly problems still to overcome , such as corruption , crime or freedom of the media .
The introduction of the visa-free scheme in Serbia , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , starting on 19 December , will give this process significant impetus .
However , I also want to draw your attention to the fact that when we are talking about enlargement , we must also look at the Republic of Moldova , which is currently going through a crucial political period , in terms of embarking on the road to democracy and EU accession .
With this in mind , we must support the implementation of the objectives of the European Strategy for the Republic of Moldova 2007-2013 in order to achieve the results desired by both sides .
in writing . - I would like to make three observations .
First , I am glad that Foreign Minister Carl Bildt pointed out the most important message of the Albertini resolution - that the EU remains strongly committed to the enlargement policy and views it as one of the most successful EU policies .
This is very much due to the excellent work of Commissioner Rehn .
The second important message is that the rule of law is seen as a key principle of democratic progress and one of the main conditions for further accessions .
We should also remain clear about the relevance of the Copenhagen criteria .
The third observation : I strongly suggest that the opening of the accession negotiations with Macedonia be decided by the December European Council in accordance with the Commission 's recommendation .
in writing . - Iceland is already an active and long-standing partner in the wider European integration process .
Iceland cooperates closely with EU Member States as a founding member of NATO , a member of the Council of Europe , EFTA , the OSCE and the Schengen Cooperation .
Also , it has been estimated that Iceland has already adopted some 60 % of the vast acquis communautaire .
From this point of view , the application of Iceland for EU membership is a logical step .
In my view , Iceland has always had a European vocation and Icelandic membership will represent a win-win situation for both sides .
We are already learning from Iceland 's experience in sustainable management of fishing resources , the use of geothermal heat and measures to fight climate change .
Iceland has proven its determination to join the Union by submitting the answers to the Commission 's questionnaire well ahead of the deadline and I look forward to the evaluation to be made at the summit in mid-December .
If all requirements are met and the principle of own merits is respected , I hope Iceland 's accession can be coupled with that of Croatia .
in writing . - ( DE ) A differentiated approach to the enlargement strategy is needed .
While Iceland is a European country which is ready for EU membership , the Balkan States are far from being ready , with the exception of Croatia .
Unresolved problems are difficult to deal with after accession and remain unresolved for years .
Therefore , there must be absolutely no doubts about the Balkan States ' readiness for accession and wages and social conditions there must correspond to the European average .
For years , the reports on Turkey 's progress have consisted of one long list of problems .
If Turkey were a car , it would long since have failed its MOT .
It is true that this country is not a part of Europe either geographically or in spiritual or cultural terms .
This is clear from its consistent disregard for human rights and freedom of speech , which the plan for the Kurds cannot disguise , and from the Cyprus issue .
However , perhaps the EU also wants to deviate from its human rights standards .
This is the only way in which its obeisance to the Beneš decrees can be explained .
Turkey regards itself as the supreme power of the Turkic peoples .
As a result , the EU 's problems would only increase following Turkey 's accession , as its actions have repeatedly made clear .
The positive aspects , such as an improvement in energy security , can also be achieved by means of a privileged partnership .
It is high time that we began speaking honestly and clearly .
in writing . - ( HU ) As an MEP from Hungary , a country neighbouring the Western Balkan region , I wholeheartedly support the Western Balkan countries ' ambitions to join the EU .
An important step in this area has been the initiative implemented by the European Commission , removing the visa requirement for Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro from 1 January 2010 .
However , the European Parliament 's proposal , which would remove the visa requirement as early as by 19 December , would be of symbolic significance and also provide practical benefits .
The European Union could hardly offer a better Christmas present than visa-free travel to Hungarians living in Vojvodina in Serbia with numerous links to Hungary , benefiting families and friends living on either side of the border .
I am confident that Member States will give their blessing to this decision this very month .
The visa waiver is a positive response to the Western Balkan countries ' genuine efforts towards European integration .
Serbia has made particularly significant progress recently .
Even the report issued recently by the Commission states that the new government of Prime Minister Mirko Cvetković has successfully taken on the fight against corruption , not to mention the extremely important advances that have been made in the area of minority rights .
The Serbian Parliament has adopted a law on national councils .
In the wake of encouraging preliminary discussions , a decision on Vojvodina 's status will come before the Serbian Parliament next week .
Apart from the many positive developments , efforts must continue to be made to eradicate ethnically incited violent crimes and the ever-increasing incidence of beatings against Hungarians from Vojvodina completely .
I would like to thank Mr Albertini for the resolution on the European Commission 's enlargement strategy .
Of course , I agree that candidate countries must continue the process of reform .
Efforts should concentrate on ensuring the rule of law and equal treatment of ethnic minorities , as well as fighting corruption and organised crime .
The evaluation of the political situation in Turkey , including reforms which are planned or have been carried out , repeats the Commission 's evaluation contained in the Regular Report .
Progress is evident in the area of meeting the Copenhagen political criteria , but unfortunately , much remains to be done in the broadly-understood category of citizens ' freedoms .
However , most important of all is that bilateral disputes be resolved by involvement of the parties .
These things should not , on their own , be obstacles on the road to accession , but the EU should strive for their resolution before accession .
The European Parliament should be an objective observer , because we would like the negotiations to end with agreement , which would facilitate Turkey 's accession to the EU .
As a citizen of Poland , a country which joined the European Union in 2004 , I know that the enlargement strategy is one of the most effective areas of EU policy .
It is crucial to keep to commitments which have been made , and that also applies to the European Union .
The objective of accession negotiations is full membership , and therefore fulfilling tough but clear conditions should also be a basic prerequisite for them to achieve this objective .
This applies to all states , including Turkey .
Our resolution on future enlargements must reflect the prevailing opinion in Europe .
We must avoid repeating past mistakes and build Europe with its peoples .
The decisions to be taken are laden with commitments and must be prepared well and explained well so that the majority of European citizens can support them .
Our Parliament , which represents these citizens , must be particularly vigilant about this .
Haste would be the worst possible policy and could take us back to institutional instability , even though the European Union is just about leaving it behind with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today we must test the new institutional mechanism resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon , build a political Europe and consolidate the policies that our fellow citizens want in terms of employment , the economic recovery , the fight against climate change , security of energy supply and common defence .
We should not reverse the priorities but rather increase the consistency and the effectiveness of Community policies before we aim for new EU enlargements .
Lastly , I am still opposed to Turkey 's accession to the European Union and I continue to hope for a privileged partnership with that country within the Union for the Mediterranean .
Elimination of violence against women ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council on the International Day for the elimination of violence against women by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0220 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on the International Day for the elimination of violence against women by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0220 / 2009 ) .
I would remind you that today is the International Day for the elimination of violence against women , and the opportunity to hold this debate is particularly important to us .
Madam President , today is 25 November , which marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment by the UN of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
Throughout my adult life , I have been politically active in women 's organisations and in networks for combating this violence against women .
During my work , I think I have used every possible word to describe the situation .
I think I have used very many words - we have done so together in this fight .
Now I feel that we actually need to see some concrete action .
This is a type of violence that robs women of their human rights .
It affects and defines women 's everyday lives .
It is a type of violence that determines the course of the lives and the situations of women and young girls .
We all have a responsibility to break the silence and , within Parliament and outside , to cooperate with all of the forces for good to stop this violence .
It includes violence within intimate relationships , sexual harassment , physical and mental abuse , rape , murder , the sex slave trade and female genital mutilation .
During wars and armed conflicts and during the reconstruction following conflicts , women are subjected to violence to a greater extent , both as individuals and collectively .
Some people claim that violence within intimate relationships is a private matter , a family matter .
That is not the case .
It is structural violence and a social issue .
Society must take responsibility for stopping this violence .
It is a structural and widespread problem in all regions , countries and continents .
Putting a stop to all forms of gender-based violence is a fundamental element of a society of equality .
Male violence against women is , in my view , a clear indication of the unequal power relationship between men and women .
At the same time , it helps to maintain this power order .
The work to stop the violence of men towards women and children needs to be based on the realisation that it is about power , control , ideas about gender and sexuality and a prevailing societal structure in which men are considered superior to women .
Male violence against women is a clear indication of the unequal power relationship between women and men .
This is a public health problem .
It is a social problem , which - quite apart from all the personal suffering - involves huge costs for society .
However , it is , above all , an equality problem .
We therefore need to tackle the problem of violence against women from an equality perspective .
It also means that the EU has the power to take action , and it is this action by the EU that I and my colleagues in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality are calling for .
Within the EU , we have the Daphne Programme , which provides a certain amount of economic assistance to various initiatives to combat violence .
That is good and it is necessary , but it is far from sufficient .
Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is therefore asking the Commission and the Council whether there are plans for the Member States to draw up national action plans to tackle violence against women .
Is the Commission planning to table proposals for guidelines for a more coherent EU strategy , and will the Council support this ?
Existing treaty provisions contain an obligation to work towards equality between women and men .
When does the Commission intend to organise a European Year against Violence against Women ? That is something that Parliament has repeatedly called for since 1997 .
It should be time for this now !
Madam President , on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , the Commission would like to reiterate its strong political commitment to combat violence against women .
This commitment is reflected in the communication on the Stockholm Programme , the priorities of which include the need to pay special attention to the rights of the child and to the protection of people who are particularly vulnerable , such as female victims of violence and the elderly .
With its road map for equality between women and men for the period 2006-2010 , the European Commission made a commitment to help eradicate sexual violence and violence linked to the trafficking in human beings .
Combating violence against women will also be an important priority of the new strategy , which will follow the road map and which is currently being drafted .
However , it is also vitally important to finance practical measures on the ground .
The Commission has already done a great deal to help combat violence in Europe through the Daphne Programme .
Its response in the fields of violence prevention and victim support must now be enhanced by means of more practical measures .
Firstly , the Commission has identified measures within the context of the Daphne III Programme in order to implement a more consistent EU strategy for combating violence against children , young people and women .
Thanks to an annual budget of approximately EUR 17 million in 2009 , the Commission targeted the at-risk groups directly .
These funds were in addition to the aid provided by the national programmes .
The creation of an expert review group is envisaged as part of the Daphne III work programme for 2010 .
This group will be able to help identify necessary measures at Community level and encourage a common approach among the Member States .
The Commission will also start work on an important feasibility study that will assess whether it is possible and necessary to harmonise legislation on sexual violence and violence against children at EU level .
The results of this study will be presented in autumn 2010 .
The Commission intends to bring together representatives of the Member States ' governments , of Community institutions , of political groups , of civil society organisations , of international organisations , and so on , with the aim of drafting a more explicit Community policy .
Furthermore , the exchange of best practices , standards and intervention models has already been the subject of discussions organised in December 2007 , under the auspices of the European Crime Prevention Network .
Lastly , it is important to stress that extreme forms of violence against women must be combated with the harshest of instruments .
To this end , the Commission proposed , in March , a change to the European criminal framework relating to the fight against trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , which affects the most vulnerable women and girls in particular .
With regard to the request to organise a European day on violence against women , on the basis of an in-depth study , the Commission has concluded that it would be premature to take such an initiative before a genuine strategy to combat violence has been drafted .
I would now like to give the floor to my colleague , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
Madam President , honourable Members , as you are all aware , I have always - obviously as a woman myself - been involved in the fight against violence against women , but also in the matter of the empowerment of women in general , not just in the last five years of my term as Commissioner for Foreign Affairs , but prior to that as a minister .
This is why I would like to add a few words on this point .
As far as the outside world is concerned , beyond specific interventions in developing countries , about which my colleague will speak a little later , the fight against violence against women has become an important focal point in the EU 's human rights policy , and the action is reinforced by the specific guidelines adopted in December 2008 .
The implementation of these guidelines is particularly pronounced at local level in third countries where the European Union is present .
In around 90 third countries the embassies of EU Member States and the delegations of the European Commission have developed their own action plans , which aim to implement these guidelines and set out a whole list of initiatives to be carried out in the period 2009-2010 .
We are systematically sending out a clear message on this : the violation of women 's rights cannot be justified in the name of cultural relativism or traditions .
In the context of these talks , we will also offer assistance in the form of our cooperation in order , for example , to implement the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women , to strengthen the national institutions in charge of matters of gender equality or indeed to support changes in legislation that provides for discrimination against women .
The subject ' Women , peace and security ' , which is what Resolutions 1325 and 1820 of the Security Council of the United Nations are about , has captured our full attention .
Moreover , in December 2008 , the European Union also adopted a global approach for the implementation of these resolutions .
This , I believe , provides a base of common principles , both for operations concerning European security and defence policy and for interventions involving the use of Community instruments .
These activities should enable us to integrate the ' female ' dimension more effectively in the whole cycle of conflict , from the prevention , management and resolution of crises to the consolidation of peace and long-term reconstruction .
Personally , I have sought support from 40 leading women throughout the world to give new impetus to the implementation of Resolution 1325 by proposing , as you know , the organisation of a ministerial conference 10 years after its historic adoption .
This idea has been approved by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , and I am very proud of that .
What is perhaps even more remarkable , however , is the fact that , in preparation for this ministerial conference , a growing number of states and international organisations , such as the African Union , have decided to step up their efforts to promote Resolution 1325 , notably through the development of national action plans .
Madam President , I would like to finish on a personal note .
I value greatly the possibilities that EU policies , whether internal or external , have offered the fight against violence against women , and I am delighted with the support they have received in general .
I am very happy to see that action which , in the past , was often somewhat limited to a personal commitment is now becoming a completely joint effort .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the elimination of violence against women is a very important topic that requires a greater effort and commitment by all of us : European institutions , Member States and civil society .
Violence against women not only represents a violation of human rights but also gives rise to serious individual and social consequences that cannot be ignored .
It is therefore a topic that must be tackled on different fronts .
On the cultural front , we must fight the idea that there can ever be any justification for violence based on cultural , religious or social aspects .
We must organise information and awareness campaigns that also reach out to young people and thus take place within schools .
The organisation of a European Year , called for several times by the European Parliament , could have the right amount of European and international impact to build a more consistent and effective policy .
On the political front , it is essential to include this subject as a priority on national , European and international agendas .
I therefore believe it is appropriate to forge stronger bonds - and I am about to finish - between the European Union and the United Nations so that we can all work together in the same direction .
In this respect , the address by the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mrs Migiro , at the European Parliament was exemplary .
It is therefore my wish for all of us that our cooperation will grow ever stronger .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today - 25 November - women and men all around the world are marking the UN 's International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
Violence against women is a major social issue that cannot simply be reduced to a women 's issue .
Rather it concerns the violation of human rights , the right to life and the right to safety .
The UN estimates that seven in ten women will experience violence from men during their lifetime .
In fact , violence by men costs more women 's lives than malaria , traffic accidents , terrorism and war combined .
We cannot simply remain passive spectators .
It is essential that we in the EU take action NOW .
The Commission must submit a plan as soon as possible for an EU policy to combat all forms of violence against women .
If we look at the initiatives taken by the various Member States , it is quite clear that some countries take the problem more seriously than others .
Spain , which takes over the presidency of the Council on 1 January , has put combating violence against women at the top of the agenda for its presidency .
Spain is the only Member State of the EU to have established an observatory on violence which each year submits a report on the development of gender-related violence and regularly updates its best conceivable strategy for combating such violence .
Let us support the forthcoming Spanish Presidency 's initiative to get an observatory on violence established in the EU for the benefit of all European women .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is not only because of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women that , when we consider a resolution on this matter , we should ask whether we have done enough .
In Europe today , one in four women is a victim of violence , domestic abuse , rape , sexual exploitation , or female genital mutilation .
One of the most horrific examples of gender-based violence is when rape is used during war as a weapon , as is the case in Congo .
It is time for a comprehensive EU strategy leading to a concrete action plan aimed at fighting all forms of violence against women , including trafficking in women .
Commissioner , I would like to inform you that we have today voted , during the resolution on the Stockholm Programme on an amendment which requests a directive , a European action plan , on violence against women ensuring the prevention of violence , the protection of victims and the prosecution of perpetrators .
I hope that this time our colleagues , you , and also the Council , will not quote the subsidiarity principle , and that very soon we will see this directive and action plan in place .
We have also brought this issue to the Spanish Presidency which is very much in favour of such a priority .
I hope this will be priority for all of us .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , it is indeed necessary to establish a clear legal basis for combating all forms of violence against women .
I also urge the Council and the Commission to take a decision on the full communitarisation of the European policy .
None of the EU 's Member States are succeeding in addressing these problems on their own .
Zero tolerance towards all forms of violence against women must become a top priority of all institutions throughout Europe .
Parliament 's demand to the Council and the Commission for a targeted and more coherent EU policy plan to combat all forms of violence against women is a step in the right direction , as is the observatory on violence that has already been mentioned .
Furthermore , I wish also to remind the Commission and the Council of my request on addressing violence against women in the gender-related dimension of human rights violations internationally , in particular , in the context of the bilateral association and international trade agreements in force and those under negotiation , as is also established in my report on feminicides , I also wish to ask the Commissioner if she can be a bit more concrete about this .
Let me just finish by welcoming the presence in the gallery of our friends from the Congolese Association for Peace and Justice .
They have given us these flowers in order to remind us every day that this is a common fight that we have to fight together and also with the people who are suffering and fighting in the field on this matter .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , violence against women , especially in the domestic environment , is an issue that needs to be debated and I congratulate the Chair of the FEMM Committee for bringing it to the forefront .
We need , however , to recognise this issue is not only a gender issue .
It is not only an equality issue .
Indeed , it is not only a human rights issue , but is a criminal law issue in the first instance .
And , because it is a criminal law issue , it is a sovereign state matter , and it is up to the nation state to lead .
According to the Council of Europe , one in four women will experience domestic violence in their lifetime .
The EU can be proactive in this area by providing resources for education and increased awareness and by opening up the debate on violence against not only women but also against men : according to the UK Home Office , one in six men will suffer domestic violence .
I recently visited Elevate , a women 's refuge in London , to talk to victims of domestic violence .
They are from all socio-economic groups .
There is no such thing as a stereotype .
Violence affects the victim , their families and children .
Its effects are both insular and outgoing and destroy lives .
The road to rebuilding these lives is long and needs support .
Elevate 's project offers victims a safe haven and supports them in rebuilding their confidence and ability to function in society .
Projects like this need support , and need financial support .
The EU can be proactive by breaking down some of the taboos around violence against women - and men .
It is an area which we as a society can no longer afford to ignore .
( NL ) Mrs Svensson has tabled an oral question about violence against women and submitted a draft resolution .
In it , she argues that violence against women is a structural and widespread problem across the whole of Europe and that it arises out of inequality between men and women .
Although the Dutch Party for Freedom is unable to join action against this problem at a European level , we are nonetheless in favour of these proposals and urge the Member States to take integrated action at an individual level .
The Party for Freedom condemns , in the strongest possible terms , any violence against women .
However , there is much violence being perpetrated in Europe against Muslim women , particularly within the domestic environment .
We therefore also need to consider cases of domestic violence , crimes of honour and female genital mutilation which stem from the Muslim vision of the roles of men and women .
Although the Party for Freedom finds all violence against women utterly objectionable , we would like to draw attention here to this particular form of violence .
Let me stress again : this is totally unacceptable .
For this reason , my party wishes to issue a strong call to Member States to combat these forms of violence and take specific action to investigate Muslim-related violence against women .
( HU ) Minister , Commissioners , I , too , would like to recall what the minister said : violence has no place in civilised societies .
We are commemorating the tenth anniversary of the resolution passed by the UN to combat violence against women .
As I was listening to your speeches and those of fellow Members , I was wondering whether in 10 or 20 years ' time , our successors will still be saying in this House that violence has no place in civilised societies .
It is true that time is not on our side as we witness the increase in aggression in our societies .
The media 's influence has something to do with this growth , but it is growing during the crisis as well .
Psychologists say that aggression is much more prevalent during the crisis than at other times .
Violence against women is certainly a problem , but we are also having the problem , as male fellow Members are often saying , that men are being affected by violence too .
Unfortunately , the statistics still indicate that 95 % of victims are women .
In the case of human trafficking , 80 % of victims are also women .
I do believe that this really is now the time for European institutions to deal with this problem more seriously .
( ES ) Mr President , today , millions of individuals and millions of women the world over are shouting out against gender violence .
Today , we cannot turn a blind eye to this major social scourge exemplifying power relationships that have been unequal throughout history .
There can be no reason , no argument and no scope for understanding .
Some women are murdered simply because they are women .
Faced with this state of affairs , we have the responsibility of using all the means at our disposal to eliminate gender violence , and to move forward and create a more equal society , by way of brave and determined legal measures .
This responsibility is incumbent on all of us , the European institutions , the Member States and organisations .
Countries such as Spain have made a clear commitment in this regard .
The law against gender violence is a necessary and essential instrument .
It should therefore serve as an example to the rest of Europe .
I could also mention education for equality , combating stereotypes and legal aid for victims .
I am sure we could refer to many other necessary policies in this area .
The incoming Spanish Presidency has named the fight against gender violence as one of its priority objectives .
I believe this is very important and trust that the House will strongly support each and every one of the initiatives in that regard .
We must make a joint effort and work together .
Only then will we be able to support the millions of female victims who cannot afford to wait a single minute longer .
( RO ) As has already been emphasised in this Chamber , violence against women is really an extremely serious issue to which we do not always devote the appropriate attention .
This problem is at an appalling level in developing countries , especially in countries ravaged by wars and conflicts .
Rape and sexual violence against girls , women and children have reached epidemic proportions in African countries riven by wars , in particular , the Congo , Somalia , Burundi and Liberia .
Unfortunately , the huge incidence of violent acts is not only typical of countries in conflict .
This is also evident on a large scale even in the most peaceful and democratic countries in the world .
It is our duty to focus our attention and efforts on punishing those who are guilty of violating human rights , while also making efforts to improve women 's safety and ensure that appropriate assistance is given to victims of sexual aggression , ranging from medical aid to their reintegration into their family and society .
Finally , I would like to remind you of the events which took place as part of the development committee devoted to the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women and also thank Commissioner De Gucht for attending these events and for the interest he has shown in this matter , as well as Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner for her attendance at this debate .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to dedicate this International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women to the memory of Anna Politkovskaya , a journalist and a woman who paid for her love of truth with her life , to the African women in conflicts , and to the many forms of suffering of women in Europe that often go unobserved .
These examples are at odds with the degraded and consumerist image that the media often attaches to female identity , helping to create a culture where women are oppressed and humiliated .
This is also a serious form of violence against which Europe must speak out and intervene in .
We must urgently set up a consistent European system for statistical recording - it has been said more than once - with particular reference to minors , trafficking , physical and sexual violence , and women in vulnerable categories , such as immigrants .
Yet we would also like to see tangible results from the European Union guidelines on women in armed conflict , which the Commissioner also mentioned previously , at least through the provision of financial and other support for projects , often organised by small associations , local NGOs , including in countries concerned with reintegrating and assisting women who are victims of violence .
We are aware that today , we have a new possibility , as offered by the Treaty of Lisbon and the Stockholm Programme , to enshrine this preventive action within the Community .
However , we must also denounce another aspect of violence : the context in which violence takes place .
Alcohol- and drug-related violence is growing among young people and minors , and perhaps we do not mention this often enough when we discuss violence against women .
( PL ) Mr President , millions of women are beaten , molested , bought , sold , raped and killed only because they are women .
More women die from the aggression directed against them than die from cancer .
We must make public opinion understand that in a modern , democratic society , there is no place for violence against women .
Let us begin by educating the political class and freeing politics from the influences of those religions which sanction the domination of men .
This is an essential condition for real equality and ending violence .
In my country , the conservative right , which is under the thumb of the clergy , refuses to grant women full human rights .
They promote a patriarchal family , in which the woman 's role revolves around kitchen , cradle and church .
Women do not have the right to an abortion , and there are plans to deprive them of their right to in vitro fertilisation .
The idealised ' Polish Mother ' bravely bearing her cross in the form of a wife-beating husband is an absurdity which must be opposed socially and legally .
I would like to extend a warm invitation to a conference on eliminating violence against women to be held on 10 December in the European Parliament , organised at the initiative of the Women 's Rights Centre in Poland .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every day in Europe , one in five women is a victim of violence .
Violence against women is unacceptable , irrespective of the form it takes .
Yet , in Europe , many women and young girls continue to live in the shadow of aggression or exploitation .
The figures are alarming .
Violence against women comes in many forms and occurs everywhere : domestic violence at home , sexual abuse , sexual harassment at work , rape , including within relationships , and also as a tactic of warfare outside Europe .
In Europe , domestic violence is the main cause of death and disability among women between the ages of 16 and 44 .
As we debate these extremely serious matters , women are being assaulted .
Talking about it is not enough .
It is time for action .
The European Union has a duty to protect its most vulnerable citizens .
Fighting violence against women is a battle for fundamental human rights , and the Daphne Programme , which supports actions aimed at combating all forms of violence , is insufficient .
New measures must be considered for the development of consistent European plans .
I support the initiative of organising a European Year to combat violence against women , which our institution has been calling for now for more than a decade .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to reiterate what has already been said by Mrs Matera and Mrs Stassen on violence for cultural and religious reasons .
I would like to use this minute to tell you about an experience that affected me personally as a volunteer in one of my missions .
It is the story of a woman , the story of Karin , the story of a woman who did not wish to wear the burkha .
To punish her , her husband poured acid over her .
He did it one night ; he did it while she was sleeping .
Karin now wears the burkha , not because she wants to wear it but to hide the marks of this tragic attack .
I hope that this day does not remain simply another date on the calendar but that it can help all those women who experience violence every day and that our words can be converted into tangible actions and deeds .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many women in Europe and throughout the world fight each day to end violence against them , but they cannot and should not carry on this struggle alone , because these acts of violence against women , largely perpetrated by men , are also acts of violence against the whole of humanity .
It is only right that men also become involved in this struggle .
That is why I am taking part in the White Ribbon Campaign .
Initially set up by men for other men , this campaign started in Canada nearly 20 years ago .
A group of men decided one day that they had a duty to urge other men to protest publicly against violence inflicted upon women .
This white ribbon is a symbol , it is also the symbol of the carnation that recalls the fight of Congolese women against the suffering they undergo every day - they were here just now .
Therefore , I call on as many of my fellow Members as possible to join us in this fight against violence against women , because as well as physical violence , there is psychological violence and often , as you know , words can hurt more than blows .
( RO ) Violence against women , in its diverse forms , varies according to the economic , cultural and political background in society .
It can range from psychological and physical abuse within the family to forced marriage at a young age and other violent practices .
Any form of violence against women is an unacceptable infringement of human rights and hampers gender equality .
This kind of violence is prevalent on a wide scale .
It has more victims than cancer and leaves deep scars on people 's psyches and on the fabric of societies .
This is why we should increase our efforts to combat this problem .
UN estimates also indicate that acts of abuse are not only continuing , but are actually on the rise .
Unfortunately , these acts are not acknowledged in most cases or are just simply ignored .
In Romania , I support the campaign run by the UN Population Fund and the UN Information Centre , entitled ' Women in Shadows ' .
It is intended to raise public awareness of the serious nature of this problem .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , violence against women is a dreadful violation of human rights , regardless of what form it takes , including forced marriage , beatings and rape .
I find the term ' honour killing ' particularly repellent , because there is nothing honourable about it .
Honour killing is a hideous crime and we must do everything we can to combat it .
The Treaty of Lisbon is about to be signed and , therefore , the Charter of Fundamental Rights as an annex to the treaty will be particularly important .
This is why we in the European Union are obliged to do everything possible to combat this violence .
It has already been mentioned that rape can be used as a weapon of war .
References have already been made to the Congo , where these dreadful acts have been taking place for years and where rapists even claim young children and elderly women as their victims .
We have a number of programmes in place and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner has referred to the fact that she has approached women in government all over the world .
Apparently that is not enough .
This is not just a problem for women .
It is a problem for everyone in the world .
We in the European Union must do everything we can to improve the situation .
( PL ) Mr President , in recent years , initiatives in support of eliminating violence against women have multiplied .
Unfortunately , this phenomenon continues to exist in Europe , irrespective of the age of the women , their education or their social position .
We must , therefore , continue to stress that violence against women is neither natural nor unavoidable .
Violence against women , everywhere in the world , is quite simply a crime and a violation of the right to life , personal dignity , safety , and physical and mental inviolability .
Talking about violence is not just presenting women as victims but , above all , involves the necessity of condemning the act of violence itself and its perpetrator , who should not go unpunished .
We need long-term education of women and men which will remove stereotypes and make everyone understand the need to fight this phenomenon .
( PT ) I hope this International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women will mark the start of the collapse of the wall of silence and indifference that still exists in our society with regard to this genuine scourge that affects millions of women in the European Union and throughout the world .
Violence against women is a violation of human rights and an obstacle to their participation in social and political life , in public life and at work , preventing them being citizens with full rights .
Although the different kinds of violence also vary across cultures and traditions , as already mentioned here , capitalist economic and social crises make women more vulnerable , exacerbating their exploitation and leading to poverty and marginalisation , which also contributes to trafficking of women and prostitution .
It is therefore crucial that we consolidate financial resources and policies that are genuinely committed to promoting the role of women in society and to promoting equal rights , and that we implement real plans to combat all forms of violence against women , along with eliminating the discrimination that still exists and protecting victims .
( FR ) Mr President , the 2000s have been characterised in Europe by a proliferation of security laws : surveillance , repression , detention and imprisonment .
Budgets linked to these policies have exploded .
Yet violence against women is not in decline .
It follows that , in 2008 , 156 women died from injuries inflicted by their spouse in France , where almost one in ten women is a victim of marital violence .
The security measures implemented for video surveillance , filing or biometrics do not meet the real security needs of women .
This violence affects all women in all countries , whatever their origin , social background or religion .
It is linked to discrimination based on gender .
Sexism , just like racism , consists in denying another person an alter ego status .
How do we combat sexism ?
What we require is strong political will to inform , prevent and protect , the political will to abolish all forms of discrimination in which violence takes root .
Is not the safety of more than half of all European citizens , in other words female citizens , worth a substantial political investment ?
Mr President , Mrs Svensson , honourable Members , thank you for a very important debate .
The violence of men towards women has many guises and it may take many forms , but the vulnerability and pain are the same no matter who is affected .
It is good that so many initiatives are being taken by the Commission in this area and it is my hope that European cooperation will be a force for combating violence and strengthening equality and that we will work strategically .
This initiative and activity has been called for by many of you in Parliament .
I would like to reiterate that violence against women is a priority area for the Swedish Presidency : 1 .
Within the framework of the Stockholm Programme that will be adopted next month , there will be greater opportunities to tackle those problems concerning women who are subjected to violence that have been highlighted by Parliament .
2 .
On 9 November , the Presidency hosted a conference at which Member States and representatives of civil society had the opportunity to share their experiences and information relating to combating violence against women .
During the autumn , the Presidency also organised a conference in Brussels on victims of people-trafficking , with the aim of highlighting the need for measures to be taken for those affected and the focus on cooperation with countries of origin for human trafficking .
I would like to express my thanks for this extremely important debate .
The road is long and the obstacles are many , but our vision must be for the violence against women to stop .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I just have some closing remarks , but first of all , I would like to thank all the Members who spoke in this debate , which is a very crucial debate .
This is one of the most brutal forms of human rights abuses that are very widespread , not only in the developing countries .
We are talking a lot about Congo , but we should also talk about other developing countries like , for example , Pakistan .
Last night , after a meeting in this Parliament , I watched television and there was a programme on 24 / 24 on abuses against women in Pakistan .
It was horrible , simply horrible .
But it is also the truth .
One of the Members gave the example of the woman who did not want to wear a burkha .
It is obvious that conflict is exacerbating and making more severe the abuses against women , that sexual violence is used as a weapon of war , that you see after some time that the social fabric and the cohesion of the traditional communities are destroyed , are breached , that ethics disappear and that you end up in a situation where not only rebels and soldiers but also ordinary citizens commit these kinds of horrendous attacks on women and children .
Several Members have asked whether it is possible to have a European directive on violence against women that would ensure the prevention of violence , the protection of victims and the prosecution of perpetrators .
Unfortunately , I do not think there is a legal basis for that .
There is a legal basis in the Lisbon Treaty for some specific actions that can be taken ...
( FR ) ... particularly as far as people trafficking , the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are concerned .
There is a clear reference to that in the Treaty of Lisbon , but the Declaration of Human Rights as such is not a legal basis on which to launch a directive .
However , I still believe that the Commission must continue to exploit various ways of attacking this problem , especially through programmes that target not only developing countries , but also certain vulnerable groups and our own Member States , because here too in our European Union , which should really set the world an example as far as the protection of human rights and the rights of women are concerned , there are still problems .
You can rely on the Commission - both the current one and the next one - to pursue and develop this action , for the simple reason that we believe it is necessary .
It is not a question , as one of you suggested , of whether the Member States , the Commission or the European Union should take the initiative .
I think that , at all levels and in all of our spheres of responsibility , we really must bear this problem in mind .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 26 November 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I agree with this resolution and I urge the Commission to declare the Year for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
I believe that then , Member States will be quicker to improve national legislation combating violence against women , especially when combating violence against women at home , and would also effectively implement national action programmes for combating violence against women .
Member States must establish a single system for the reduction of violence against women - to consolidate prevention , protection and aid measures .
It is very important for this matter to be one of the priorities once the new Commission begins work and Spain presides over the Council .
in writing . - Today is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
Violence against women exists everywhere and among all classes , rich and poor , educated and uneducated , the socially mobile and the marginalised , but a widespread and structural blindness to this problem has persisted .
This resolution calls for a targeted and coherent EU policy plan to combat all forms of violence against women , as stated in the EU Roadmap for Equality between women and men .
National laws and policies should be improved through the development of comprehensive national action plans to prevent , protect and prosecute .
In Ireland last year , 1 947 women and 3 269 children were admitted to refuges .
Over 120 women have been murdered since 1996 , a significant number by a partner or ex-partner .
EU studies have shown that one woman in five has suffered violence at the hands of her male partner , and that 25 % of all violent crime reported in Europe involves a man assaulting his wife or partner .
Domestic violence aims to control and destroy the human spirit .
Reports of planned cuts of up to 30 % by the Irish Government to some services amply illustrates their lack of real commitment to prevention , protection and prosecution .
in writing . - One in five women has been subjected to domestic violence in Europe .
In Malta , 467 cases of domestic violence were reported between January and October 2009 , but these figures are probably not fully representative of the problem in Malta .
Similarly , statistics in other Member States are misleading .
This is because women often fear being misunderstood by authorities and judicial bodies .
The resolution outlines that violence , aside from its criminality , is also a question of discrimination and inequality - an area of EU competence .
The motion rightly focuses on the prosecution of perpetrators .
That there should be no legal loopholes that allow perpetrators to go unpunished is important .
Having said that , however , the rehabilitation of abusive partners should also be considered in order to avoid future repetition of violence .
Certain Member States do not have sufficiently trained staff to adequately provide support , help and advice to victims .
For victims , creating shelters is not enough .
Such women require help from government to re-enter the labour market in order to acquire true economic independence from their abuser .
Training programmes for victims must be stepped up , to allow them to fully reintegrate into society , and the EU should use its power to fully address such blatant inequalities .
in writing . - Violence against women is a serious concern in the world .
Women - and children - are the most vulnerable part of society , those who have to face abuse the most often .
For instance , in Europe , it is estimated that 20-25 % of women are victims of physical violence during their grown-up lives , while 10 % of women even have to abide sexual violence .
As for domestic violence , 98 % is violence by men against women , and therefore we need to consider this as a gender-related issue .
When talking about violence , we are not only talking about psychical violence : and thus the results above would be much worse .
I believe that we cannot accept such figures and the reality that affects especially women .
The European Socialists have long been calling for effective protection and for good programmes .
The Daphne Programme is a good start , but we need to do more at EU Member State level .
I think that it is very important that the Spanish Presidency has decided to make a priority of the fight against violence .
No social problem can be solved completely in just six months .
Therefore , I will do everything to ensure that the Belgian and Hungarian Presidencies continue the work began by the Spanish Presidency .
in writing . - Coercive sterilisation is one of the most grievous forms of violence against women and an impermissible violation of human rights .
In several Member States , Roma women have been subject to coercive sterilisation aiming to reduce their ' high , unhealthy ' birth rate .
Despite several cases being recorded and judicial verdicts having been reached in favour of the victims , adequate compensations and official apologies in most cases are still pending .
I would herein like to welcome the apologies of Prime Minister Jan Fischer , as well as the recent motion by the government of the Czech Republic requiring that by 31 December 2009 , the Ministry of Health would undertake a series of measures to ensure that such violations do not occur anymore .
I hope that other countries , such as Slovakia , will adjoin the Czech initiative and will establish a mechanism to provide adequate compensation to women whose reproductive capacities were destroyed without their consent .
It is indispensable that Member States investigate without delay the extreme human rights abuses against Roma women , penalise the perpetrators and ensure that all victims are identified and provided redress .
It is the common goal of European countries to safeguard the health and physical integrity of all women in the continent .
In the general campaign for upholding human rights , it seems that the problem of violence against women , including domestic violence , is given too little attention .
The UN campaign to end violence against women worldwide in 2008 revealed that women from the ages of 15 to 44 are more at risk from rape and domestic violence than from cancer , road accidents , war or malaria .
Various forms of sexual harassment at work have been reported by 40-50 % of women in the EU itself .
It is estimated that from 500 000 to 2 million people , and the majority of these are women and children , become the victims of human trafficking every year , forced into prostitution , forced labour and slavery or bondage .
Therefore , I am pleased about the fact that this problem has been presented in the resolution prepared by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
It is important to harmonise the approach to combating violence against women , which should , as a result , make these efforts more effective .
It is also important to give the right kind of help to women , and to people who have already become the victims of violence .
However , no less important is also an awareness on the part of society that domestic violence must not be an inconvenient problem which is kept closed within four walls .
Today , 25 November , is not only International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women , but also the day on which the Christian world remembers Saint Catherine of Alexandria who , at the beginning of the 4th century , was imprisoned and became a victim of violence , a martyr to conscience and freedom of expression .
Some people overstate the problem of violence in such a way that I sometimes get the feeling that we women do not have any other problems .
I firmly believe that for most of the time by far , women are much more worried about poverty , health concerns , education , the value placed on their work in the family and other circumstances in their lives .
However , we must nonetheless admit that violence is also a problem .
It is a problem unworthy of a civilised society , a problem which undermines human dignity .
However , I gather that there is politically correct violence and politically incorrect violence in the European Parliament , for that can be the only reason why my draft amendment condemning the forced sterilisation of women and the violent termination of pregnancies did not get through in the FEMM Committee .
It is a matter of great shame that there are still so many cases of violence against women in Europe .
Particular concern must be aroused by the fact that a significant proportion of instances of violence are not reported to the police , especially in view of the fact that they are instances of such serious crimes , such as the crime of rape .
No strategy for eliminating violence against women can be successful if the victims do not report the fact of violence to the right authorities .
The law must ensure a resolute reaction in this area , so that victims can recover a sense of justice , and also so that both they and the whole of society can be protected from similar incidents in the future .
Concern must be aroused by the fact that in several countries of the EU , including Poland , sentences imposed for crimes of a sexual nature are very lenient and , in addition , these sentences are often suspended .
As an example , we can point to the fact that 40 % of sentences imposed in Poland for the crime of rape are suspended prison sentences .
The imposition of such lenient punishments is , in fact , a slap in the face of the victims on the part of the courts , which take such a light view of the wrong done to the victims .
A serious approach to the problem of violence against women must involve the necessity of treating the perpetrators of that violence severely , in order to ensure a just recompense for the wrong done , and also to make society safe in future .
A political solution with regard to the piracy off the Somalian coast ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on a political solution with regard to the piracy off the Somalian coast .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to briefly discuss Somalia and , in particular , the very serious problem that is caused by piracy off the coast of Somalia .
I will not go into all of the background : the country has been in dire straits for more than 18 years , the humanitarian situation is horrible , and there is strife throughout the country .
There is a process with the transitional federal government , but it is fragile - to put it in the mildest possible terms - and it requires sustained efforts by the international community to gradually move the country towards reconciliation and gradually build up some sort of functioning state that can restore some kind of stability to this horribly torn country .
Piracy is a very serious threat indeed .
Addressing that requires a broad engagement within the country itself which , as indicated , is enormously difficult given the current security situation in the country .
Accordingly , as you have noticed , our current efforts have been concentrated on practical assistance that can be delivered outside Somalia for the benefit of the country and the people .
We are , of course , discussing , as you might be aware , further steps in that particular respect .
On the specific problem of piracy , the Atalanta naval operation continues to operate successfully off the coast of Somalia .
All shipments from the World Food Programme have been safely delivered to Somalia from Mombasa to Mogadishu and to Berbera .
No successful attacks have occurred in the Gulf of Aden since early May 2009 .
This is , at least to a certain extent , the outcome of the commitment of the EU Member States and the rest of the international community , which has helped to produce a high-level generation of significant naval assets .
The operation 's success in this limited respect is also the result of close cooperation between the civilian maritime community and the EU operational headquarters at Northwood in the UK .
This has allowed the development of best management practices which are also increasingly respected by seafarers .
There has also been very effective implementation of the coordinated mechanism for the naval protection of commercial traffic in the Gulf of Aden .
For the time being , therefore , it can be said that piracy in the Gulf of Aden has been contained , but still continues .
For this reason , the Council has decided to extend the counter-piracy operation until December 2010 .
This means that we have to be able to sustain our current efforts and maintain the right level of military resources .
In parallel , we expect UN Security Resolution AL1846 to be extended over the coming days .
In spite of what I have said , there is no room for complacency .
Pirates continue to extend their activities further to the east into the Indian Ocean , and with the end of the monsoon season , we have recently witnessed a new surge of attacks to the north and north-east of the Seychelles , which is quite a distance away .
No fewer than 11 ships are currently being held - all of them following attacks in what is referred to as the Somali Basin - with a total of 250 crew members .
With operation Atalanta , we have reinforced our capabilities in this remote maritime area .
Additional patrol aircraft have been deployed in the Seychelles , and I can announce that Swedish maritime patrol aircraft will join the force in the Seychelles as well .
This has proved helpful .
For the time being , additional protection measures are already in place or planned on a national basis , with France , and more recently Spain , offering an appropriate and effective response .
There is also the protection of the internationally recognised transit corridor in the Gulf of Aden .
That is the recommended route through the Gulf , and all ships benefit from naval protection irrespective of their flag .
We currently have naval units there from the European Union , from NATO and from the US-led coalition maritime forces with very good coordination of the patrols and with the very essential intelligence cooperation that is necessary for an operation of this sort .
China is now willing to associate itself with this coordination mechanism and to participate in the protection .
This means that existing mechanisms will have to be evolved and widened .
It could , in due course , lead to China , and possibly other maritime powers , taking some responsibilities .
Others - Russia , India and Japan - have also deployed naval assets , and they should be invited to join this mechanism as soon as possible .
Coordination is , of course , the key to success .
I know that there is some interest in Parliament in the rather difficult question of the trial of suspected pirates who have been arrested and apprehended by Atalanta units .
There are currently 75 suspects being held in Kenyan jails .
The legal process involved amounts to nine different trials and creates a significant additional burden on the Kenyan judicial system .
The proper conduct of these trials is , of course , essential if we are to maintain both the deterrent effect provided by Atalanta and the overall credibility of our counter-piracy efforts .
A recent agreement with Seychelles , which I imagine you are aware of , on the transfer of suspected pirates constitutes an important additional contribution in this respect .
Piracy is a very lucrative business , and it is important that in every single respect , we gear our different activities towards reducing every possibility of the pirates gaining further money from these truly despicable operations that they carry out .
At the end of the day , of course , what we are doing in the maritime waters cannot be a substitute for what needs to be done in Somalia or on Somalia itself , but that , as I indicated earlier , is something where immediate success cannot be taken for granted .
We will have to continue the maritime operation and this will require firstly that we are prepared to sustain a long-term commitment of military assets ; secondly , that we will have to strengthen coordination cooperation between all of the powers and international bodies involved in this operation ; and thirdly , that we must also help to develop regional maritime capabilities as the burden cannot only be on us .
The maritime international organisations , such as the contact group on piracy , will have an important role to play here .
Finally , this is one of the areas where we have demonstrated the capabilities of the ESDP in recent years .
Go back a couple of years and few of even the most ambitious here would have envisaged us operating European Union naval assets in the Gulf of Aden or in the Indian Ocean .
Imperative humanitarian and other reasons have led us to what has , within the limits of what is possible , so far proved to be a relatively successful operation , but let us not have any illusions .
Much remains to be done .
We need to sustain the operation , and the support of the Parliament is very important in this respect .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this time the focus on the whole question of Somalia is wider , also addressing the root causes of this scourge with sustainable methods .
The Commission has always maintained that piracy can only be finally eradicated by addressing the underlying causes , beginning with the instability in Somalia and also addressing the country 's development needs , which manifest themselves in the most extreme poverty , including massive illiteracy and vulnerability .
Therefore , a comprehensive approach to addressing the challenges of security and development in Somalia , which have been mentioned , is essential .
This will require the establishment of a functioning state , capable of enforcing laws and providing at least basic services .
In the medium to long term , governance , including institution-building and security , education and economic development are necessary preconditions for the eradication of the incentives which now exist for Somalis to become pirates .
On the security side , a rapid approach is essential .
The African Union has , as you know , a pivotal role to play , not least through AMISOM , which is the African Union force providing security for the transitional federal government in Mogadishu .
Through the Africa Peace Facility , the European Union is a major contributor to AMISOM , providing funds to support African Union forces .
The new contribution agreement of EUR 60 million has just been finalised .
This is part of a pledge made by the Commission at the conference in Brussels in April this year .
The joint strategy paper 2008-2013 defines Commission assistance to Somalia and , in concrete terms , the EC support programme for Somalia has a budget of , altogether , EUR 215.4 million from the European Development Fund ( EDF ) for the period 2008-2013 .
The Operation ATALANTA , the EU 's first naval operation , will soon celebrate its anniversary .
This operation is a success , providing deterrence to piracy but also raising the awareness of the shipping community on best self-protection measures .
But , we all know that much more has yet to be done .
In parallel to the operation ATALANTA , the Commission uses the instrument of stability , a financial instrument , to support the Kenyan justice system - as the President of the Council has just mentioned - because Kenya has undertaken to prosecute transferred suspected pirates apprehended by the operation , and it is necessary that there should not be impunity .
This support to the Kenyan judiciary system includes a sort of mixture of capacity-building measures for prosecution , police , judicial and prison services .
The programme is implemented through the UNODC at a cost of EUR 1.75 million .
In a broader context , regional maritime capacity development is also an important aspect of ensuring security in the area .
The Commission supports the implementation of the so-called Djibouti Code of Conduct of the International Maritime Organisation , once again by using our instrument for stability .
A programme dealing with certain critical maritime routes , including the Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Aden region , will assist the creation of a regional training centre for maritime affairs in Djibouti .
This centre will focus on the capacity-building and training of maritime administration staff , officials and coastguards of the region , including from Somalia , Puntland and Somaliland , as feasible .
A regional information-sharing centre in Sana 'a , Yemen , has also been identified for funding in 2009 .
The first phase of this programme has already started and technical feasibility studies are launched .
Let me now turn to another important issue before concluding .
The Commission is developing an integrated maritime policy - including an external dimension - and also integrated maritime surveillance across the sectors and borders to generate maritime situational awareness of activities at sea , impacting , among other things , on maritime safety and security , but also on general law enforcement .
The current Swedish Presidency has initiated a significant effort to ensure the inter-pillar coherence of EU maritime policy , ensuring the link between Community action and the work developed under the second pillar , notably by the European Defence Agency .
We believe that the integration of maritime surveillance has a strong potential to assist EU operations against piracy , as the harvesting of maritime surveillance data from different sources allows authorities acting at sea to take decisions and react in a more informed manner .
All these different strands of activities , which are also outlined in the EP resolution of last October , constitute the Commission 's contribution to the fight against piracy .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we welcome with great satisfaction the extension of the Atalanta mission .
I have sought to devote myself to the Somalia problem for some 10 years and I cannot deny that on too many occasions , Europe has not acted quickly enough .
The situation in Somalia becomes more dramatic every day due to the consequences of international terrorism and also the problem of piracy and the human tragedy lived out by millions of people , particularly women and children , who suffer violence , face hunger every day and , all too often , are forced to escape across the desert in an attempt to seek shelter on European shores .
In conjunction with the fight against terrorism , we must also introduce actions that bring new hope to the economy of the region but also introduce European control of the situation of the refugee camps in Libya .
We have received reports of very serious situations in these camps , both of violence and of failure to respect human rights , often directed against Somalian women .
During an address organised by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the permanent representative to the United Nations of the Somalian transition government , Dr Yusuf Mohamed Ismail Bari-Bari , pointed out that Somalia has been further impoverished by fraudulent fishing of its shores and that many of the pirates are also former fishermen who have not received justice or attention .
We therefore need to fight hard against terrorism but also strive to bring justice , hope and economy to a country that has become a martyr to years of war .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , through this debate and with the resolution that we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament will approve tomorrow , it is our intention to express our strong support for the European Union 's commitment to fight piracy .
At the same time , we intend to express our concern regarding the dramatic nature of the situation within Somalia , which reinforces the need for and urgency of an action to promote stability in the country in order to tackle the root causes of the phenomenon of piracy .
The Atalanta mission is a success story : it has allowed the transport of 300 000 tonnes of aid and has improved safety in the Gulf of Aden for all maritime traffic , demonstrating the capacities and added operational and political value of the ESDP .
At the same time , we need greater European commitment , alongside the African Union , to support the Djibouti process and for this reason , although we are aware of the difficulties and risks , we express our support for the possibility of an ESDP mission in Somalia , which the Council has begun to examine .
We therefore hope that , in the context of the amendments and debate , all the groups will help to reinforce this message instead of falling into the trap of using a dramatic situation such as that in Somalia as an excuse for political diatribe within certain countries that have nothing to do with this debate and with the work of Parliament .
Madam President , we must support the social and democratic development of Somalia in order to bring piracy to an end .
In addition , we call for European vessels fishing in the southern Indian Ocean to be protected from pirate attacks under Operation Atalanta in the same way as merchant vessels are .
We call for military escorts to be provided , because that is the most effective solution and also the cheapest and the one recommended by the International Maritime Organisation .
In addition , we wish persons arrested and charged with piracy to be judged in the countries of the area , as provided for in the March 2008 treaty with Kenya and the Seychelles .
This is all because fishing vessels run a real and increasing risk of being attacked and hijacked in the area .
We should recall that Parliament spoke out against this situation a year ago , yet even the Commission has admitted that nothing has been done on the subject .
In the meantime , the pirates are continuing to carry out attacks .
The most recent victim , the Alakrana , was held for almost 50 days .
It should also be recalled that these vessels are fishing pursuant to a European fisheries agreement .
They are operating legally , in international waters , and controlled by the competent authorities .
That is why we should increase the protection offered to vessels of this type .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , the Atalanta operation represents a successful contribution by the EU to security in the Horn of Africa and it should be continued .
However , the EU also has a broader common responsibility .
This involves not turning a blind eye when illegal toxic waste exports or illegal fishing damages Somalia 's interests .
For this reason , we must take a consistent approach to following up on these matters .
The resolution that we will be voting on tomorrow takes the wrong track in two respects and we do not endorse these approaches .
It is wrong to want to change the Atalanta mandate now , either with regard to enlarging the area of operations or with regard to the attempt by Members of this House to extend the mandate to include fishing .
We want the mandate to continue unchanged .
Secondly , it is highly questionable to launch a European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) training mission which has not been properly justified and which will not make a demonstrable contribution to state-building in Somalia .
We should be working on the principle of caution rather than haste .
Madam President , we fully support the first part of the statement by Mrs FerreroWaldner .
That is indeed the nature of the problem and its very root .
Until we tackle the root of the problem , there can be no chance of either an air-based or land-based military solution to it .
As to a maritime solution , the officer responsible for Operation Atalanta stated quite clearly yesterday that no maritime solution to piracy is possible .
I would remind the House that the United States did attempt a land-based military solution and failed in the endeavour .
It would , therefore , be a mistake to hold back on development aid and on solutions concerning the governance of the country .
No military solution is possible , but it is not possible either to privatise the functions of the armed forces , as the Spanish Government has seen fit to do .
It is not a case of replacing armies with private security firms equipped with the weapons of war .
No , that is certainly not the solution .
The solution , in fact , is to put an end to all kinds of piracy .
I mean , to put an end to piracy based in Somalia and also to foreign piracy that is wreaking havoc in Somali territorial waters .
Madam President , international observers have remarked that the solution to the problem of piracy lies in achieving political stability in the area .
This is something we all wish for , especially we Greeks , because Greek shipping is being hard hit by piracy in the area .
Commissioner , what you said was a pleasant surprise to me .
Until now , the only information we have had , both from international media and from all sides , was about progress in military operations .
You disarmed me because I wanted to put the following question to you : what progress has been made to date by the political forces in the country , because we are now focusing on the fact that , in order to resolve the problem , we need political stability in Somalia .
Thank you for the information you have given us and I must say that it would be useful if both the European Parliament and the media concerned with the question of political intervention could be given more detailed information .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Spain has just endured a painful situation in which a vessel , the Alakrana , and all its crew were subjected to blackmail , humiliation and countless risks .
The Spanish Government is being called to account in Spain , as is appropriate in the case .
In this House , we are going to talk of Europe and more Europe .
Accordingly , it has to be stated that after a year in which we have demanded diplomacy and determination , the outcome has been positive .
Operation Atalanta is inadequate , however .
It needs to be broadened and made more flexible .
It has to become possible to protect not only the routes along which humanitarian aid moves , but also Community fishing and merchant vessels .
The latter must be protected , and that is why , in the resolution to be adopted tomorrow , we shall call on the European Parliament and on its institutions to make certain commitments .
What we are seeking to do is to say ' yes ' to the strong stance taken by states that protect their vessels with their armed forces to deter and , if necessary , legally repel pirate action .
We must say ' no ' to recourse to private security contractors , a move which , according to the IMO , carries with it the risk of unnecessary violence .
We must say ' no ' to the passive and dilettante attitude of governments that are making life easy for the pirates .
We must say ' yes ' , however , to diplomacy , ' yes ' to aid to Somalia , and ' no ' to unsubstantiated charges of alleged illegal fishing .
Community vessels are fishing in compliance with our international agreements .
They are doing so legally and must be protected .
The Community 's institutions are duty bound to do so .
( NL ) The complex and dangerous situation in Somalia and its impact on stability in the region is a source of great concern to all of us .
At the same time , the whole world has borne witness to the problems which this country has been experiencing as a result of sea piracy and its impact on shipping in the wider waters surrounding Somalia .
In order to resolve this situation , we obviously need an integrated approach , as Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said earlier .
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to express our appreciation for the excellent work which the Atalanta mission has carried out to date .
Their efforts are very important , because the accessibility of this zone is crucial for international trade and goods transport .
Our wish is that both the seamen on board merchant ships and the fishermen who work in the region will be able to carry out their jobs in safety .
We think this is essential .
Let us therefore continue to support the work of this mission .
Of course , let us also consider what else we can do and , as the Commissioner rightly said , let us , at the same time , tackle this problem at the source , effectively and on various fronts .
( DE ) Madam President , Somalia is a country in a constant state of emergency and has had no government for almost 20 years .
We in the EU must help to change this situation .
This is why we support the Commission 's work .
However , we are very sceptical about the new European Security and Defence Policy ( ESDP ) mission and the plan to train 2 000 soldiers for the transitional government in Somalia .
What is the real goal of this mission ?
What is the overall political concept for Somalia ?
What value can we add to the current US and French training projects ?
We do not understand how this mission can contribute to state-building .
What legitimacy does the transitional government have ?
Why are we supporting it ?
Why do we believe that the soldiers will help it ?
How can we prevent the soldiers from joining the war lords once they have been trained ?
We believe that there are still too many questions relating to this mission for it to be possible to start planning for it .
Above all , I do not see what value the EU can add and I believe that the money would be better spent on other projects which the Commission is already running .
( ES ) Madam President , if we are to try and understand what is happening in the waters of the Indian Ocean we must tackle the issue of piracy in a responsible manner , refraining from demagogic statements and from taking a party political stance .
I am saying this despite the statements that I have had the misfortune of hearing in this House .
Certain Members have taken the opportunity to attack the government of Spain while they had the floor .
I would point out that the aforementioned government was instrumental in promoting and taking forward Operation Atalanta which we are today commending .
That operation is clearly inadequate , however , and must be strengthened .
I therefore wish to ask the Council to strengthen this operation , to enlarge the protected areas for which it is responsible , to increase its staff allocation and to grant it additional competences .
I refer , for instance , to surveillance of the ports from which the mother ships used by pirates leave .
Nonetheless , it is clear that Atalanta cannot be the sole mechanism for resolving the Somali problem .
That is why I am taking this opportunity of calling on all concerned to seek a common strategy on Somalia .
Such a strategy should include development aid and political dialogue with the transitional federal government .
I also call on the Council to set up a new operation , in parallel with Atalanta .
That operation would help to train and equip the Somali federal government 's security forces whilst also strengthening the commitment to respect for human rights and the rule of law .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( ES ) Does the Member think it is irresponsible to have stated that the Spanish Government should be held to account in Spain , and that in this House we should focus on discussing Europe and European measures in support of Operation Atalanta ?
( ES ) Mr de Grandes Pascual , please do not try to bandy words .
What I consider irresponsible is for you to take advantage of having the floor to have a go at the government of Spain .
( EL ) Madam President , it is a fact that Somali pirates are a threat to international shipping .
Piracy not only affects the cost and reliability of maritime transport , it also - and most importantly - prevents the provision of international humanitarian aid to Somalia , thereby exacerbating the serious food shortage in the country .
Nonetheless , I must point out that countries with a long tradition in merchant shipping , such as Greece and other Mediterranean countries , are particularly affected .
I understand that the EU anti-piracy mission to protect the sea passage in the Horn of Africa is an important step .
However , we need to understand that the very things that we all used to think belonged to the realm of fantasy and the film world - I read about them in story books when I was a child - are now knocking at our door , are a visible danger , a reality .
That is why we need to coordinate , to persuade the Council and the Commission to take more political initiatives .
( ES ) Madam President , piracy is a very important issue for Spain since it is affecting our fishing vessels , and I welcome the release of the vessel Alakrana and commend its fishermen , its owner and the Spanish Government for their efforts .
Fishing boats are a target for pirates and , it seems , provide irresistible opportunities for hostage taking .
Pirates have modernised their tactics , as the Council has said , at sea and on land .
They are profitable and Member States must respond to the situation .
Operation EU NAVFOR Somalia ( Operation Atalanta ) was a success , and the Commissioner mentioned that a large number of activities had been undertaken , but we need more and better such operations .
Fishing boats must no longer be vulnerable ; we need fishing boats to be protected and we need the area in which they are offered protection to be extended .
Above all , we need a solution on land , because it is on land that the problem is created : as the Commission has pointed out , we need democratic stability .
We are asking the Commission if it would be prepared to organise a summit on piracy in the area , in an attempt to find solutions on land to what is happening at sea .
( ES ) I too , of course , am delighted about the happy ending to the Alakrana case , but I fear that unfortunately it may not be the last such case .
As has been said , it is important to remember that pirates feed not just on poverty , but also on the faults and gaps in a system that does not work .
While it is certainly sad and regrettable that sailors are being kidnapped when , at the end of the day , they are only doing their job , it is also deplorable that there are those who are taking advantage of the lack of government , not only in Somalia but in the region as a whole , to fish the waters illegally or dump pollutant waste .
Regrettably , Mr de Grandes Pascual , this is what has been happening .
We condemn any act of piracy , without a doubt .
Combating this phenomenon , however , requires more than soldiers and mercenaries .
In fact , reducing it to such terms could even be counterproductive and lead to a worrying escalation in the conflict , especially given that we know that some ship owners , in order to maximise their presence in the area , are risking more than they should and moving further away from protected areas than they should , creating a risk that is always very difficult to address .
( ES ) Madam President , while illegal fishing in the Indian Ocean may be occurring , the Community fleet can certainly not be described as illegal , as has been suggested here .
The Community fleet fishes within the strictest bounds of legality , with licences issued under the European Community - Seychelles Fisheries Partnership Agreement and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission ( IOTC ) , which regulates and manages tuna fishing in the area .
Secondly , all Community vessels are equipped with a satellite monitoring system , through which they can be located in real time and at all times by the fishing and military authorities .
Thirdly , the Community fleet has observers on board and complies with a strict regime of providing information on fishing activity through fishing logbooks , catch samples and a ban on transferring goods at high sea , among other measures .
Lastly , the entire Community fleet has been duly entered in the IOTC regional fleet register .
I personally would like both the Commission and the Council to acknowledge that the European fleet fishing in that area is doing so within the strictest bounds of legality .
( PL ) Madam President , I would very much like to express my thanks , and to start by saying that we have been given today , in my opinion , very good and dependable information both from Mr Bildt and the Commissioner .
This information shows the fact that the European Union 's efforts concentrate on two areas .
The first area is humanitarian aid .
The second is military action , and these two areas of activity are , fortunately , being increasingly effective .
I would like , however , to ask this : should we not attach at least the same importance to building the State in Somalia , because it is , in fact , a country deprived of proper rule ?
Should we not also build the local police , as well as a core of military forces ?
In my opinion , if this third area is not treated in the same way as the other two , it will be difficult to achieve success in the long term .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I will be very brief .
Somalia is a big problem .
It has been a big problem for 20 years .
We discussed piracy . But let us not forget the humanitarian situation , which is a disaster .
Let us not forget the problem of terrorists .
Let us not forget the region 's instability .
Over time , we need to try and deal with it all . But let us also be realistic .
The international community , the United Nations and others have been struggling with Somalia for a very long time .
Results have been fairly limited .
We are fairly late entrants in this area when it comes to trying to deal with Somalia .
We are trying to do certain things .
In Atalanta , we all claimed it a success , but let us not think that it can solve all the problems .
When we are discussing extending it out into the Indian Ocean , we are talking about absolutely enormous areas .
And , even if we were to deploy all of the naval assets of all of the countries of the European Union , I would not be certain of absolute success .
And some of these pirates are , of course , fed money as well , which makes it possible for them to invest in further resources .
That makes the problem rather challenging .
That is not the reason for not doing what we can do .
With the reservation of all of the difficulties , we should try to engage in supporting the transitional federal government .
That is what we are trying to do with different training programmes .
Is there a guarantee of this being successful ?
No , there is not . But the only thing that we can be absolutely certain of is that , if we do not even try , we are absolutely certain not to succeed .
If we try , at least there is the possibility of us making a positive impact .
And , if we have received nothing else , we have managed to secure the programmes of the deliveries of the World Food Programme to the starving and suffering people of Somalia .
That in itself is something to be proud of .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I know very well that this is an issue that is very important in some member countries because of the victims they have had , because of the difficulties there .
Our Greek colleague who asked me a question that I wanted to answer is no longer here , but I wanted to say what we have been doing and why I said that there was a certain success .
As our President mentioned , there was the so-called Djibouti Process and the international contact group , of which the Commission was part and where I know that our former colleague , Louis Michel , who is now a European parliamentarian , tried very hard to help and support the transitional government .
It is this government that is still best placed to bring some stability to Somalia .
This is our first and foremost task , and we will have to do it with diplomatic and political support .
Then we have to help and protect the boats and all the people there .
Then we also have to do what I said before - the colleague who spoke last has maybe heard me before .
I said before that , institution-building , capacity-building , trying to help the legal process , to help the population , is absolutely fundamental .
Only then , when we have more stability in the country and steps have been taken to eradicate poverty , can all of that then be done .
So it is indeed a very complex process .
In order to be helpful , apart from the other things , we now have concrete support ongoing for 29 projects , worth over EUR 50 million , which is a huge amount of money for these people , that support governance , security and civil society , that support the reconciliation process and institution-building .
The ultimate aim is to help create a functioning state that will be able to serve the Somalian people and where we also have to combat terrorism .
Terrorism , unfortunately , is very much anchored there , where we nearly have a failed state , so we have a huge task indeed .
Somebody asked whether there could be a summit on piracy in the future .
We , the Commission , would certainly not be against it , but I think this is for the Member States to decide and , in particular , maybe for the next Spanish Presidency .
If they have an interest , then they might indeed do so .
I have received six motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday , 26 November 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give this resolution my unfailing support , as it underlines the relevance of Operation Atalanta and its success .
I understand the immensity of the task to be achieved , given the size of the territory to be covered .
However , I would like European fishing boats operating in the zone to be seen as very vulnerable vessels and , for that purpose , to receive special protection .
They must therefore be classified as category 3 .
In fact , tuna boats are particularly vulnerable , insofar as , on the one hand , they have a very low freeboard and , on the other , they are immobile and not manoeuvrable during seine fishing : that is , during a four to five hour period .
At these times , they are therefore at risk of pirate attack .
It is this particular feature that justifies this specific request .
I would also like to clarify that this classification in Operation Atalanta would be in addition to French and Spanish protection operations on board ships .
The Commission and the Council are right .
The only possible answer to the situation in Somalia is a comprehensive approach to the conflict there , with coordinated action of all parties engaged in efforts at achieving stability in the region and ending piracy .
Our immediate objective in the problem of eliminating piracy must , of course , be continuation of Operation Atalanta .
This should even include extension of its mandate , so that fishermen would also be protected .
I cannot understand why certain fellow Members do not want to protect fishermen .
Since we are protecting commercial and tourist shipping , as well as ships carrying food aid , we should also do everything possible to enable fisherman to do their work in safety .
At the same time , we must not lose sight of the long-term goal , without which a lasting solution to the problem of piracy will never be found .
I am referring to peace , stability , the elimination of poverty and development of the country .
Therefore , acting on a long-term basis , we must concentrate on :
• strengthening the AMISOM mission ,
• resolute maintenance and execution of the arms embargo on Somalia ,
• stabilisation of the country by a coordinated and comprehensive strategy for action involving the European Union , the African Union and the USA ,
• striving for lasting peace agreements between the parties , and ,
• support in building State institutions active throughout the country .
Smoke-free environments ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council on smoke-free environments by Edite Estrela , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , - B7-0225 / 2009 ) .
Firstly , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs of all the political groups for their joint work and the effort they have made in order to be able to table a joint resolution in such a short time .
I would also like to thank the secretariat of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the secretariat of my group and my assistant for their support .
They have all been outstanding .
On behalf of the Committee on the Environment , I will begin by expressing my regret that the Swedish Presidency has decided to finalise this dossier without waiting for Parliament 's report .
This attitude shows an unacceptable disregard for those elected by Europe 's citizens .
Hence the question that I put to it on behalf of the Committee on the Environment : can the Council confirm its intention to adopt conclusions on this subject in the Council of 1 December 2009 , despite Parliament 's timetable ?
What are the reasons for the Council to rush into adopting the recommendation without the European Parliament 's opinion ?
Since Parliament was consulted on the Commission 's proposal , is the Council prepared to take Parliament 's view into account when drafting the Council 's conclusions ?
It should be noted that the Committee on the Environment supports the objectives of the recommendation , since tobacco is still the leading cause of death and disease in the European Union .
The Committee on the Environment would therefore like its timetable to have been respected , which would allow for a thorough debate to be held on the issue and for Parliament to adopt a position .
Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke , also known as passive smoke , is a significant additional cause of death , disease and disability in the European Union .
Passive smoke contains more than 4 000 gaseous compounds and particles , including 69 known carcinogens and many toxins .
There is no safe level of exposure to passive tobacco smoke .
The most conservative estimates indicate that many thousands of people die every year because of passive smoke , and it therefore also puts significant burdens on the economy , in terms of direct medical costs , and also indirect costs associated with lost productivity .
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in establishing smoke-free environments in several Member States .
To date , more than a third of Member States have adopted wide-ranging legislation prohibiting smoking in workplaces and enclosed public spaces .
However , there are still significant differences in the level of protection against exposure to tobacco smoke within the EU .
For example , workers in the hotel and catering sector make up an occupational group that is particularly vulnerable to the lack of global protection in most Member States and the exceptionally high concentration of tobacco smoke in bars and restaurants .
At EU level , the issue of smoke-free environments has , up to now , been the subject of several non-binding resolutions and recommendations which do not provide detailed guidelines on how to set up smoke-free environments .
The issue also appears in a number of directives adopted in the area of occupational health and safety , but is only addressed indirectly in some cases and does not guarantee an adequate level of protection in others .
I would point out that Article 8 of the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control , which , to date , has been ratified by 26 Member States and by the Community , obliges all parties to guarantee effective protection against exposure to tobacco smoke in workplaces and enclosed public spaces and on public transport .
We believe that only a total ban on smoking in enclosed workplaces , including the catering and hotel sector , public buildings and public transport , will be able to ensure protection of the health of workers and non-smokers , and will encourage smokers to stop smoking .
I will end by saying that we hope that the Council takes account of this resolution , which , we hope , will be adopted by Parliament tomorrow .
Madam President , on 1 July 2009 , the Commission submitted its proposal for a Council Recommendation on smoke-free environments , based on Article 152 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The principal aim of this proposal is to implement Article 8 of the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control .
Article 8 concerns protection against exposure to tobacco smoke .
So far , this convention has been ratified by 26 Member States and also by the Community .
With regard to the Swedish Presidency 's work programme and in order to be able to give the other institutions sufficient time to give their opinions , on 8 July 2009 , the Council called on the European Parliament , the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions to submit their opinions at the latest by 26 November , 5 November and 8 October 2009 , respectively .
The European Economic and Social Committee has already adopted its opinion and the Committee of the Regions announced that it did not intend to submit one .
I believe that the European Parliament is planning to adopt its opinion by March 2010 at the latest , which I find regrettable .
Unfortunately , that will be too late for the Council to have the chance to take it into account .
It is absolutely nothing to do with a lack of respect - quite the contrary , in fact .
The Minister for Elderly Care and Public Health , Maria Larsson , confirmed to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on 2 September that it is the Swedish Presidency 's intention for the recommendation on smoke-free environments to be adopted before the end of the year .
The text of the recommendation is currently being discussed in the Council and so far , we have made significant progress .
I am certain that we will achieve our goal for the recommendation to be adopted at the Council 's meeting on 1 December 2009 .
However , the Council is not planning to adopt any conclusions in this regard .
The Council has examined the European Parliament 's resolution that was adopted on 24 October 2007 on the Green Paper ' Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke : policy options at EU level ' .
In the resolution , Parliament called on the Member States to introduce legislation on smoke-free environments within two years .
Many EU Member States have now adopted such laws , and several are on the way to doing so .
Parliament also considered that the smoke-free policy should be complemented by other supporting measures .
The Council shares this view .
I am pleased to have had the opportunity to report on the Council 's timetable with regard to the proposal for a recommendation on smoke-free environments and look forward to hearing your views on the matter .
Madam President , the Council Decision to promote its proposal on smoke-free environments to the Member States post haste , without giving Parliament sufficient time to process its position is , in our opinion , a mistake .
Our reaction , apart from today 's question , is the resolution that I hope we shall pass tomorrow , on which we have achieved a good compromise and which , I think , expresses the majority view in the House .
This resolution contains numerous new elements .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are particularly proud of the emphasis placed in this text on the protection of children from passive smoking and , at our proposal and with the acceptance of other groups , numerous new elements have been introduced .
I would highlight , for example , the reference to the need for particular awareness and protection because children , unlike adults , do not have the facility to give their legal , moral or even psychological consent to their exposure to passive smoking .
Parents have a duty to protect , but they need our help , because passive smoking by children has not been researched sufficiently and , consequently , neither parents nor anyone else knows what the consequences are of children 's long-term exposure to smoke and to what degree they need to be protected .
That is why our proposal that the Commission conduct a Europe-wide study into the problem , including third-hand smoking , is particularly valuable .
The information obtained may provide a massive service .
Moreover , there are numerous important elements in the resolution and we hope that the Council will bear them in mind .
The European Union 's citizens and environment must benefit from the protection offered by the ban on smoking in public places .
We cannot ignore the fact that smoking currently remains one of the biggest causes of illness and death .
We fight with all our might against dangerous epidemics and invent complex and costly vaccines to protect ourselves against new viruses , but making the effort to protect our children , families and the environment from the harm of smoking is much more achievable for us .
Simple logic , if not the appeal to concepts such as the right of the non-smoking majority , should convince us to make this effort a priority .
Some recent studies indicate that the ban on smoking in North America and Europe has led to a rapid decrease in certain serious health problems .
In fact , this effect was noticed almost immediately after the smoking ban was introduced .
In countries where smoking has been banned completely in public areas , the positive impact on health has been attributed to a number of factors .
These include not only the removal of smoke inhaled indirectly by smokers , but also the reduction in passive smoking affecting non-smokers .
I would like us not to lose sight of one essential fact : smokers are a minority in the European Union .
Of course , no one can suggest curtailing the right of individuals to smoke , not even for the sake of certain principles which we all support , such as strong protection for public health and an environment rid of sources of pollution .
At the same time , however , the majority made up of non-smokers want a smoke-free environment .
This reality should guide us when drafting and supporting anti-smoking legislation .
As the evidence suggests to us that smokers are likely to give up smoking with the help of these support measures , I think that we must strengthen anti-smoking legislative measures as part of a Community policy for controlling tobacco consumption , in order to make a practical contribution to improving public health right across the European Union .
Madam President , with this resolution , our Parliament intends , as a matter of course , to support the Commission 's very proactive policy on the fight against smoking .
However , we are also asking it - and this is essential - to go even further and guarantee that , in 2011 , European men and women will have the right to a clean area in all public places , means of transport and places of work .
In fact , Europe has the right - it is obvious - and even the duty to offer protection , and thus in this case to introduce a ban , as it did and as it continues to do in respect of a whole series of toxic substances , substances that kill , in some cases , far fewer people than tobacco : chemical substances , pesticides , some heavy metals or even asbestos , to mention but a few .
When I say that Europe must introduce a ban , and therefore guarantee this non-smoking area for all workers , as an overwhelming majority of citizens are asking us to , that obviously does not mean that we are launching a crusade against smokers .
I am a liberal and am virulently attached to this notion of freedom , free choice and free will .
A European text can provide for dispensations , smoking rooms and areas of freedom .
To legislate does not mean to oppress .
Here we are talking about public areas , but you cannot tell me that Europe does not have a role in this debate .
Madam President , I would like to point out that this is , of course , a worker-protection issue .
That is the only reason that the EU is getting involved in the matter at all .
We prohibited DCM , dichloromethane , for example - a matter that I was responsible for - precisely because it affects the health of workers .
Workers have the right to be protected by European legislation , and we are now talking about the health of restaurant and hotel workers .
A smoking ban in these environments would save many more lives and be much more effective in preventing a lot of poor health than most of the laws that we make here .
It is one of the most effective instruments we can introduce to protect the health of workers in the workplace , and especially children and other innocent victims of smoke .
Dozens of substances in cigarette smoke are so toxic that , if you want to use them in a laboratory , you have to have a special permit , and yet this is what we want to release into people 's everyday environment .
It is a completely absurd situation .
It is not about freedom of choice , because those who become sick have not chosen it at all .
We can now help those people and prevent them from becoming sick in future , and this is an opportunity that we must take .
I am delighted that we have succeeded in creating a joint resolution which represents a decent compromise and which can contribute to reducing the incidence of deaths and ill health caused by smoking .
I welcome the wording of Article 15 , which should ensure that the effort to control tobacco is protected particularly against the commercial interests of the tobacco industry .
The mechanism established in Article 22 for submitting reports is a good one , in my opinion .
I am disappointed that we have not managed to incorporate a reference to standardised packaging in the joint resolution .
Studies have shown that standardised packaging would greatly reduce consumption and demand , especially among young people .
I am also disappointed that , for reasons of time , the proper consultation process was not followed and I hope the Council will back the aforementioned proposals .
I would also like to add for the record that we have adopted at today 's session measures that will put the protection of non-smokers in the European Parliament on a proper footing .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to the resolution .
Passive smoking is a huge problem , particularly for children .
The president of the German association of paediatricians once said that smoking in the presence of children constitutes intentional bodily harm .
I would not express it as drastically as that myself , but it is clear that we need to act .
I very much welcome the legislation that has been introduced in Ireland , Italy and other countries .
I think that the legal and practical situation in Germany is shameful from a health policy perspective .
We have a lot to learn from other European countries in this respect .
Nevertheless , it is not as easy as paragraphs 2 , 10 and 13 of this resolution suggest .
We have only limited authority at a European level and introducing legislation in this area could be politically counterproductive .
We can only protect workers .
We cannot provide special protection for children by taking action at a European level .
However , it is this sort of protection that is urgently needed .
Therefore , I would ask you to support the amendments put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on this subject .
One word about the controversial tobacco subsidies , which we have been discussing for years .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has always called for them to be abolished .
Now we have a good compromise in the Council and , therefore , I would like to make a strong personal plea , subject to a discussion with my group , for leaving paragraph 9 unchanged .
It is an effective compromise and people will not understand it if we continue to pay subsidies as we have in the past .
We need this change and we should support it .
Madam President , during the 2004 European elections , Ireland introduced a ban on smoking in the workplace , so we met many irate voters outside restaurants and public houses .
They were furious about the ban . But this is 2009 , and there has been a huge acceptance that what we did was good for workers , good for employers and good for the public health system .
People have come to live with it .
This morning , I took the healthy option and walked into Parliament and I was dismayed to see in cars young parents , with children strapped into the back , smoking cigarettes .
There were parents pushing children in buggies , with a cigarette hanging over the child .
Obviously , we have a lot of work to do to educate adults about the dangers for children .
So , I support my colleague , Peter Liese , in his call for the protection of children .
They are so vulnerable , and it is so sad to see that they are exposed to this danger .
But let us not demonise smokers .
Remember that tobacco is a terrible addiction and smokers need all our help and support to kick the habit .
Those who chose , as others may say , not to kick the habit should carry on with what they wish to do , without doing harm to others , and understand fully the harm that they are doing to themselves .
This is a good resolution and , obviously , in Ireland , where we are well advanced in this legislation , we are fully supportive .
( LT ) Here in the European Parliament , we often discuss human rights .
According to a Eurobarometer survey , 70 % of European Union citizens do not smoke and the majority would like smoking to be banned in public places .
There could be some discussion about whether this might discriminate against smokers .
However , I believe that given the recognised damage to health that smoking can cause , we cannot risk people 's health .
Of course , when talking about a smoking ban on an EU scale , we must not forget the principle of subsidiarity and we must allow the Member States themselves to decide how they will defend and protect their citizens .
In Lithuania , for example , as our Irish colleagues have already mentioned , we have the Law on Tobacco Control which is one of the most progressive when compared at EU level .
Of course , there is still more to achieve .
In Lithuania , tobacco consumption is banned in public institutions , in workplaces , in enclosed areas , in all eating establishments and on public transport .
In Lithuania , the Law on Tobacco Control was accepted quite willingly and in truth , even smokers themselves admit that they are now smoking less or , in some cases , have even stopped altogether .
Of course , Lithuania , like other EU Member States , must devote somewhat more attention to the problem of under-age smoking .
I believe that we are all interested in having a clean and healthy environment , especially for our children .
Therefore , the good examples set by states banning smoking in public spaces should encourage and inspire those states that are more sceptical in this area to defend the rights of non-smokers and they should encourage EU institutions - having heeded the opinion of the European Parliament - to find ways of adopting legislation of an obligatory nature .
Madam President , firstly I would like to compliment Mrs Estrela on her initiative .
I agree with the points that she made .
In Ireland , I have also seen the transformation in attitudes to smoking and I have seen a transformation in the habits of Irish smokers .
I was President of the Gaelic Athletic Association , which is Ireland 's largest sporting body .
We introduced a ban in our biggest stadium , which can hold 82 500 people .
People resisted it but now they accept it .
There is a complete change .
I have no problem with people smoking but it affects others and that is the problem .
Passive smoking has basically been eliminated in Ireland and adults have also cut back on smoking .
Many have given it up and also - and more importantly - young people are less inclined to smoke now than they were before .
The final point I would make is that , even in terms of their clothes , people find that there is no longer a smell .
When you go abroad and go into restaurants , and if you smell smoke , you are inclined to leave , and it is the same for hotel rooms .
It is a good initiative and , the sooner it is introduced , the better for everybody .
They will not regret it , I can guarantee that .
Madam President , people have the right to smoke but I bow to no one in saying that others should not have to breathe in the smoke at the workplace or any establishment that is breathed out by others .
Personally I hate the stuff - just loathe the stuff - and I welcome the ban that has been introduced in my country . But I do not think the decision should be taken at European level .
I do not think we should be calling for binding legislation to apply to every Member State .
I am a federalist but I am not a centralist .
Decisions should be taken at the lowest practical level and , in this case , that is the Member State , or indeed the regional government , as in Scotland , the first area of my country to go smoke-free .
It is so easy to disregard the principle of subsidiarity when we think we are doing good .
In this case , I think we are trying to do good , but with the Lisbon Treaty now adopted , we should be bending over backwards to respect that principle .
( DE ) Madam President , we need clear and practical rules for the protection of non-smokers to be introduced throughout Europe .
However , in my opinion ' throughout Europe ' does not necessarily mean ' from Europe ' .
Many Member States already have in place legislation to protect non-smokers and others are in the process of introducing laws of this kind .
Why are some of my fellow Members now saying that we in Brussels can do this much better than the Member States , regardless of the fact that the European Union has no authority on health policy and that we have to implement this via the circuitous route of health and safety at work ?
In my opinion , the Member States should decide which regulations to put in place to protect non-smokers .
This makes sense , because they are closer to the local problems and issues .
I do not understand why Brussels should impose protection for non-smokers in Lapland and in Andalusia which is identical in every detail .
What has happened to the cross-border implications ?
We in Brussels have come up against our limits in this respect .
For me , protecting children and young people is particularly important .
We need comprehensive protection in this area .
If we introduce protection for non-smokers on a European level via health and safety at work , we are not protecting children and young people , because they are not employees .
Therefore , I would ask you to support Amendments 2 and 13 put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Madam President , my thanks to the honourable Members for this important debate .
It is extremely positive that we are all so committed to succeeding in achieving smoke-free environments .
I believe that we have many points of view in common .
As I said earlier , I regret the fact that the European Parliament has not been able to submit its opinion in time , but the Presidency will take account of Parliament 's resolution .
With regard to smoking in the workplace , the Commission has initiated a round of consultation with the social partners at EU level .
They have been asked to give their opinion of the current legislation and any future legislative initiatives in this area .
The proposal for a recommendation states that it is particularly dangerous for children and young people to be exposed to second-hand smoke and that this could increase the likelihood of their taking up smoking .
The proposal for a recommendation on smoke-free environments invites the Commission to report on the implementation , the functioning and the impacts of the proposed measures , on the basis of the information provided by Member States .
The Commission 's report will also provide an appropriate opportunity to return to this issue .
The issue of tobacco control will have a prominent place on the agenda over the next year as well .
We will then begin preparations for the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control .
The conference will be held in Punta del Este in Uruguay on 15-20 November 2010 .
I am sure that at that time the Council will want to discuss this issue with the European Parliament once again .
I have received one motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday , 26 November 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is often the case that good intentions cause problems .
No one here would question the fact that non-smokers need comprehensive protection .
However , the compromise motion for a resolution on smoke-free environments on which we will be voting on Thursday goes far beyond the protection of non-smokers .
Even though the current draft explicitly supports the principle of subsidiarity , it also undermines it .
The motion calls for strict and legally binding regulations at EU level .
It abuses valid concern for health protection in an attempt to transfer invalid authority in the field of health policy and of work and social issues to a European level .
We all want a Europe which is close to its people and the principle of subsidiarity is the key to this .
The Member States or , in the case of Germany , the federal states , must have their own discussions on the protection of non-smokers .
This is the only way to identify solutions which suit each country 's traditions and culture and are therefore close to its people .
For these reasons , I would ask you to vote against the motion for a resolution in its current form on Thursday .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am a non-smoker myself .
I am fully aware of the damage to health caused by using tobacco and by passive smoking .
However , as is so often the case , these plans from the EU go a step too far .
Some of these regulations are completely absurd and , in some cases , do not even permit smoking in the open air .
The EU is focusing obsessively on the consumption of tobacco , while there are a number of other activities in daily life which have been statistically proven to be hazardous and harmful , such as fast food , sun beds , alcohol and coffee , driving a car , taking no exercise and having too little sleep , to name but a few .
I would welcome sensible regulations and awareness campaigns which aim to minimise the risks involved .
However , all adults should ultimately be responsible for making their own decisions about the extent to which they are prepared to accept the resulting damage to their health .
A total ban on smoking in businesses is planned for 2012 and this gives very little consideration to those businesses that will suffer most , in other words , those in the catering industry .
They can expect a drop in their takings of up to 20 % which will result in the loss of numerous jobs .
In addition , in recent years , restaurants and bars were required by law to set up smoking and non-smoking areas on their premises .
A total smoking ban in 2012 would make these expensive investments obsolete at a stroke .
The draft Council Recommendation on smoke-free environments is not a sensible measure .
The Member States in particular have some catching up to do when it comes to the protection of non-smokers .
Our central concern must be to protect vulnerable groups such as children and pregnant women .
However , the European Union has no direct authority in this area .
Health care is , and remains , a matter for the Member States and the countries must take on responsibility for these issues .
The EU should therefore focus on what it can do to protect non-smokers , which means protecting employees in the workplace .
However , attempting to achieve the fundamental aim of making Europe smoke-free by introducing a large number of regulations to protect workers is not a satisfactory solution to the problem .
In order to protect as many sections of the population as possible and , in particular , children from the harmful effects of tobacco smoke , we need more campaigns to raise public awareness .
This is the only effective means of changing the way in which people in Europe think in the long term and this is the only solution to reducing smoking in the private sphere .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.30 and resumed at 21.00 )

Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
The ratification and implementation of the updated ILO conventions ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission on the ratification and implementation of the updated ILO conventions by Alejandro Cercas , on behalf of the S & D Group , Marian Harkin , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Jean Lambert , on behalf of the VERTS / ALE Group , and Gabriele Zimmer and Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group - B7-0228 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , fellow Members , Members of the Commission , we all know that economic globalisation , the international financial crisis and all future challenges must be addressed at the global level .
We can no longer tackle these problems at the national or even regional levels .
Cooperation between the European Union and the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) has therefore become a key item on our agenda .
The ILO , with its tripartite method , is doing invaluable work in bringing coherence and rationality to our world .
Our values are those on which the ILO was founded .
It and we are working towards a social model that respects people 's dignity , and we believe that we can work together .
It is clear that Europe needs the ILO in order to maintain that social model - we could not do so in an unjust world - and that the ILO gives us the opportunity to be a global player in international relations .
The European Union and its Member States claim that they are working very closely with the ILO and that they are promoting the programme on decent work for all and the Global Jobs Pact , with the ILO at the helm .
However , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , there is a lack of consistency between what we all say and what we do .
It is therefore absolutely crucial this evening to discuss ratification of the ILO conventions , and tomorrow to approve a resolution on the issue , in order to offer certain guarantees to the ILO and also to our own project .
In your Communication on a Renewed Social Agenda , you called upon Member States once again , but the Member States did not respond .
You called on them to ratify and implement the conventions , but with little success .
It now seems that you must take much more ambitious action .
There is no point in saying that Member States have already ratified the core ILO conventions .
The ILO has updated 70 of its conventions , and even some third-world countries and developing economies are moving faster than the European Union .
This is hard for the rest of the world to understand , and Europe is losing credibility and missing opportunities .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , it is somewhat scandalous for Europe to speak out in favour of decent work and in favour of the ILO , and then not ratify the ILO conventions and simply content ourselves with rhetoric .
This is where the question arises .
And so , tomorrow , all the groups in this Chamber want you to go further and issue a communication demanding that Member States should ratify the conventions , in order to create coherence between what we say and what we do .
The lack of such coherence in politics is one of the reasons why we are losing credibility among the citizens and why Europe , too , is losing credibility in the rest of the world .
author . - Madam President , I am very happy to support the call for the ratification and implementation of the updated ILO conventions by the EU Member States .
It is certainly worth saying that , when the ILO was created in 1919 after the Treaty of Versailles , which ended the First World War , it was to reflect the belief that universal and lasting peace can only be accomplished if it is based on social justice .
In the intervening 80 years , the ILO has responded to the needs of people all around the globe for decent jobs , livelihoods and dignity .
Tonight we are asking all Members States of the EU to ratify and implement the updated ILO conventions ; but it is not just the authors of this question who are asking - many other agencies and bodies are also .
If you look at the United Nations Supplier Code of Conduct , you will see that the ILO conventions have served as a foundation on which most of the Code of Conduct is based , and it is the UN 's expectation that any supplier providing goods and services to the UN will adhere to the principles of the Code of Conduct .
Therefore these conventions need to be ratified and implemented across the globe so that all suppliers can adhere to them .
Surely we can manage that in the EU .
The European Commission , in its communication on the renewed social agenda , states : ' The Commission calls upon all Member States to set an example by ratifying and implementing the ILO conventions that are up to date ' .
In a resolution on the renewed Social Agenda approved by the last European Parliament in May of this year , again we state that we consider that strengthening of the implementation and enforcement of existing labour law under national and community law and under ILO conventions must be a priority for EU institutions and Member States .
So , tonight , we in Parliament are reinforcing all of those calls .
We are asking the Presidency-in-Office to be as ambitious as possible on the matter , we are calling on Member States to consider the strong social arguments for ratifying and implementing these conventions , and we are asking the Commission to consider the adoption of a recommendation to the Member States to encourage the ratification of conventions that are up to date .
We also believe that the EU must ensure coherence between its internal and external policies .
In this Parliament we hear again and again about exchanging best practice between Member States .
Surely this is a prime example of where we can achieve best practice among ourselves by all Member States ratifying the relevant conventions and promote best practice externally or globally by , as the Commission itself suggests , setting an example by ratifying the up-to-date conventions .
Today , 25 November , 7 650 ILO conventions have been ratified globally , with 47 in the last 12 months .
We expect Europe to lead the way on climate change in Copenhagen ; we could do similar good work with the ratification of all ILO conventions .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to emphasise that we consider the messages in this decision on the ratification and implementation of the ILO 's conventions to be very necessary and a matter of great urgency .
Why ?
For two reasons .
Firstly , the EU should take the lead in fighting for decent work .
We should be a global pioneer when it comes to promoting good working conditions and decent work .
Secondly , as has been mentioned here today , a gap is opening up between what we say and what we do , in other words , a gap between the EU 's internal and external responses .
If the EU forgets or if EU Member States forget or choose not to ratify and implement updated conventions , that is not only bad for the workers of Europe . It is also a very bad signal to send to countries outside the EU that we are demanding should ratify the very same conventions .
We should practise what we preach .
It is crucial that the EU takes the lead at a global level , that we show that we are a region that succeeds in combining good working conditions with a high level of competitiveness .
The ILO is our global player when it comes to regulation at international level .
It is essential that the EU supports the ILO as an institution and that we take the ILO 's conventions seriously .
Consequently , the Group of the Greens fully endorses the messages in this decision and we call upon the competent bodies of the EU to impress upon the Member States that they should take it just as seriously as we are doing here this evening .
Madam President , we support the call on the Member States to consider the strong social arguments for ratifying and implementing the Conventions that have been classified by the ILO as up to date .
Since 1919 , the International Labour Organisation has maintained and developed a system of international labour standards which cover a broad range of subjects , including work , employment , social security , social policy and related human rights .
We therefore supported the initial draft of the joint resolution tabled here .
Regrettably , however , due to pressure from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the other signatories have allowed the importance of the resolution to be diluted and its power to be undermined , with the inclusion of a reference to the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
However , as we are all aware , it was in the name of the Lisbon Strategy that the European Commission presented to this House some of the worst proposals against labour and social rights , through their emphasis on flexibility and labour deregulation .
Who could forget the proposal to amend the Working Time Directive , which sought to devalue work and make it even more precarious , to extend the working day and to undermine collective bargaining and the role of trade unions , precisely the opposite of what the ILO conventions uphold ?
It is because of this regrettable reference to the Lisbon Strategy in particular that we have withdrawn our support for this resolution .
However , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , we call on the Member States to ratify the ILO conventions and we urge the European Commission to consider our proposals .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , over the last few years , the Commission has repeatedly highlighted its commitment to the internationally agreed Decent Work Agenda , including the promotion of ILO conventions .
The Commission has actively supported the Member States and closely cooperated with the ILO with a view to adopting ambitious legal standards which meet the challenges of a globalised economy and contribute to the implementation of the ILO 's Decent Work Agenda .
The Council and the European Parliament have underlined the importance of the Decent Work Agenda and of the Commission 's activities in this respect .
The EU Member States have already ratified all ILO conventions covering core labour standards and a large number of other ILO conventions .
The Commission has reaffirmed its commitment to the Decent Work Agenda as part of the renewed social agenda .
In particular , the Commission called upon all Member States to set an example by ratifying and implementing the ILO conventions classified by the ILO as ' up to date ' .
In doing so , the Commission underlines both the internal and the external dimension of the Decent Work Agenda .
In addition , where ILO conventions have involved exclusive Community competences , the Commission has issued timely proposals for Council Decisions authorising the Member States to ratify the relevant conventions combined with a call to ratify the standards as soon as possible , notably the Maritime Labour Convention and the Work in Fishing Convention .
Finally , the 2008 Decent Work Report provides for the monitoring of the policy developments with regard to the ratification process .
The outcome of this analysis is expected to be reflected in the follow-up Decent Work Report to be published in 2011 .
First of all , I would like to welcome the fact that the groups have managed to agree on the text of the resolution to be drafted on the subject of ratification and implementation of the conventions revised by the International Labour Organisation .
We will therefore also support this .
As is well known , the International Labour Organisation is one of the oldest international bodies .
It was founded in 1919 with the fundamental aim of creating work regulations governing the development of working conditions and difficult working environments to counter exploitation .
It subsequently expanded its activities more widely to include social policy and a technical cooperation system as well .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) feel that the work standards devised by the International Labour Organisation help mitigate the harmful effects of competition on the international market , thereby increasing the chances of balanced economic growth being achieved .
This has particular significance at a time when we are perhaps already emerging from the current crisis , and certainly reinforces the legitimacy of these standards and the fact that they have come about at the end of a tripartite process and were based on a separate democratic process conducted with the cooperation of governments , employers and trade unions .
We are therefore dealing in this case with rights and commitments at the workplace and a comprehensive system encompassing them , which the countries who accept and ratify the conventions must comply with .
At the same time , we cannot ignore the fact that the European Union , as a community , cannot ratify agreements .
Only individual Member States can do this .
This therefore raises the issue , at any rate , of the proper application of Community jurisdiction and subsidiarity .
This is why the text features , very appropriately , a call to the EU to define exactly which legal areas and regulations relating to them come under the Community 's jurisdiction and which come under individual Member States ' jurisdiction .
This means that if we can take into account the principle of subsidiarity , we will support the drafting of a recommendation , thereby facilitating the ratification of the convention as soon as possible .
Madam President , we have an internal market in the EU in which we are able to sell goods to each other in a free market .
We ensure free competition and cheap goods , and that is all very well and good .
However , other areas need to be included .
Fundamental workers ' rights must be ensured and respected throughout the EU .
EU Member States must not compete on poor working conditions , and the workforce in all the Member States must secure equal pay for equal work . The right to strike is also a fundamental right .
It is therefore important that there is close cooperation between the EU and the International Labour Organisation , the ILO .
We share some common values and we can use the ILO conventions as a basis for developing the European social model further .
Unfortunately that is not possible at present , since the Commission only considers the conventions binding if they have been ratified by more than half the Member States .
We could start by ensuring that every EU Member State as a minimum ratifies and implements the conventions that the ILO has classified as updated .
We do not need more talk ; what we need is action .
How else can we ask other countries of the world to ratify and implement the ILO conventions and ask the WTO to include fundamental workers ' rights in all trade agreements ?
The EU must take the lead .
Only then can we tell other countries that they must all ratify and implement these conventions .
We must promote decent work in the EU and in the world as a sustainable , strong response to the global crisis we are facing .
Madam President , it is true , ladies and gentlemen , that in times of crisis , worldwide minimum standards protect workers from inhumane working conditions .
The EU always supports the core standards of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) in soapbox speeches and in its contacts with third countries and rightly so , because they protect workers against discrimination and social dumping .
Unfortunately , within the European Union things do not go any further than these soapbox speeches .
The Member States of the EU and the EU itself ignore the ILO conventions .
They do not ratify them and they do not implement them .
This allows the Member States and the EU to shirk their responsibilities .
For example , the Court of Justice of the European Union has abolished the right to strike and the Commission has applauded the move .
For example , the convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers has been ratified by only three out of the 27 Member States .
This is scandalous and this situation needs to change 90 years after the founding of the ILO .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the other political groups of our European Parliament , because on this matter of decent work , we all wanted to toe the same line and submit a joint resolution , and the negotiations of the last few days have been extremely positive .
Since 1919 , the International Labour Organisation has been able to guarantee and develop a system of international labour standards covering a wide range of issues , including work , employment , social policy and human rights .
We must not forget this , particularly at this time of crisis .
That is why it is extremely important that the conventions have been classified by the ILO as up to date after a tripartite process bringing together employers , workers and governments .
That is the reason why we have put this recommendation to the Member States , encouraging them to ratify the conventions that have been classified by the ILO and asking them to contribute actively to their effective implementation for the sake of the development and progress of social Europe .
We hope that this will happen as soon as possible .
We will be vigilant regarding the deadlines for applying these conventions while , of course , respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
The PPE Group will be particularly vigilant regarding the application of these conventions in the Member States .
The fight against illegal work , the modernity of social progress , the building of a genuine social Europe that shows the world the way , is what is at stake , and we really want to help move it forward .
( EL ) Madam President , one of the most important attributes of the European Union is the importance that it ascribes to social policy and fundamental rights .
We know full well that the application of these rights is a prerequisite to becoming a Member State of the European Union .
We also know that these rights , when they are infringed , create an obligation on the part of the European Union to impose sanctions .
The rights established alongside the creation and operation of the Union also extend to the workplace .
The importance which the Union ascribes to defending labour rights is not only demonstrated when it produces internal legislation , but it is also demonstrated in its foreign policy .
We know full well that , when it comes to concluding agreements with third countries , one of the preconditions laid down is that basic labour rights be respected .
That is why the Union could not but be one of the first to support the necessary systematic update of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) conventions .
The ILO recently updated its conventions following negotiations with workers , employers and governments .
While the governments of the Member States and the Union are among those who participated in the update in question , we face a paradox .
The paradox is that , although many Member States of the European Union have adopted unifying directives imposing more advanced labour rights than those in the ILO conventions , they underestimate the importance of the formal question of ratification of these conventions at national level .
As the image that this gives third countries , especially developing countries , is distorted , it would be reasonable for us to change our attitude and for those Member States which have not done so to proceed with the necessary ratifications .
Be that as it may , the European Commission should not hesitate to be more proactive in asking the Member States to honour such obligations , so as to increase the credibility of the Union by promoting dignified working conditions , especially in the present financial crisis .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , clearly we must emphasise the importance of implementing the conventions of the International Labour Organisation , but unfortunately , I fear that the system that governs us , namely that of free competition , is making a market and therefore a commodity out of labour itself .
That creates threats everywhere to labour codes , threats to the reductions in working time that were planned , and downward pressure on the cost of labour , which is very damaging .
In France , we have an example where a ball bearing business has now closed so that it can be relocated to Bulgaria , and the workers of that business are being asked to go and train the Bulgarian employees .
So you can see clearly that this downward pressure on labour costs leads to relocations , to downward pressure and to the decline of social rights everywhere .
Consequently , we should invent a system of upwards harmonisation in terms of social rights and levels of social protection , so that there is no more of this fierce competition between employees , engineered by businesses and our institutions themselves .
Similarly , we should not continue moving towards what is referred to in this Chamber and at the Commission as flexicurity , but we should , on the contrary , progress towards a system of occupational social security for work and employment , combined with periods of training , which are necessary .
That is what would allow us to exit the crisis , to train workers to help them move towards the professions that have to be invented for tomorrow .
( SV ) Madam President , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has been adopted and the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights has become legally binding , we have a new opportunity to reinforce the social dimension of European cooperation .
In order to do this , we need to be able to realise these opportunities in practice , too .
A good place to start would be for the EU Member States to ratify all of the updated ILO conventions as soon as possible .
There is also an external dimension to this .
If the EU wants to be a serious partner in the international work to improve working and living conditions , it is imperative that the EU Member States also adopt the ILO convention .
If we want to influence the situation in third countries , we must first set an example ourselves .
I would therefore like to call on the Commission and the Swedish Presidency to act in a progressive way and to do their utmost to ensure that all of the ILO conventions that are up to date be adopted by all Member States .
Personally , I think it is a little disheartening that my own Member State , Sweden , has not ratified basic conventions such as Convention No 94 on public contracts .
I would therefore like to call on the Presidency to take action at national level , too , to ensure that his happens .
This , together with the Charter of Fundamental Rights becoming binding , should reduce the risk of the European Court of Justice making any more rulings like that in the Rüffert case .
We cannot have a situation in which we have EU legislation that contravenes basic ILO conventions .

Madam President , the ILO , as colleagues have said , has been around for a long time - since 1919 : 90 years of business and still working on the Decent Work Agenda .
It is important that Member States , as others have said , ratify all of the conventions , especially at a time of economic crisis when workers are under pressure .
But I think it is also important in this debate to acknowledge the role of the ILO in the developing world and its links with non-governmental organisations and the many programmes which it runs particularly targeting the most vulnerable , for example , working with people with a disability who would never have any opportunity if it were not for these programmes .
Also , two very important areas that we talk about in this House : forced labour and child labour .
So if we are looking to the ILO to do good work , as it does , in the developing world , I think the very least that Member States of the European Union could do is to fully ratify the conventions , to lead by example .
( PL ) Mr President , over the many years of its activity , the International Labour Organisation has adopted and presented for ratification by EU Member States a series of international conventions and directives on matters of employment , trade union freedoms , social policy and social insurance , and also collective employment relations and conditions of work .
Member States should ratify and apply conventions which the ILO considers to be currently in force .
The European Union should resolutely and actively make its contribution to the extremely important matter of protection of the rights of working people in a globalised world .
It should be stressed that every citizen , irrespective of background , faith or race , has the right to improve material prosperity , to spiritual development in the context of freedom , and to dignity , economic security and equal opportunities .
We must remember that poverty , irrespective of where it is found , is a serious threat to us all .
Madam President , honourable Members , there is a significant convergence of opinion on the usefulness of and need for the ratification of the ILO conventions among speakers from the European Parliament and the Commission .
Nevertheless , as Mr Őry observed , the Commission can only impose itself in areas where it has exclusive competence and , as I have said , it has done this .
As far as the role of unions is concerned , in its recent decision , the European Court of Justice recognises collective action as a fundamental right .
However , this right can be regulated , and this complies with other international instruments .
I will nevertheless pass on your concerns to my colleague in charge of social policy so that this matter can be followed up in depth .
I have received three motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 November 2009 .
FAO World Summit on Food Security - Eradicating hunger from the face of the earth ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the FAO World Summit on Food Security - Eradicating hunger from the face of the earth .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the World Food Summit last week in Rome is the latest in a series of high-level events organised this year where food security and agriculture have featured prominently : in January in Madrid , in July in L 'Aquila , in September in New York and Pittsburgh , as well as at the meeting of the Committee on World Food Security last month .
The underlying premise of all these events has been the realisation that we are failing in the fight against world hunger .
Over one billion people in the world presently do not meet their daily basic nutritional needs , and the situation is threatening to get worse in many developing countries , owing also to the effects of climate change , which is posing additional challenges to these countries ' capacity to become food secure .
The World Summit on Food Security represented an opportunity to sustain the political momentum that has been building up in past months .
Once more , world food security has been in the spotlight .
However , the time for discussion is over ; now it is time to deliver .
For the European Commission , the summit was a useful event for three reasons .
First , there was the pledge to renew our efforts to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal of halving hunger by 2015 .
In my view , that target is still valid , and we should strive to reach it - particularly in those countries and regions where progress towards its achievement has been very limited , for example , in Africa .
Second , the promise to improve international coordination and the governance of food security through a reformed Committee on World Food Security , which would become a central component of the global partnership for agriculture , food security and nutrition .
The European Commission has actively encouraged this reform and is assisting in providing core funding for it .
This is , in my view , a very important step , which will pave the way for a global governance system of food security based on sound scientific advice but one also more open to key actors in the public and private sector and non-governmental organisations .
These actors are crucial to making the new system more effective than the current one .
Third , the promise to reverse the downward trend in domestic and international funding for agriculture , food security and rural development .
If we want to meet the first Millennium Development Goal of halving hunger by 2015 , the commitments taken to increase ODA must be fulfilled - in particular by those countries which have committed themselves to reaching the target of 0.7 % of gross national income .
Some have criticised the final declaration for not setting more precise official development assistance targets for agriculture and food security , but we must recall that significant financial pledges had already been made at the G8 Summit in L 'Aquila .
The priority now is to honour them .
With strong support from the European Parliament , the Commission has successfully mobilised the EUR 1 billion food facility , of which 85 % is already committed for the period 2009-2011 .
However , we need more and sustained assistance over time .
In order to be accountable for our pledges , we need a global pecking system of commitments , but we also have to develop monitoring mechanisms , specific indicators and benchmarks which can be used to report on the outcomes and impacts of investments .
However - and let me say this loud and clear - even the most substantial commitment by donors will be worthless if governments in developing countries fail to translate their own commitments into better agricultural policies , strategies and investments .
In discussing food security , we should also be careful about terminology , and distinguish food security from food sovereignty and food self-sufficiency .
Efforts to achieve production around the world are not enough in their own right .
What counts is that people should have sustained access to food , which is basically a poverty question .
Food trade - regional as well as global - plays an important part in enhancing access to food by providing farmers with an income and by allowing consumers access to cheaper food .
Self-sufficiency in food or autarchy could be a very costly strategy and will not be necessary when markets and trade work well .
Therefore , concluding the Doha Round with a balanced and comprehensive outcome would be a major step ahead .
We should also not forget that global food security is a very complex and multifaceted problem which requires a holistic approach .
In this area , the European Union has made enormous progress in the past decade and progress will continue to be ensured through the Policy Coherence for Development ( PCD ) process .
The various reforms of the EU common agricultural policy have strongly reduced export refunds and the vast majority of support for farmers in the EU is recognised as being ' non-trade distorting ' by the WTO .
Moreover , with the Everything But Arms arrangement , market access to the EU is free for the least developed countries , and the provisions of the economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) show an understanding of problems faced by many of the ACP countries in guaranteeing food security to their citizens .
We have therefore come a very long way in the EU , in enhancing policy coherence for development and thereby creating improved food security conditions for developing countries .
Other countries and regions should do the same .
To conclude , the FAO Summit has underscored that if we want to keep to our objective of halving hunger by 2015 , then we should step up ODA and increase ODA and private investments in agriculture and we should improve global governance of the agricultural sector .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is important for us in the European Parliament to discuss the subject of hunger in the world .
We cannot simply sit silently by while the number of people suffering from hunger , which includes many children , increases .
I was first elected to a parliament 20 years ago and I can still remember well how international organisations such as the World Bank , the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations , the United Nations itself and the World Trade Organisation stated their intention of halving hunger in the world within the next 20 years .
What has happened since then ?
Hunger has not been halved , it has increased .
More than 1 billion people suffer from hunger every day .
The opposite of what these organisations intended has occurred .
There is a wide range of different causes for this .
There are countries such as Zimbabwe where an incompetent government has transformed the bread basket of Africa into a famine region .
A communist president has brought this rich country to a position where people are suffering from hunger and we say nothing .
However , we share the responsibility for this .
We spend weeks , if not years , talking about the climate in one hundred years ' time .
The people who are suffering from hunger today and tomorrow are not interested in the climate in one hundred years .
They want something to eat tomorrow , but we have no answers to their problems .
Without wanting to neglect the issues of the future , it is a question of simple humanity to concern ourselves with people who are suffering from hunger today .
Mr de Gucht , when we say that we intend to halve hunger by 2050 , I find this almost insulting .
As a world community , it must be possible for us to reduce the number of people who do not have enough to eat much more quickly .
We can transport weapons to every corner of the world , but apparently we are not able to do this with food .
This is a failure of the world community , which I would like to denounce .
We must find other answers than the ones which we have come up with today .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the figures illustrating hunger and malnutrition in the world , which we are all aware of and see tritely repeated , are so tragic that it is almost obscene to mention them .
The right to food is associated with the most sacred right of all : the right to life , meaning a life with a minimum of decency and not merely a fight for survival .
Fighting hunger in the world should therefore be the number one priority of all political agendas and all resources should be mobilised to achieve this objective .
Unfortunately , we are all also aware that resources , including financial resources , are not always the main limitation .
The problem nearly always lies in the management and use of resources and in the lack of judicious governance and effective coordination at global , regional and national level .
The motion for a resolution that was tabled here today - and to which my political group , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , subscribes - contains proposals and recommendations that , were they to be followed , could certainly help significantly to mitigate such a serious problem .
I therefore urge the Commission to give it the attention it deserves and , based on it , to present legislative proposals and adopt procedures to put them into practice .
The difficult and uncertain political situation that we are experiencing is also a time of change for those policies that are the best tools for the European Union to use on this issue : the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy , which we are about to reform radically .
With the new powers given to us by the Treaty of Lisbon , this is also a perfect opportunity for Parliament to go beyond mere proclamations and to take real action .
The European Socialists are ready for this challenge .
We hope that the new Commission and other political groups are prepared to accompany us on this mission .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank my colleagues who have already contributed .
The first point I would like to make is that I think the recent spike in world food prices serves as a wake-up call to all of us .
The doubling of grain and rice prices has had a disproportionate impact on some of the poorest people in developing countries around the world .
Indeed , it is estimated that an extra 75 million people around the world went hungry as a direct result of the higher food prices in 2007 and 2008 .
That is something we have to take very , very seriously .
Indeed , in many countries , we have seen food riots and political instability as a result of the spike in food prices .
With world population predicted to rise to over nine billion and climate change predicted to have a major impact on our ability to feed ourselves , food security is , I would argue , a major issue that we must confront and address and find solutions to .
The European Union must do all it can to help developing countries to develop sustainable farming and food production systems that enable them to feed themselves .
That requires finance - as the Commissioner outlined in his statement - and it requires open markets .
Here , there is a recognition that Europe has gone a long way to assist in opening up and liberalising markets .
But also many of the problems that developing countries face result from a failure of politics and a failure of the legal system .
No amount of help will actually correct that problem until you have got a stable political system and a stable legal system that allows farmers to flourish and to reap the benefits of higher market prices .
It is estimated that EU production will have to rise by over 70 % just to meet rising demand in the future .
I would argue that European agriculture has a major role to play , not only ensuring that we are self-sufficient here , but also ensuring that we can contribute to global food security in the future .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against hunger demands a substantial political and financial investment .
The Food and Agricultural Organisation was unable to generate that investment last week in Rome , and I regret that .
More than a billion people suffer from malnutrition and 40 million men , women and children die of hunger each year .
These dramatic figures have risen since 1996 , the year of the first World Food Summit .
The global financial and economic crisis has aggravated the situation , and the populations of the countries of the South are the main victims .
Ten per cent of the advertising budget worldwide would allow developing countries to be given the necessary support to safeguard their agricultural infrastructure .
The food crisis is one of the main threats hanging over peace and stability in the world .
In 2050 , small farmers will have to feed more than 9 billion people .
Soil damage , damage to biodiversity , oil dependency , greenhouse gas emissions , groundwater depletion and the development of consumption patterns put us in a very fragile situation , more fragile than 40 years ago .
Poverty and dependence on imports are the main cause of food insecurity .
The need to support local production is obvious .
At the end of the 1950s , Europe introduced the common agricultural policy in order to produce the food it needed .
To do this it protected its internal market and supported its consumers .
This autonomous choice , this right to food sovereignty , must now be accessible to all the countries or groups of countries throughout the world that want it .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , our resolutions on this issue address the dual challenges of eradicating hunger - which currently affects one sixth of the world 's population - and securing a food supply for the future .
We are facing a situation whereby , on one hand , the world 's population is growing , while , on the other , food production is proving to be an ever more challenging endeavour owing to the negative effects of climate change and rising costs associated with food production .
While the agricultural element of food security is undoubtedly key to solving this problem , we should also firmly focus on how good governance in developing countries is absolutely necessary if we are to have any chance of successfully tackling world hunger .
Take Zimbabwe , for example , which Mr Deß has already referred to .
It was once known as the bread basket of Africa , and was once able to feed itself and many neighbouring countries .
Now it is unable to do so , after being destroyed by the actions of Robert Mugabe and his henchmen .
We have all got to work together to overcome this problem and prevent the civil unrest and misery that could arise from it .
Madam President , Commissioner , if the European Union wants to play a positive role in the world , if it wants to bring to life a new humanism , it should really listen to the deafening cry of hunger resounding across the planet .
Here and elsewhere we continue to make our fine speeches .
Honestly , though , can we , here , have a clear conscience when a child is dying of hunger every five seconds ?
It is not because there are technical problems that children are dying .
It is the result of this wave of ultra-liberalism flooding the world today .
Until now , we worked the land to feed people .
Today , the capitalist system has turned soil and food into commodities , into objects of global speculation .
That is why we must radically change policy , support the Food and Agriculture Organisation and give it the means to act .
We need action , as you have said Commissioner , and we demand action .
However , to ensure that action takes place , the European Union could enforce the principle of food sovereignty for all peoples , could help implement farm work remuneration systems with guaranteed prices for every country and every continent , could respect and enforce the commitments to grant official development assistance to the countries of the South , could cancel the debt of poor countries , could stop the purchase of land by multinationals and hedge funds , and could recognise that agriculture and food cannot be part of the hard bargaining of the World Trade Organisation .
We must hear the cry of famine and act accordingly .
That would make Europe grow in stature , and it is urgent !

In the ten years or so that I have been a member of the European Parliament , I have regularly heard fine words being used in this House .
In the run-up to the World Food Summit in Rome , Mr Barroso , President of the Commission , also used fine words .
He said : ' We have collectively failed in the fight against famine . That is a moral scandal and a huge stain on our collective conscience . '
End of quote .
And he was absolutely right .
Which makes the outcome of the summit all the more disappointing .
I have a sneaking feeling that what took centre stage in Rome was the political interests of the wealthy countries , rather than the interests of the one billion hungry people in the world .
To give you a concrete illustration , I will use two examples : as is increasingly being recognised , the biofuel policy and its promotion are causing price increases and , thus , more famine .
However , it seems to be taboo to express any criticism of this policy .
Also , I have , on many previous occasions , already drawn this House 's attention to the danger of encouraging third countries to make large investments in Africa , with a view to ensuring their own food security , for example .
How can countries where millions of people are dependent on UN food aid be expected to export to third countries ?
Yet , there is no mention of this in the final declaration .
It is very easy for wealthy countries to deal with controversial topics by simply making well-intentioned , impassioned pleas and commissioning further studies .
Another thing I take from the declaration is that developing countries will have to rely primarily on their own resources .
In the light of the international community 's failure so far to eradicate hunger , I would call this nothing short of shameful .
Apart from that , I have also spent some time going through the final declarations of previous world food summits and come to the conclusion that they share a surprising number of similarities - with each other and with the resolution of this Parliament , for that matter .
They all talk of urgency and invariably call for the implementation of promises made in the past .
However , should not the repetition of all those calls be a warning signal to us ?
To quote Mr De Schutte , the UN rapporteur , ' poor people do not need promises ' .
As has often been said before , food security ought to be a human right .
Madam President , I wish to approach this from a different angle and say that the Bible teaches us that it is one of God 's commandments that we should feed the hungry .
That is my personal duty and our collective responsibility .
( BG ) I personally attended the FAO meeting in Rome .
I saw with my own eyes what this conference was like .
I think that we also need to drop the hypocrisy slightly which has affected us because , given the money spent on organising a conference like this , where the outcome is usually only a long series of promises , perhaps we need to use this expenditure in practical terms to calculate , as the speakers before me have said , exactly how many children need not have died today of hunger if these funds had not been spent just on happy stories .
However , the Commissioner said that the problem was to do with the global production of food , but before we start to remove the speck from our brother 's eye , let us first see the beam in our own .
My country Bulgaria has , based on scientific proof , the most fertile soil in the European Union .
One hundred and fifty years ago , Bulgarian farmers were able to feed the most densely populated regions of the Ottoman Empire in Asia Minor using 19th century technology .
However , nowadays , agriculture in Bulgaria is in steady decline , even more so since Bulgaria joined the European Union .
The quotas which the Commission itself has imposed on Bulgaria are restraining agricultural production , while the land in Bulgaria is going to waste .
It only takes one farm in one of the 28 regions in Bulgaria to produce the whole quota of tomatoes , for instance , which is assigned to Bulgaria by the European Commission .
It has been like this because some data 10 years ago indicated that this was the official production level .
However , no one is looking at what the real production level could be .
Currently , within the European Union itself , there are restrictions on food production processes which could otherwise significantly improve the situation and actually offer a real measure for fighting hunger .
Therefore , as long as things are controlled by officials who only look at sheets of paper and are not interested in anything else , all that we will be left with are just promises and no action .
( PL ) Madam President , the number of people suffering from hunger and living in extreme poverty has risen dramatically over the past year , and it is not true that this is the fault of capitalism .
There are political systems which are significantly worse for human life and the fight against hunger .
I will give but one example .
In Europe , several decades ago , a country which has very good agricultural conditions was driven to starvation by communism .
As a result of this , more people died in a single country than currently die of starvation worldwide .
That country was Ukraine .
I would advise caution about what is said in this Chamber .
In the year 2000 , 198 Members of the United Nations adopted specific Millennium Development Goals .
The Commissioner spoke today about the first , most important goal .
Today , we must answer the question as to whether this goal is attainable .
Europeans are asking if our priorities and policy are correct and , in particular , for example , if an expensive battle with climate change is more important than the fight against poverty .
I received such a question only this week : is the European Union not mistaking means for objectives , and instead of fighting the effects of global warming , beginning the most expensive tilt at windmills in the history of humanity - a battle with climate change ?
I think the best proof that there is no inconsistency between action to protect the climate and to eliminate hunger would be effectiveness in the latter area , in other words , really to remove hunger from the world .
Then no one would accuse us of having wrong priorities and of making the fight against climate change more important than the fight against hunger , as Mr Deß has also said .
Agriculture is going to be very important in the next few years .
What we have to do is to persuade and help developing countries to invest in agriculture and to abide by their own declarations that 10 % of the national budget will be designated to the development of agriculture .
It is only in this way that we can increase the agricultural potential of poor countries and help in an effective fight against hunger .

( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , with the exception of Mr Berlusconi , whose country hosted the summit , no leading member of the G8 was present at the FAO World Summit on Food Security .
So a highly political meeting in economic , social and financial terms was reduced to a run-of-the-mill technical meeting .
Nevertheless , Mr Diouf 's objective was to develop tools and means of production , in order to ensure food security in a sustainable way in developing countries .
The economic and financial crisis - as we know , since it has been said repeatedly - is only aggravating hunger worldwide .
The subject was more topical than ever since , for the first time in history , hunger today affects more than a billion people in the world .
That is a sixth of the world 's population , 20 % more than in 2005 and 105 million more than in 2008 .
As Mr Bové said , all of that means there is a strong risk of stirring up new conflicts and , moreover , conflicts of an extremely serious nature .
It is the lack of investment in agriculture that has led to this phenomenon of food insecurity .
The fact is , agriculture is the sole means of existence for 70 % of the world 's poor , as Mr Diouf underlined .
He made an appeal for a total of USD 44 billion per year to fund investments to help small producers .
His demand has been completely disregarded : there is no timetable , no strategy and no political will on the part of rich countries .
Commissioner , how much progress has been made in implementing the G8 commitments made in July ?
Having been in your position , I know the difficulties involved in getting donors on board .
I still remember the extremely difficult battle , which President Barroso also waged , to obtain that wretched EUR 1 billion , two years ago now , in order to establish this food facility .
However , Europe 's future is intimately linked to the fate of developing countries .
Commissioner , I do not believe in the formulas of our socialist fellow Member who talks to us of ultra-capitalism and ultra-liberalism - which , moreover , as a semantic assimilation , is morally debatable .
I myself cannot see the solution in this kind of rather short-sighted ideological ranting .
Mr Le Hyaric , I must tell you that Marxist obscurantism bears a much greater responsibility than liberalism for the underdevelopment of some countries since they gained their independence .
That is what I wanted to say , because I did not want to let any ideological ranting or incantation that is short-sighted and that pushes the limits of intellectual honesty go unchallenged in this Chamber .


Madam President , my colleagues Mr Bové and Mr Belder sketched the problem and the political reality , but there is a new trend in farming .
Rich countries ensure their staple food or their biofuels by buying up land in poor countries - land grabbing or , as it is euphemistically called , ' farmland acquisition ' .
It happens in Madagascar , for instance .
This seems to be too sensitive for world leaders to discuss .
Europe and its leaders have a moral duty to go against this new form of what I would call colonialism .
The declaration of the FAO Food Summit did not touch upon the issue of land grabbing and in that respect , really missed out on an opportunity to target hunger in the world .
Why did you not do that ?
Then there is the common agricultural policy of the EU .
We produce a lot of food .
Europeans have food to eat , but that CAP ruins chances for both small-scale farmers and industrial farmers in developing countries , and they lose the chance to earn a decent living .
That causes food shortages and brings a need for food imports .
When can we see a free and fair European agricultural policy ?
Madam President , both the Untied Nations and the European Union have agreed that the growing world population is going to demand greater global output of agricultural productivity of the order of a 50-100 % increase .
We accept that .
We accept the Commissioner 's point of view , not only because we accept it , but because it is a target that the world cannot afford to miss .
But , at the same time , agriculture is being asked to do it using less land , less water , less energy , less greenhouse gases .
So there are three points which we need to understand .
Firstly , governments - and the EU in particular - must invest more in research and development ; we simply do not have the information upon which to base a plan for the future .
Secondly , faced with volatility in global markets , we need a safety net from the common agricultural policy .
And , thirdly , food security , and all that it implies to the European Union , involves cost .
These are costs which we cannot pass on to consumers , and therefore I repeat : we need a strong agricultural policy , and we have to win the argument in the budget debate .
( PT ) Madam President , the final declaration adopted at the last FAO Summit by its 193 member countries truly is , unfortunately , a drop in the ocean in the fight against hunger .
No deadlines have been set and , above all , no concrete resources and conditions have been established to tackle a scourge that affects more than 6 billion human beings .
According to available data , in the mere 90 seconds it will take to give this speech , 15 children in the world will die from hunger .
This is the starkest and most cutting indictment of an unfair , exploitative , irrational and , therefore , historically reviled economic system .

It is a system that is based on real policies and guidelines and , now , Mr Michel , on protagonists and a liberal rhetoric that have led to the current situation : promotion of the agri-industrial model , in line with protection of the interests of the large agri-food industry , and the resulting qualitative impoverishment of the world 's farming industry ; years and years of inadequate investment in farming , of promotion of abandonment of the farming industry , and of liquidation of small and medium-sized farms , a sector that provides subsistence for 70 % of the world 's poor .
Market fundamentalism , policies of privatisation and liberalisation , and free trade have resulted , and are continuing to result , in the abandonment of land , the concentration of land ownership , and production dominated by the few and food dependency for the many .
Experts estimate that it would cost USD 44 billion to overcome the scourge of chronic malnutrition .
This is a much more modest sum than what the Member States handed over to big business to save it from the ongoing systemic crisis .
Madam President , during the World Summit on Food Security , Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , said ' the food crisis of today is a wake-up call for tomorrow ' .
By 2050 , our planet may be home to 9.1 billion people , over two billion more than today - a staggering figure and one which will mean that farmers will have to grow 70 % more food .
Farmers in Northern Ireland want to help to meet that need .
However , most of them believe that Europe is hindering their ability to produce more food by forcing a reduction in stocking rates through nitrate and phosphate regulations , red tape , a lack of research and development within the industry , and hence an attitude that food security is not an issue .
CAP reform will determine the farmers ' ability to produce food .
It will also influence the price of food .
If farmers are not supported by Europe through direct payments , the price of food will have to increase to meet production costs .
My aim is to promote food production within Northern Ireland and food security within Europe .
This will only be achieved by allowing farmers to farm .
CAP reform will play a huge part in this , and food security should be a central component of our work as this CAP reform goes ahead .
Madam President , as one of the authors of this report , can I first thank the political groups , who worked very closely together to come up with a text which does not have amendments to it .
I think we should all be very pleased with that .
We have different opinions on many things , but I think , on the general point of wanting to do the right thing to assist in feeding the hungry of the world , this text is a step in the right direction .
I was also the author of a report on global food security and the CAP in the previous mandate , so I have worked very hard on this issue .
Can I make one very simple point , which seems to escape many : it is farmers who will feed the world if they are given the right climate - and I mean that in the broadest context - to do that particular job .
The rest of us will talk about it .
It is our responsibility to develop and put in place the policies to allow our farmers to produce food .
They will respond if they have two basic elements : one is decent prices and the other is stable incomes .
The recent volatility has hit both of those and farming cannot survive on that .
Lest I run out of time - and as one of the authors I beg your forbearance on this - please do not demonise the common agricultural policy .
Some of the arguments made now are historic and out of date ; we have reformed absolutely this policy and perhaps without the CAP , we might have greater problems of food insecurity within the European Union .
Why do we not adopt the best parts of it and ask the developing world to take onboard a common agricultural policy ?
Because let us be very tough on this : we should not let the developing world 's governments off the hook ; it is their responsibility to use the development aid properly ; it is our responsibility to ensure that more money is spent and invested in agriculture .
I think it is time to stop pussyfooting around this issue and be tough with governments and tough with ourselves .
We have a moral responsibility and we are prepared to take it on board .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , the world is facing two major long-term challenges : combating the effects of climate change and combating poverty and hunger in the world .
The Commissioner mentioned the figures , as did other members of this Parliament , and they appear in the final declaration of the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) World Summit on Food Security : over a billion people around the world are suffering from hunger and 40 million die every year as a result of poverty .
First the food crisis and then the financial crisis have been hindering achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
We are not progressing : we are actually moving backwards .
The challenges are long term , but the solutions are urgent and are needed now .
However , in recent weeks , we have received alarming news of resistance among the main gas emitters to making decisions at the Copenhagen conference and the absence of leaders and specific results at the FAO Summit in Rome .
Our problems are alarming , but no less so is the lack of capacity for action .
Human beings have progressed because we have identified challenges , determined the responses and taken action .
In the current times , we know what we are up against but we have lost the capacity for action .
I therefore support the resolution , which calls on Parliament to take action as a matter of urgency .
Madam President , Article 208 of the Lisbon Treaty states that the main aim of European Union development policy is poverty reduction and eradication .
Poverty is also the main reason for hunger .
Article 208 also states that the Union shall take account of these objectives in other policies that might affect developing countries .
However , with export subsidies , the EU is destroying markets in developing countries , therefore causing poverty and hunger .
If we want our development assistance to be effective , we need to make sure that it is not hampered by other policies .
Otherwise , we will not manage to meet the Millennium Development Goals .
We should keep that in mind when we review and reform policies such as the common agricultural policy and fisheries policies .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , I would like to ask the previous speaker to be specific about what export refunds .
I made this point in my speech , and I accept that in the past , damage was done through export refunds and that Europe has now reformed its agricultural policy .
However , when we introduced export refunds for the dairy sector last year , the only country which complained was New Zealand , which is not a developing country .
Can I please ask for an example of where this is currently a problem .
Madam President , of course the frozen chicken example that you all well know is already a bit old , but still now , for example , tomatoes that are highly subsidised in the European Union make it to African markets , are cheaper than the local products and therefore destroy jobs and increase poverty .
So that is still a common phenomenon and I think we have to work on that .
( HU ) An ever-increasing number of scientists in the world are saying that a severe oil , water and food shortage will develop simultaneously by 2030 .
However , it would seem that the first one we must face is the food shortage , as there are already one billion people on Earth suffering from hunger .
The number of people suffering from hunger is growing at a faster rate than the world 's population .
Therefore , while only one person in six is suffering from hunger at the moment , we must face a situation where in a few decades ' time , as many as one person in four or five will be suffering from hunger .
Two children die of hunger every minute .
The solution to this situation is obviously not for us to discontinue the European Union 's common agricultural policy .
The European Union can only be strong and play a strong role in the world if it has a strong common agricultural policy .
However , hunger is not unique to Africa .
Hunger is present in the European Union as well .
For example , there are regions in the European Union where people spend less than 10 % of their income on food , whereas there are other regions too - some parts of Bulgaria and southern regions in Romania - where people are spending on average more than 50 % of their income on food .
These also include those people - representing the average - who spend many times more than this on food .
It is worthwhile emphasising this point because we must face the fact that each time we draft a new regulation that makes agricultural production more expensive and reduces its efficiency , such as animal welfare regulations which increase the amount of fodder required to produce 1 kg of meat , we are not only harming the environment by increased CO2 emissions , but every single measure of this sort increases the number of people suffering from hunger .
It is perhaps precisely this extra amount of fodder which we must use , for instance , in rearing poultry , that will be missing from a starving child 's table .
( RO ) The number of undernourished people in the world has passed the one-billion mark , exacerbating the tragic situation that one person in six suffers from hunger .
Unfortunately , as has been mentioned earlier , the leaders of the main industrialised powers have shown an indifferent attitude to a summit which is so important and necessary like the one organised by the FAO in Rome very recently .
The leaders of the G8 Member States did not feel it necessary to attend this meeting , with the exception of the Italian Prime Minister .
I cannot help but mention the huge , unfair discrepancy between the maximum level of attention given by the representatives of this group of countries , which account for 60 % of global GDP , to saving the banking system and their disregard for the tragic reality of famine affecting an ever-increasing number of our fellow human beings .
In fact , this is a crisis which is not of the poor countries ' own making , but they are the ones being hardest hit by it .
We have reached the most serious level of global famine since 1970 .
A child dies of hunger every six seconds .
Unfortunately , the world 's developed countries are closing their eyes to a tragedy which will affect us all through its complex implications .
The best example of this , and also a warning to us , is the neglect shown to agriculture over the last two decades , which has ended up at the current food crisis .
Out of the total amount of official aid for development , the funds allocated to agriculture have fallen as a proportion from 17 % in 1980 to 3.8 % in 2006 .
Food security is an extremely serious challenge which requires urgent solutions , primarily through opening up markets and providing aid to farmers in developing countries so that food can be provided and famine eradicated as soon as possible .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs McGuinness on this initiative , which demonstrates the important role that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) plays in meeting food provision needs internationally .
Now that the European Commission seems to want to reduce the burden of the CAP on the Community budget , it is important to stress that while the CAP may not be a priority , food sufficiency must be .
In past decades , it has been clear that without the CAP , it is very difficult , if not impossible , to achieve food sufficiency .
Agriculture cannot , therefore , be compared with other sectors of the economy which are able to thrive in a free market , because the food market is not a free market .
Farmers need the support of the European Union in order for their businesses to succeed , and the European Union , in turn , needs farmers in order to maintain an agricultural model that is capable of providing sufficient food of sufficient quality to its increasingly demanding citizens .
I therefore believe that we must change the course of the CAP , but not abolish it .
In order to do this , direct aid must be guaranteed to farmers and a policy of managing agricultural markets must be restored to bring about greater price stability , which would benefit not only farmers but also consumers and third countries .
A framework of best practices should be established in order to encourage balanced relations between the different players in the food chain , avoiding abusive practices and promoting fairer distribution of commercial margins .
In addition , a European consumer information policy that highlights efforts by Community producers to comply with European Union regulations in the areas of the environment , food security and animal welfare is needed , since Community producers have to compete with imports from third countries , where the standards applied are much lower .
Third-country producers prefer to export to the European Union rather than supplying their own countries ' markets because such exports are more profitable under World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) agreements .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was said earlier that , every five seconds , a child dies of hunger and poverty somewhere in the world , and it is estimated that more than a billion people suffer from malnutrition .
The matter of global food security therefore assumes an extremely urgent character and must be at the top of the European and international political agenda .
European policies need to be made more consistent so as to ensure that the first Millennium Development Goal is realised .
The EUR 1 billion food facility is a necessary first step , and it is essential that the implementation measures are focused on small and medium family and crop farms , in particular , those run by women , and on poor populations , those therefore that are most affected by the food crisis .
Sustainable agriculture must be a priority area .
Innovative funding mechanisms , such as an international tax on financial transactions , must be explored to accompany adaptation to climate change , while being accessible to the small farmers of the most vulnerable countries .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of the recent conclusion of the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) World Summit on Food Security , I would like to express my disappointment at its limited social , media and political impact .
In particular , I am disappointed that no agreement could be reached on the package of USD 44 billion intended to help the poorest farmers , and sad that everything will continue as before .
When we talk about food security , agriculture and development , we often forget the issue of water scarcity , an essential problem now and , above all , in the future .
In the current context of economic and environmental crisis , more than ever we need a commitment by developed countries to create a new forum for international reflection , at the highest level , with the aim of consolidating water as a public good , sharing technologies and developing efficient , sustainable and economically viable systems of water management .
If we do not look after our water , we will never succeed in combating hunger .
Madam President , in 18th century England , Thomas Malthus predicted that population increase would exceed food supply .
Now , in many ways , his ideas have been discredited because we have had a series of agricultural revolutions which have transformed our society .
But his words were also true : in the lifetimes of many of us , world population has trebled - trebled , quite incredible - and , in too many parts of the world , that has exceeded our food supply .
We need to be doing more if we want to prevent hunger and control population growth , and the way of doing that is to ensure that women everywhere have control over their reproductivity .
And we have got to save the lives of children .
The best way of reducing population growth is to save the lives of youngsters , so that people do not feel the need to have bigger families .
Here in the Western world , we are addicted to eating meat : a massive waste of resources .
All I can say is - and I see my time is up , Madam President - as someone who gave up eating meat 20 years ago , if we want to save the world and prevent hunger , then we eat green , not red .
( DE ) Madam President , adequate food is a human right and hunger is a crime against humanity .
I also think that the human race has enough technical and scientific knowledge to ensure that no one in the world should have to suffer from hunger .
Of course , money is also needed to combat world hunger .
However , it is not just about money .
We also need to meet the following requirements beforehand . Firstly , developing a stable democratic structure in developing countries , secondly , fighting corruption , thirdly , establishing a suitable agricultural system in developing countries and then , finally , investing in agriculture .
Too little is often said about the first three points .
In addition , a lot of funding disappears in these countries , gets into the wrong hands and is used for corrupt practices .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to expand on what I said here myself two days ago concerning the tragic food crisis that Africa , above all , has been plunged into , and the clear lack of support from the most industrialised countries , as well as emerging countries , with regard to the problem of global food security .
During the debates that took place at the FAO Summit in Rome , several NGOs accused the food multinationals of trying to grab thousands of hectares of very fertile land belonging to small farmers in the developing world .
More than 40 000 hectares have already been acquired in this manner from Ethiopia to Indonesia .
They also condemned the tendency many rich countries have of favouring the use of chemical fertilisers and new technologies in Africa instead of encouraging the sustainable development of agroecology .
They castigated agrochemical companies , the use of GMOs and the development of biomass fuels to the detriment of crop growing .
I call on the European Union to invest as a matter of urgency in the implementation of the global partnership project , which will enable actions for combating famine to be better coordinated .
It seems to me that subsistence agriculture is undoubtedly the most obvious answer .
( DE ) Madam President , long-term food security is one of the central challenges of the common agricultural policy .
In particular , in the light of food shortages , we must emphasise the importance of a strong CAP which will take on a key role in future in overcoming global challenges .
This means that adequate long-term funding for the CAP is required .
The CAP is an important element of the EU food and security policy and after 2013 , it will play a significant role in development policy and in external food security policy .
Therefore , perfectly functioning ecosystems , fertile soil , stable water resources and further diversification of the rural economy are the highest priorities .
International cooperation and solidarity , together with balanced trade agreements which promote , rather than jeopardise , food security are an essential element of global food security and this is where a strong CAP can make an important contribution .

( RO ) First of all , at the risk of repeating an idea already mentioned by Mr Stoyanov , I deplore the fact that we have so much uncultivated land in many countries in Europe while we are talking about hunger in the world .
Secondly , because the motion for a resolution is dealing with this issue , and I am pleased that the Commissioner touched on this subject , I wish to draw attention to the danger posed by the objective of food self-sufficiency , which is very much in vogue .
This objective , which is not synonymous with food security , might have an undesirable effect in the current conditions because climate change affects every region in a different way .
This situation makes trade more necessary than ever and not the ambition of every country to produce everything that it wants to eat .
author . - Madam President , I just want to comment on two matters raised in the debate so far .
First , the link between hunger and climate change .
As Ban Ki-moon said in Rome , at a time when the global population is growing and our global climate is changing , by 2050 , we will need to produce 70 % more food , yet the weather is becoming more extreme and unpredictable .
So any positive efforts we make on climate change will impact positively on food production .
Another issue raised once again is the easy option : blame the CAP - as if the CAP were responsible for all of the ills of the developing world .
The CAP is not perfect , but it has been reformed .
If we want our farmers to continue producing and ensure food security for Europe , we cannot , by regulation and withdrawal of support , literally force them out of business .
For example , has anybody done a study on the recent reform of the sugar industry in the EU to see if the decimation of the EU sugar industry has benefited those in Third World countries or if it has just benefited the sugar barons and landowners while leaving the small sugar growers in poverty ?
In no way do I want to minimise the issue of world hunger , but we need to ensure that when we put forward solutions to the problem , they actually do alleviate it .
( FI ) Madam President , it is excellent that on the same day that we are discussing the resolution on the Copenhagen climate conference , the issues of food security and the problem of hunger are on the table , because these matters are very closely linked .
Some Members have already mentioned the problem of how , through climate policy , we have also partly caused more problems .
We have set unrealistic targets for biofuel , for example , which has led to a situation where land has been bought from developing countries for the cultivation of vegetation for biofuel .
So land is being taken away from the poorest of the poor , who could use it for farming and developing their own agricultural production .
There have been similar distortions in agricultural policy .
These have resulted in over-production being exported to the developing countries , thus hampering the development of agriculture there .
It is extremely important to bear in mind one truth : in the world today , we have more than enough food , but the desire to share it fairly is missing .
( PL ) Madam President , at the last FAO Summit , the participating states did not manage to produce any constructive proposals .
The absence of a common strategy at international level is concerning , especially in light of the continually increasing world population , which is set to reach 9 billion in 2050 .
We all well remember the effects of the food crisis of 2007 when , as a result of a sudden rise in the prices of basic agricultural products , millions of people around the world were faced with a lack of food .
I think the crisis should teach us a lesson .
We must end action intended to limit agricultural production , so popular , strange to say , in recent years in our EU .
I think that , in the light of global trends on the foodstuffs market , every attempt to restrict the CAP is an unwise move which will , in the near future , threaten the food security of our continent .
We should help developing countries establish an agricultural policy that will enable them to ensure food security to their citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I also deplore that none of the G8 leaders were present at Rome except for Commission President Barroso , and of course , it adds to the image that this has been a summit which did not bring that much new .
When you look at the final declaration this is , I think , also obvious .
On the other hand , I think it is also very important that we managed to keep the food security item on the political agenda and the result of the several summits we have been witnessing in 2009 has certainly been that it is now high on the international agenda and that , whenever world leaders meet , for example , latterly in Pittsburgh for the G20 , there is talk of development cooperation and development policy .
So that in itself is a very positive element .
I have been in Rome and I must say that apart from the final declaration which is , I must agree , a little bit disappointing , there have been very good discussions and also a very good presence , and something can come out of it .
For example , there was a whole discussion on the selling of fertile land in developing countries and countries which have no arable land ; buying them itself is a very interesting topic to discuss and I think it is also one where we can come to some common understanding .
The second thing I would like to say is that , as a couple of Members have already said , the CAP is , of course , not ideal .
Nothing is ideal in this world , but when you look at the effect of the common agricultural policy on the developing world , I think we can claim that it is , by far , the least harmful system of a big trading block with respect to distorting effects in the developing countries .
The WTO has acknowledged that most , if not all , of our subsidies are non-trade-distorting because they are supporting agricultural income , not the prices of agricultural products .
I am also a little bit , how should I put it , disappointed that we are blaming ourselves all the time .
Europe is not ideal either but I think that with the Food Facility , for example , we took a major step forward .
This involves EUR 1 billion on a two-year basis ; it is not about supporting the delivery of food , but is largely focused on delivering seeds and so on , sustaining small agricultural producers in the developing world .
I think this really is an innovation .
It has also been acknowledged as such by the World Bank , for example , which is taking over this mechanism .
So we should not blame ourselves all the time .
By the way , this facility was an innovation by my predecessor .
There is one thing I do not agree with him and that was about a gentleman who , in the meantime , has disappeared , Mr Le Hyaric .
He is not a socialist , my predecessor , he is a communist ; I mean you should look at his political group : he is a communist and that probably explains the reasoning he was using .
Having said this , also in L 'Aquila , we took up our responsibility as a European Commission and we pledged USD 4 billion , which is about 20 % of the food package and the support package that was agreed in L 'Aquila .
With that , we are by far the largest donor that made pledges in L 'Aquila and we are also going to honour them .
We are also going to commit this sum and to disburse this as soon as possible .
I will end by saying a last word on the new EU agricultural and food security policy because , in the 2010 work programme of the Commission , there is a plan to present to the Council and the Parliament a communication on a renewed policy for agriculture and food security for the European Union .
This document will review current issues affecting agriculture and food security , for example , challenges posed by climate change , enhanced attention to nutrition and food quality , safety nets and social protection policies , the impact of biofuels on food production or the use and impact of new technologies and biotechnologies , increased calls for rights-based approaches , large-scale land acquisition , etc .
The communication will aim firstly at renewing the EU commitment to assist developing countries advancing their agricultural production .
This remains crucial , notably in view of the increasing demand for food due to a growing global population and changing dietary patterns and the challenges and threats that climate change is posing to sustainable agricultural production .
Secondly , it will aim at launching reflection on how the EU could best use its experience and know-how to support the emergence of regional policies and strategic frameworks in agriculture and food security .
Thirdly , it will aim at providing the basis for the whole EU approach to harmonise existing ECMS policy frameworks following the commitments set out in the L 'Aquila agenda for action .
Fourthly , it will aim at proposing ways on how the EU could contribute to accelerating the process towards the achievements of the MDGs and notably , MDG1 in view of the upcoming review of the MDGs in September 2010 in New York .
Fifthly , it will aim at better positioning the EU vis-à-vis current developments in the global food agricultural governance system , and lastly , at addressing issues that have recently gained prominence in the food security agenda .
A public consultation on an issues paper was launched on 16 November and will close in early January .
Thus we will consult all the stakeholders and then come forward with a formal communication by the European Commission .
I have received six motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 26 November 2009 .
Meat imports from third countries ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on meat imports from third countries .
Madam President , I apologise because this issue is of great interest and has many facets and I shall be a little long-winded in my statement for the benefit of the honourable Members of Parliament .
The Commission has in place a robust set of EU animal and public health requirements for meat coming from third countries .
For a number of years , the EU has maintained a very effective import policy which takes into account scientific developments and the current disease situation in third countries .
In particular , it pays close attention to foot-and-mouth disease in exporting third countries because , as you know , the EU is free of this disease , which has the potential to cause serious economic harm .
Very detailed standards and requirements have been established at the level of the World Organisation for Animal Health to prevent the spread of FMD .
The WTO agreement on sanitary and phytosanitary measures acknowledges that , while countries may use different standards and different methods of inspecting products , this does not necessarily increase the animal and public health risks .
The EU cannot impose an exact replica of our internal legislative measures on third countries , just as third countries , to which we export , cannot impose their own national rules on us .
We can only require that their measures have an equivalent effect to ours .
Let me take traceability as an example .
In the EU , we have very stringent rules on the individual identification and traceability of cattle .
In case of a disease outbreak , our rules facilitate the tracing of potentially infected animals to limit the spread of the disease .
In addition , our rules allow us to trace and follow food or feed through all stages of production and distribution from farm to table .
On the other hand , traceability rules applying to third countries exporting to the EU are aimed solely at ensuring that imported meat does not pose unacceptable risks for the EU .
Thus , the scope of these rules is much more limited than the rules in force in the EU .
I would also like to stress the fact that the measures on traceability of cattle in the EU were adopted largely in response to the BSE crisis which , as you recall , caused a dramatic drop in consumer confidence and major disruption of the internal market in relation to the trade in beef .
Let me now take this opportunity to explain in more detail the extremely effective cascade of risk-mitigating measures that we have in place for beef imports and which ensure the highest possible level of protection for EU public and animal health , whilst taking account of OIE standards and remaining fully in line with the principles of the SPS Agreement .
These measures can be grouped into five main levels of protection .
They are so comprehensive that only 12 third countries outside Europe are able to meet all these requirements , and consequently , we only import beef from these few countries .
First , imports of beef are only permitted from third countries or from certain parts of these countries that have been specifically authorised following a Commission inspection to verify the competence of their veterinary authorities and the animal health situation in general .
Second , the territory of origin of bovine animals must be recognised as free of FMD by the OIE and the European Union .
Third , beef-exporting countries must have an approved monitoring plan for specific residues from veterinary medical products , growth promoters and performance enhancers which are restricted or banned in food-producing animals in the EU .
Fourth , all imports of fresh meat must come from an approved slaughterhouse that has been authorised and listed for that specific purpose .
Fifth , we have specific conditions concerning meat production and storage .
We have an additional layer of protection by only allowing bone in meat to come from Australia , Canada , Chile , New Zealand and the United States .
For the seven other authorised countries , only deboned and matured beef without offal can be exported to the European Union .
This treatment ensures the inactivation of the FMD virus , should it still be present despite all the previous measures I have described , thus providing an additional safeguard .
Consignments of meat destined for the EU market must be certified by an official veterinarian who guarantees that all of the above conditions are fully met .
When the meat consignment arrives in the EU , controls are carried out by the official veterinary services of the Member States at our border inspection points .
All imported meat must undergo mandatory veterinary checks at EU borders .
The border inspection posts are obliged to carry out documentary , identity and physical checks .
Imported meat is subject to 100 % documentary and identity checks at border inspection posts .
In addition , a physical veterinary check is carried out on a minimum of 20 % of all consignments of imported meat .
Furthermore , we have an additional level of protection through our ban on feeding swill or catering waste to animals throughout the EU .
This measure ensures that susceptible species in the EU are not exposed to the FMD virus should it enter the EU despite all the previous measures I have described .
All the measures I have described are fully harmonised .
In 2006 , the European Food Safety Authority recognised that these measures are very effective at reducing the risk of FMD entering the EU .
In its opinion , EFSA stated , ' The EU thus has a sophisticated import control system in place .
These efforts appear to be very effective with regard to legal trade in meat and meat products ' .
This brings me to my next point .
Since the harmonisation of the veterinary import conditions in the 1970s , we have never had an outbreak in the EU of FMD through the legal import of meat .
I am sure I do not need to remind you that the FMD outbreak in the UK in 2001 was caused by the illegal introduction of meat - most probably from Asia - and the illegal use of swill feeding .
I therefore believe that we should focus our efforts on where the real risks are , and target illegal introductions or personal imports rather than trying to excessively regulate legal imports .
In this regard , I hope you have all seen the posters in EU airports and at other points of entry into the EU explaining to travellers the rules concerning the introduction of products of animal origin .
I am aware that some of you have expressed concern as regards our imports of beef from Brazil .
I would like to remind you that additional requirements were established for imports of Brazilian beef in January last year .
These include , in addition to all the requirements I have already outlined , that the farms of origin are audited and approved by the Brazilian authorities .
The Brazilian authorities now also require that bovine animals whose meat is destined for the EU market are individually identified and registered in a database .
These animals represent less than 1.5 % of the total Brazilian bovine population , amounting to about 2.9 million animals in approved holdings .
As a consequence , the Brazilian authorities reassessed holdings wishing to produce beef meat for export to the EU .
From a total number of more than 10 000 holdings eligible for export in November 2007 , only 1 708 farms are currently approved .
As a consequence , EU imports of Brazilian beef have dropped dramatically .
In early 2009 , some deficiencies were identified during a Commission inspection , and the Brazilian authorities demonstrated full cooperation to address these deficiencies .
In any case , the overall findings did not justify any further restriction on imports of beef from Brazil .
As things stand , imposing further restrictions on imports of beef from Brazil could be interpreted as protectionism by some , and could lead to a challenge to our measures at the WTO .
We also need to bear in mind that the EU will have to face , from time to time , animal-health or food-safety problems , and we insist that third countries react in a proportionate manner to these problems .
We should lead by example therefore , playing by the rules governing international trade .
I would like to conclude by assuring Parliament that the Commission will continue to target illegal introductions which present the greatest risk to our high standards .
The Commission will also maintain its current proportional approach towards imports of beef from third countries , including Brazil .
These will ensure we maintain our high level of public and animal health in the EU and that the EU retains its respectability at international level .
Madam President , the European Union imposes on Community producers the highest standards in the world in terms of food security , health , animal welfare and the environment .
European stockbreeders are obliged to meet these standards as a prerequisite for receiving European Union support .
For the vast majority , this support does not offset the increased burden , and farms are being abandoned at an alarming rate .
This process will continue unless adequate measures are taken .
Let us , however , examine the issue more closely .
The growing deficit in European production is naturally being covered by imports from third countries , mainly from Brazil .
Given the pressure on Community stockbreeders , it would be totally dishonest to allow consignments of meat to enter the Community market if they failed to meet the minimum requirements agreed by the European Union with third countries .
I would also like to highlight the fact that these requirements are lower that those imposed on our own farmers , because it would seem that imposing exactly the same standards on third-country imports would go against World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) rules .
Given that the WTO prevents us from imposing the same standards on imports as we do on European stockbreeders , however , the Commission must , at the very least , guarantee that all meat that crosses Community borders comes from farms that have undergone adequate inspections .
It would make no sense to block imports from countries like Brazil , since there is a Community demand which must be met .
Nonetheless , this does not justify closing our eyes and looking the other way in the face of any irregularities that the European Union 's Food and Veterinary Office ( FVO ) might detect during its regular inspections .
I would like to know why the Commission is so keen to downplay these irregularities given that the FVO , on its last mission to Brazil , confirmed that some certification authorities do not meet the necessary inspection standards .
The FVO also found huge flaws in the traceability system used by Brazil and detected problems with many consignments in transit to the European Union that did not have the necessary certificates .
In view of this information , how can it be guaranteed that the 1 500 Brazilian farms do fulfil the agreed requirements ?
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , when it comes to the issue of meat imports , we in Europe must nail down the principles which form our policy on this , and have a strong but fair system of regulation .
Those principles must be based on consumer safety and trust , protection of the environment and - vitally - a fair playing field for producers of meat .
Currently , the system is operating in a way that is blatantly unfair for both farmers and consumers .
We are forcing our farmers to go through a range of time-consuming and costly practices , only to allow them to be undercut by meat products from outside the EU , with Brazil being a prime example .
There is huge evidence from the FVO in relation to this .
This situation is simply unsustainable .
Farm practices in Brazil are , in many cases , simply not up to the standard that is known and acceptable to European consumers .
If we are not careful , the incentive to produce high-quality , safe meat will disappear because we are allowing inferior quality products to undermine prices and farmers ' incomes .
Also , naturally , owing to the way the food chain is integrated , once you have meat in the system it will disperse across a wide range of products and become untraceable .
How is that fair to consumers in Europe ?
Beef producers across Europe are getting it in the neck , and the situation cannot last for them or consumers .
There is no faith that the new measures implemented recently are actually being taken stock of .
There are many examples of claims of cattle being produced and put through farms that are approved , when they do not actually originate from those farms .
Commissioner , I am not advocating protectionism in any way , but it is time to act .
We cannot stand idly by and let this practice continue .
It is simply unfair .
It is unfair for European consumers and it is unfair for producers in Europe , who are having to take on practices which , at the same time , are not being accepted , and are not practised , by producers in Brazil .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her statement , where she outlined that the range of protections and measures are there to ensure that third-country imports are meeting the highest standards possible .
I want to look in particular at the FVO report from Brazil .
Proper traceability systems and designated holdings in Brazil are at the heart of the measures that the EU has requested be put in place to prevent any threat or risk of contaminated meat products being imported into the EU from that country .
They are fundamental in guaranteeing to EU consumers , farmers and taxpayers that there are no risks .
Let us not forget that foot-and-mouth disease is still a serious problem in Brazil .
Yet the Commission 's FVO report in February highlighted a catalogue of failures : 50 % of the farms which were inspected which were designated for exports to the EU had problems .
25 % of these with serious problems , with missing ear tags identified , cattle on farms which could not be identified - they had no idea where they came from .
There was a lack of documentation ; there were conflict-of-interest issues ; EU inspectors found that one of the government supervisors just happened to be married to the person responsible for cattle identification - and it turned out that they actually own some of the cattle on that holding where the stock records were inaccurate .
My concern , Commissioner , is that the summary of that FVO report stated that all the controls were generally satisfactory .
But I am sorry , the content does not support that conclusion whatsoever , and we must , as a group of nations , be on our guard .
I do not need to remind the House of the impact a major disease outbreak can have on taxpayers , farmers and customers .
In the last major disease outbreak in the UK which you referred to in your speech , foot and mouth erupted and we destroyed a million animals and it cost our taxpayers GBP 4 billion .
That is the kind of risk we run if we do not get this right , so we must be vigilant .
I am not asking for restrictions to be put on Brazil ; what I am asking from the Commissioner here tonight is an assurance that this matter is taken seriously and that the Commission makes sure that the failings identified in the report are corrected in the next report .
We need to see a clean bill of health to reassure farmers , taxpayers and consumers that they are protected and that free and fair trade can resume between Brazil and the EU .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her very full statement - possibly one of the fullest and most substantive statements we have heard from a Commissioner lately .
This issue does merit it and , as one of the last veterans of the first battle of Brazilian beef , it is a pleasure to see so many familiar faces in the Chamber tonight .
I hope that indicates that we are interested and serious regarding this issue .
We support you in what you are saying about the import controls and about FMD .
Frankly , that is not quite what this issue is about , and that is why I am so glad that those who wanted to broaden this issue out to imports from third countries have achieved that aim .
It is not just about Brazilian beef .
It is about the wider principle that our consumers , our voters and our farmers demand that imports from those countries which would seek to bring their produce here meet our standards - and that means meet all our standards .
So it troubles me to hear you accept the fact that Brazil has lower standards of traceability than we do because it might not create such a disease risk coming into the territory of the European Union .
Our consumers expect exactly the same standards in all things coming into the European Union .
I accept your point if you are talking about strict disease control , but we are talking about equity and fairness .
Our consumers demand - and our farmers demand and we , frankly , demand - that we have exactly the same standards of traceability across Brazil and across all third countries .
For an FVO report to come back that said 50 % of the inspections failed or had problems with them is just like throwing red meat to a pack of hungry wolves , as you perhaps see this evening .
Can you assure us : when is the next FVO report , and will you actually take it seriously and ban whichever countries fail to meet our standards ?
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the first thing I want to make clear here tonight is that this is not about third-country imports .
This is about Brazilian beef coming into Europe .
That is what it is about .
I am saddened that I stand here tonight and we do not have a resolution .
I do not know why , but I understand that some of the big groups in this Parliament were not prepared to stand up to the Brazilian Ambassador who lobbied last week in Brussels .
That goes for the Socialist Group and I will let the Liberals answer for themselves , for I understand they did not stand up at the Conference of Presidents and allow us to have a resolution before us .
I want to make it very clear .
The Brazilian Ambassador did not lobby me .
Maybe he did not think I was worth coming to see ; I do not know .
Or maybe he thought I was too hard a nut to crack because - let me make it very clear here tonight - in the future , Commissioner , I have to say to you that you in the Commission are no longer going to tie the hands of the farmers of Europe behind their backs on meat standards which they meet every day of the week and then come here and lecture us about the WTO and everything else .
I have to say to you , Commissioner , that we are here for the next five years .
I do not know how long you are going to be there , but you , if you are there , or whoever takes your place , are going to have to satisfy us in every way , shape , size and form as to how the meat that comes into Europe has got to be of the same standard as the meat we produce .
We will not accept second best any more .
You are not going to destroy us any more .
I hope you pass that on to your officials because we cannot be expected to accept this on behalf of those who are our producers in Europe .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I , too , want to raise serious concerns about the safety and suitability of Brazilian beef exports .
Unregulated meat is imported from thousands of miles away at the expense of native farmers .
The meat brings with it the risk of contamination such as foot-and-mouth disease , as we have heard tonight .
The lack of strict regulation in Brazil means exporters also have an unfair competitive advantage over European farmers .
The extent of hypocrisy on the matter of foreign beef exportations is made even more apparent in the context of climate change discussions .
Whilst we are told we must commit to an ambitious climate change agenda , the EU turns a blind eye to the fact that the Brazilian beef export industry is responsible for 80 % of deforestation in the Amazon rainforest .
Before a ban in 2007 , 30 000 premises in Brazil exported beef to the EU .
Today only 12 % of those exports are authorised , but more and more premises are approved for EU exportation daily .
Around 100 farms per month are given that right .
At the start of this issue , the Food and Veterinary Office reported significant problems in Brazil with the certification of farms and traceability of livestock .
There are grave concerns about unidentified cattle in slaughterhouses .
It is also widely held that many inspectors have strong connections with , or even own , the farms being granted authority to export beef .
European farmers must abide by rules put in place for the safety of the consumer .
The fact that their foreign counterparts do not work under the same regulations gives overseas exporters an unfair competitive advantage .
The UK beef industry faces real problems from producers outside the EU , who can mass export meat at much lower prices .
Some of the world 's largest retailers , such as Carrefour and Wal-Mart , have already banned Brazilian beef on the grounds of the deforestation the industry is responsible for .
Each year , an area in the Amazon the size of Belgium is cleared for the lucrative beef export industry .
It is estimated that cattle rearing is responsible for 80 % of illegal deforestation .
It amazes me how there is one set of rules for British and European farmers and another for farmers in Brazil .
Which agricultural industry does the EU and the Commission actually support ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I would welcome much of what Mr Bufton was saying , but I would take issue and question him on one of his phrases there .
He said that unregulated meat was imported into the EU .
You said that , Mr Bufton , quite early in your presentation .
Given the 15-minute presentation we heard from the Commissioner earlier on , would you accept that that is just clearly not the case ; that your sort of hyperbole undermines the case in the serious discussion we are having here tonight about a very technical piece of legislation and regulation ; and that you are not actually helping the case , you are hindering it ?
Madam President , I will answer that .
Certainly if we look at what is happening with meat coming into the country from Brazil and countries like that , where we know there are problems with it , that is unregulated , of course .
It is quite simple .
The whole issue is there : it is quite clear .
So I know the point you are making is a very important point , but I am telling you now that there is unregulated meat coming in from these countries .
Why on earth have we got this situation now , within the European Union ?
We have got meat coming across - we have heard tonight about how this meat is not being inspected in these places , in slaughterhouses and so forth , and I mentioned earlier on about the fact that we had the Food and Veterinary Office reporting these issues .
That is clearly the case .
We are on the same side with this one .
Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for her lengthy and full statement .
Like many here in this Chamber tonight , Commissioner , I have been a little bit mystified by your acceptance that there is nothing that we can do in relation to the import of meat from Third World countries .
Just earlier in your statement , you said that just as third countries cannot impose standards in the EU , so the EU cannot impose standards on other countries .
Now , for many of our farmers , that would seem an unfair position to have , and I would respectfully suggest tonight that , yes , we can impose standards until we are sure .
And , until we get food and veterinary reports that actually tell us that there is compliance with the regulations that we have looked at , then we should not import beef from those countries .
Many of our farmers are suffering under the huge strain of production and feel the unfairness , and I think that you can hear in this Chamber tonight the anger that many feel in relation to this particular issue .
Madam President , as one of the co-authors of this question , can I just support Jim Nicholson 's plea , regretting that the Socialists , in particular , who are now crying crocodile tears about this issue for populist reasons , refused to support a resolution on this important issue .
Sometimes late at night we get cross , but sometimes it is justified .
Commissioner , thank you for your very long and detailed presentation , which I appreciate very much , but can I just say that you missed the elephant in the room .
I will be blunt .
You were forced to act only because of pressure from , and action by , the Irish Farmers ' Association , which was reported in the Irish Farmers ' Journal and followed up by this House .
Political pressure brought you to your senses .
I listened in detail to your speech , took notes and will read it again .
However , I really would like you to accept that you were forced to act .
Can I draw your attention to your own figures : it is quite staggering that in 2007 , there were 10 000 farms eligible to export while currently , only 1 700 are approved to export .
Does that tell us that the others should not have been exporting at all ?
There are serious questions which we raise and rightly raise in this House about this importation .
I have a little time left , so let me stretch this with two points .
I do not have faith in the current Commission to deal adequately and responsibly with this issue .
However , I am putting the next College of Commissioners - both President and members - on notice that I and others in this House will pursue this to the very end , because we have got to persuade and cajole our producers to meet high standards .
They will revolt in time if they see that those standards are debased by imports from third countries .
You may not realise the anger that is on the ground , but let me tell you it is there .
We will also face this issue over cereal imports , with tighter pesticide regulations in Europe , and we will face it on animal welfare regulations when we ban caged-egg production in a few years ' time and imports of powdered egg from small cages .
Rest assured , Commissioner , that it may be late but we are wide awake , and the next Commission had better beware .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , what makes European beef different from imported beef ?
It is not necessarily the taste , nor is it just the price ; it is , above all , the health standards that exist within the European Union and that do not necessarily exist in the third countries exporting their meat .
For example , as far as the production of Brazilian beef is concerned , particular mention was made of veterinary- and health-related shortcomings in a report by the Irish Farmers Association submitted to Brussels in 2007 .
Tests carried out by the Belgian Scientific Institute of Public Health have also revealed that the bacteriological quality of Argentinian beef was not as good as that of local meat , for instance , when the beef arrives on our plates .
It is hardly surprising if we consider that it takes around two months for Argentinian beef to arrive in Europe .
Consumption cycles are much shorter in Belgium , for example , as produce is usually consumed in the month of slaughter .
That is why the health standards imposed by the European Union must not only be respected by European countries ; it is equally important that third countries exporting meat to Europe respect the same standards .
If this is not the case , it shows that the European Commission , who considers banning premature and unjustified , has failed in its responsibility to defend consumer interests and is penalising European producers .
Finally , the countries that have banned the import of Brazilian beef , such as the United States , Chile and Japan , are showing Europe the road to take , since for us , quality is an essential requirement .
Let us therefore act accordingly so as to protect our producers , who are the guarantors of this quality .
Madam President , the Commissioner said we cannot impose the same standards , but we must ensure they have an equivalent effect .
She spoke of EU traceability from farm to table , but she also told us that in third countries , the scope of traceability is much more limited .
If the scope is much more limited - and those are the Commissioner 's words - then how can it have an equivalent effect ?
But my issue is the recent FVO report on beef imports from Brazil .
My problem is that both the Commission and the FVO consistently play down the impact of their findings and they minimise any adverse information .
Yes , additional requirements were authorised ; but as my colleague Mrs McGuinness said , that was only after sustained pressure from the Committee on Agriculture and the Irish Farmers ' Organisation .
I was a maths teacher for most of my life , and if I gave my students 12 problems to solve - like the 12 visits that the Commissioner had to establishments in Brazil - and they only solved six of them correctly , I would not stamp ' satisfactory ' on their exam paper .
If three had minor and three had major problems , I would not consider that a good outcome , particularly if I had spent years working with them to improve their grades .
EU farmers want fair trade as well as free trade , and EU consumers deserve certainty .
The EU Commission and the FVO have a responsibility to ensure both .
I certainly would not give them an ' A ' grade for their work .
Madam President , I was happy to hear that the Commissioner is determined to maintain food standards in the EU , but there are two issues that I want to pull her up on .
Firstly , Commissioner , you talked about posters in airports .
I have got to tell you that I have never seen any warnings or any checks carried out in airports in the EU on imported food products .
I suggest you reinvestigate that , because it is not happening to the extent that you think it is .
Secondly , I am not convinced about your argument regarding Brazilian beef .
I went there myself , saw matters on the ground and support previous speakers in this regard .
Farmers in the EU conform to the world 's highest standards , and rightly so .
However , these imply a level of cost which we cannot pass on to our consumers .
It is therefore grossly unfair to expose European producers and consumers to a product which simply does not conform to the same standards as we are expected to achieve .
Past experience has shown us that you cannot leave it to commercial interests to resolve this problem .
You have to have a sound EU food policy .
That is not protectionism - it is a common agricultural policy doing precisely what it was intended to do , which is to supply an assured quantity and quality of food .
The two points I have made show it to be falling very short .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am grateful to Mrs Herranz García for bringing up this topic today in Parliament .
This is a discussion which is fundamental to food policy .
I am not interested in shaming Brazil or other countries .
The basic question is this : Do we need these strict regulations for European agricultural production in the interests of consumer safety ?
If the answer is ' yes ' , then this means that consumer protection is regarded as a coherent whole .
If the regulations are needed , then the same rules must apply to imports as to our own farmers .
The Commission must not allow imports from countries which do not fulfil these requirements .
Cattle farmers in Europe must not be punished because one cow in their herd has an ear tag missing , when imports are allowed from cattle herds which do not have a single ear tag .
This is not acceptable .
If traceability is so important for consumer protection , then it must also apply to imports .
If we cannot ensure that this is the case , then it is unfair to our farmers to demand it of them .
I have the impression that those people in the Commission who are responsible for imports are applying double standards .
As already discussed , I am not interested in partitioning off Europe .
I would like to see fair competition for our farmers in Europe so that we can continue to guarantee the food supply of half-a-billion people in future .
I can assure you of one thing , Commissioner , and you can pass this on to your successor , Parliament will continue to touch on this sore point .
We will not give up until equal competitive conditions have been established .
We have good arguments that we can bring up repeatedly to ensure that food security is guaranteed in Europe in future .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , fellow Members , the European Commission must continue to monitor compliance of third-party imports with European standards , since such monitoring benefits us all .
It benefits our farmers and stockbreeders , who have worked hard to comply with European standards , it benefits our consumers , who are demanding increasing amounts of high-quality farming products and livestock that comply with rules on plant protection , animal welfare and traceability , and it benefits third countries wishing to export their products to the European Union .
Lastly , I would like to recall that this problem is not restricted to a single sector or a single country .
The issue of the competitiveness of European agriculture is a complex one that requires in-depth debate .
Madam President , my region of south-west England is blessed with a particular blend of climate and landscape which produces good grazing and excellent beef .
British farmers are amongst the most efficient in the world and they work , after bitter experience , to the highest standards of animal welfare and traceability .
All these factors , coupled with a growing world population and increased efforts to ensure food security , should mean that they are a happy lot .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
They find themselves under attack on many fronts .
Only this week we see that this Parliament will be entertaining the vegetarian lobby , claiming that meat eaters and , by association , farmers , are climate criminals .
Yet they see the EU failing to be rigorous in dealing with countries where they are clearing rain forests to raise cattle .
How can the consumer see any logic ?
Beef farmers are not asking for special privileges - just a level playing field .
It is absolutely vital that we support them , not by protectionism , but by making sure that all exports to the EU match their high standards .
I urge you , Commissioner , to sharpen up your act , stiffen your backbone , reread your FVO report and deliver .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the topic we are discussing this evening is only a small part of a much bigger problem .
The topic of fairness between the treatment of imports and the conditions imposed on our producers does not concern only meat and meat imports but also affects many other production sectors .
As you are well aware , Europe is a net importer of meat .
In our continent , Europe , we produce only 60 % of our requirements .
This means that we are forced to import .
Yet we wish to guarantee consumption conditions and the health of our consumers .
We hope this is the last time we have to hear what we heard today , in other words , that it is not possible to impose similar conditions on imports , because this is certainly not the direction in which we should be moving .
Although we have product traceability conditions which help to raise standards internally for our consumers , I believe it is important to maintain these standards both for our producers internally and for imports from abroad .
( NL ) Commissioner , as the last speaker on the official speakers ' list , I will try to sum up this debate .
I think that one way in which I can do that is by using the Dutch proverb : ' All monks of the same order should have to wear the same habit ' .
My apologies to whomever has to come up with an interpretation of that at this late an hour but , although we in the Netherlands have hardly any monks left these days , we still use that proverb when we want to say that you have to apply the same standards in equivalent situations .
Therefore , any requirements which you impose on EU producers should also apply to third country producers who wish to enter our market .
Otherwise , you will simply be making it impossible for our farmers to compete .
That applies to the identification and registration of cattle and to animal disease prevention measures in Brazil .
However , it should equally apply to chlorinated chicken imported from the United States and to bovine growth hormones in milk .
And to cloned animals , and so the list goes on , Commissioner .
Listening to my fellow members , I get the impression that that is exactly what Parliament is going to judge the new Commission on - whether or not they apply the same standards in equivalent situations .
And they are not going to judge them on it , as we are doing now , five years down the line , but well in advance of the new Commission taking office .
Commissioner , you also spoke about foot-and-mouth .
I agree with you that we have indeed taken some steps forward .
For example , vaccination has been given greater prominence in the combating of the disease .
Thank God , because , in my country alone , 285 animals have had to be destroyed , as a result of 26 cases of foot-and-mouth .
However , Commissioner , the next Commission will also be judged on whether we have been able to market products derived from these vaccinated animals within the European Union .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's agricultural experts have made a quite simple demand .
They are asking for no more and no less than the same conditions for production at home , that is within the European Union , as for imports .
I listened with interest as Mrs Vassiliou spent more than ten minutes explaining to us that essentially , this is not possible .
She could have answered more concisely .
She could simply have said : ' Yes , Parliament is right and I will put that in place and take it into account in future ' .
What my group and now Parliament are asking for has nothing to do with trade restrictions .
On the contrary , it is a crucial requirement for fair world trade and for the mutual exchange of goods .
We want fair rules in the market economy within the EU and abroad , no more and no less .
We will be calling for this now and in future from the Commission .
You can be sure of that .
Madam President , the debate prior to this was about hunger .
These two debates are linked .
The Commissioner is right to do what she can to ensure consumer protection in Europe , and colleagues in this Chamber are right to hold her to account and to hold the highest standards .
But beef is a cash crop .
It is produced as cheaply as countries can produce it .
Tragically , to produce one kilogram of beef takes 100 times more water than to produce one kilogram of soya .
If we are concerned about consumer protection worldwide , we will do two things .
First , we will help third countries more to develop the kinds of systems of traceability that they need , and second , we will follow the advice of my colleague Chris Davies in the last debate in encouraging all of our citizens to stop eating meat .
( DE ) Madam President , our citizens have high expectations regarding the safety and quality of their food .
This concerns not only animal health and food safety , but also environmental standards , production and animal welfare .
The traceability and accompanying transparency of foodstuffs from the producer to the consumer is only guaranteed in Europe .
It is in all our interests to ensure that our consumers are protected , that European agricultural products are competitive and , therefore , that the agricultural industry itself is competitive .
For this reason , I feel that it is essential and that it is one of our responsibilities as Members of the European Parliament to speed up this debate and to ensure that the related political framework is in place .

( RO ) Madam President , Commissioner , as you are very well aware , Romania is not entitled to sell pork and pork products on the European market , in return for which we have been given the right , from next year , to import pork from other Member States and export it afterwards in processed form .
In addition , we will also have to implement , within a maximum of one year , clear , stringent and costly slaughter rules .
I am convinced that Romanian pig farmers would be extremely happy if these rules were replaced by a system of superficial and selective controls or by a few posters stuck up at airports .
I am obviously joking , but the rules , if rules are to be applied , must be the same and mandatory for everyone .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your statement , which I believe reflects the remarkable work you have done during your mandate .
Europe has chosen a food model to protect its population .
Our fellow citizens are ready to pay EUR 100 per year per capita if we guarantee the quality of their food .
The other day in committee , we learnt of the Food and Veterinary Office 's report .
I must tell you that , as a new MEP , I was deeply concerned to see the discomfort of your staff , who obviously could not answer or did not want to answer our questions .
Commissioner , should we be ashamed of having strict rules to protect our consumers ?
Should we be ashamed of imposing these rules on those who want to feed our consumers ?
Are we ashamed when , in order to sell aircraft or cars , these same countries force us to establish this or that factory or impose this or that condition on us ?
Our market access conditions are important conditions because they affect food and they affect the health of our residents .
We have nothing to be ashamed of .
( PL ) Madam President , we want to export , but we also have to import .
Trade accelerates development , it brings benefits to the parties to the exchange , but certain necessary requirements are imposed here , related to quality and meeting suitable standards - this is obvious , and I am sure we are agreed on this .
Europe has a variety of forms of inspection and audit in order to protect its market from an influx of food which does not meet European standards , or which would be a threat to our health security .
From what the Commissioner has said , we cannot expect the same audit procedures as we apply to our own producers - have I understood that correctly ?
What does it mean , as you clearly indicated , that only the effect of these measures should be the same ?
By way of comparison I would like to ask if , for example , Russia or another country can impose requirements on the import of goods from the EU which we cannot impose , for example , on meat imported from Brazil ?
Are only the effects important here , as in the case of imports from Brazil ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , may I remind the honourable Members that what I said was not that we cannot impose rules on third countries .
I am sorry that , even after a presentation of 10 to 15 minutes , I failed to explain the rules we impose when we import from third countries .
I must remind you that at the same time as we are importers of meat from third countries - and at this point we import from Brazil only 5 % of our requirements for beef in the European Union - we are also big exporters to third countries : to Russia and elsewhere .
At this point , our exports to Russia amount to EUR 1 billion per year - mostly from Ireland .
We are trying to convince Russia that we cannot accept the same rules as applied in Russia .
There are rules of international trade , and we apply equivalent , but not identical , rules provided that we are satisfied that they are strict enough to protect our consumers .
This is what we are doing .
The reason why we applied the safety rules in the case of Brazil is precisely because our FVO missions have shown us that something was going wrong .
We applied very strict rules .
I gave you the figures .
Regarding the last mission to Brazil , there were indeed problems , but I challenge you to look at all the reports of our FVO missions to any of the Member States and make a comparison .
You will also see very serious deficiencies in the Member States , which we ask Member States and their authorities to put right .
That is also what we have asked Brazil to do .
Problems were identified in Brazil .
In one state , where three holdings showed significant deficiencies , the Brazilian authorities took corrective action to de-list all the holdings concerned and to retrain the auditors responsible for their audits .
Problems were also identified at three other holdings , mainly in relation to delays of notification of animal movements or to the consistency of the data in the database .
These problems were recognised to be minor problems by the FVO Team .
Nevertheless , the Brazilian authorities made an undertaking to review the database to avoid incorrect data .
The FVO missions have this in mind when they go .
They know that they will find defects .
Our obligation is to correct the deficiencies that we find - whether this is in Member States or in third countries - because our obligation is to our consumers .
I want to assure you that we shall continue sending missions to Brazil and to other third countries to make sure that when deficiencies are discovered , they are put right .
I must also assure you that we are playing a very fair game for our farmers and producers vis-à-vis third countries .
There was a remark about Romania , which in the same way as Bulgaria and - in the past - many other Member States , had a problem with classical swine fever .
We have heard a lot about Romania and Bulgaria .
I must challenge you to ask your respective governments what assistance we have offered in order to get rid of this problem .
I am sure that Romania will be able to export meat in the very near future precisely because of the assistance we have offered it and Bulgaria to get rid of classical swine fever .
In ending I want to assure you that our first responsibility is to our European consumers and that we want a just and fair deal for everybody .
You can also be assured that our FVO missions to third countries will be very strict .
We shall remain vigilant and if something goes wrong , we shall try to put it right .
We shall remain vigilant and strict .
Whether more farms are put on the list or not depends entirely on the Brazilian authorities , and on whether they are prepared to spend the money that they have to spend in order to have their farms approved in accordance with our standards and to be able to export .
If they do not , then they will not .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Union 's food safety regulations are the most stringent and high-level in the world .
However , compliance with these regulations incurs significant additional costs for Europe 's farmers .
European products cannot be put at a disadvantage to products originating from third countries simply because the latter have been produced according to a lower level of food industry regulations .
The health of European consumers must not be endangered by products which are not of the appropriate quality and are unsafe .
Meat products can carry a particularly wide range of health risks if they are not produced in the appropriate conditions .
This is why the European Commission and Member States must ensure that identical conditions apply to meat products produced within the EU and originating from third countries .
Ladies and gentlemen , recently , the European Commission has noted a significant rise in beef imports from third countries , in particular , from Argentina , Brazil and Uruguay .
To import any product to the EU , including beef , high Community standards must be met , standards which have recently been made more rigorous by the European Commission .
Very often , however , products coming from third countries do not meet these food safety standards .
Despite this , their significantly lower price makes them competitive in the marketplace .
This is also why a key question at the moment is the support of our farmers , and promotion of European products , which meet high standards and are healthy and safe .
The subject we are discussing has another aspect .
We should draw conclusions from the critical situation in the dairy market .
Perhaps today , when , in many EU Member States , we cannot cope with the overproduction of milk , it would be worth thinking about how to reorganise beef production . Thank you for your attention .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Documents received : see Minutes
Presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report - 2008 ( debate )
The next item is the presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report .
President of the Court of Auditors . - Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to have the opportunity to take part in your debate today about the Annual Report of the European Court of Auditors on the implementation of the budget for the 2008 financial year , which I have already presented to you , Mr President , and to the Committee on Budgetary Control on 10 November .
We have four key messages in this year 's annual report .
First , the Court gives an unqualified opinion on the accounts for the second year running .
It concludes that the accounts present fairly , in all material respects , the financial position , results and cash-flows of the European Union at the year 's end .
In other words , the final accounts for 2008 present a true and fair view , although due attention should be paid to addressing weaknesses in the systems of a number of directorates-general of the Commission .
As regards the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions , the second key message is that there has been an overall decrease in the level of irregularity in recent years . But the level of irregularity remains too high in some areas .
As in previous years , for 2008 , the Court gives an unqualified opinion on Revenue and on commitments .
The picture for payments , however , continues to be mixed .
For Administrative and other expenditure , the Court gives an unqualified opinion as in previous years .
The Court also gives an unqualified opinion on education and citizenship , estimating that the error rate has fallen below 2 % .
This result is mainly due to a high proportion of advance payments in 2008 , which have a lower risk of error than interim and final payments .
Systems in this area continue , however , to be assessed as only partially effective .
For Agriculture and natural resources , the Court concludes that , except for rural development , payments were , in all material respects , legal and regular .
This is the first time the Court gives a qualified opinion and not an adverse one .
The overall error rate for this policy group is under 2 % , a decrease with respect to previous years .
Deficiencies in supervisory and control systems related to rural development contributed significantly to the Court 's overall assessment of systems as only partially effective .
The Court also gives a qualified opinion to the policy group Economic and financial affairs due to errors found in transactions relating to the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development .
For the policy groups Cohesion , Research , energy and transport and External aid , development and enlargement , the Court continues to give adverse opinions concluding that they are affected by material error , although to different levels .
Cohesion remains the area most affected by error .
The Court estimates that at least 11 % of the total of EUR 24.8 billion reimbursed during 2008 in respect of the 2000-2006 programming period should not have been reimbursed .
The Commission has claimed that the correction and recovery mechanisms mitigate the effects of the errors .
However , the Court considers that Member States do not provide sufficiently complete and reliable information on financial corrections to support this claim .
And the Court found cases of Member States replacing ineligible expenditure rejected by the Commission with new expenditure which was also ineligible .
As regards the 2007-2013 programming period , almost all payments are pre-financing , for which there are relatively few conditions .
It is therefore too early to say whether changes to rules or systems have reduced the level of errors .
However , delays in approving Member States ' systems descriptions , compliance assessments and audit strategies have slowed budgetary implementation and may increase the risk that control systems do not prevent or detect errors in the start-up phase .
Although there continues to be a material level of error in Research , energy and transport , remedial measures taken by the Commission have helped to reduce it .
Nevertheless , legal requirements remain complex and control systems continue to be only partially effective .
Payments for External aid , development and enlargement also continue to be materially affected by errors , with weaknesses in systems for external aid and development assistance mainly at the level of the implementing bodies and delegations .
Overall , error rates appear to be decreasing but legal frameworks continue to be complex and problems remain in some control systems .
Reducing the level of irregular payments further will therefore require the continuing improvement of supervisory and control systems and , where appropriate , the simplification of rules and regulations .
The third key message of the Annual Report is that the Court 's recommendations from previous years on improving supervisory and control systems continue to be valid because the relevant measures are part of an ongoing process where it will take time before they can be deemed to be effective .
The priority remains to address the specific weaknesses the Court has found in the areas where the most problems have been detected , many of which I have just outlined .
Particular attention should also continue to be paid to improving the financial correction and recovery mechanisms in anticipation of the closure of the 2000-2006 programming period .
In addition , the Commission should continue to monitor the effectiveness of systems and identify where more could be achieved from existing expenditure controls , or where it would be appropriate to consider revising the programmes or schemes involved .
In the context of such revisions , the legislative authorities and the Commission should consider trying to set a level of residual risk of irregularity to be achieved by the system , that is , the tolerable risk of error , rather than specifying the number of checks to be undertaken , as is the case now .
But there is a limit to the reduction of the level of irregularity that can be achieved by improving the effectiveness of supervisory and control systems .
This brings me to the fourth and last key message of this Annual Report .
Simplification remains a priority if further significant and sustainable reductions in the level of irregular payments are to be achieved .
The areas where the Court finds too high levels of errors are those where there are complicated and unclear legal requirements , such as eligibility rules .
An example of where serious efforts have already been made to simplify the expenditure schemes is agriculture , the main area of improvement found by the Court .
The Court also maintains the view that well-designed rules and regulations which are clear to interpret and simple to apply not only decrease the risk of error but can also reduce the costs of controls .
However , simplification needs to be applied with caution in order to find the right balance between simplification and establishment of policy objectives , avoiding unintended side-effects such as less focused expenditure .
In addition , as the Court has also emphasised , simplification should be applied alongside the principles of clarity of objectives , realism , transparency and accountability when revising or reforming the arrangements for European Union spending .
The intended proposals for a revision of the financial regulation , a new financial framework and a reformed budget will provide opportunities for doing so during the mandate of the new Commission .
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty will also bring changes to the management of European Union funds and the scrutiny of their use , strengthening the role of this Parliament .
These changes will have important implications for the Court 's work and should serve to reinforce accountability and transparency , thereby contributing to building the confidence and trust of the citizens in the European Union institutions .
Mr President , honourable Members , this is an important moment of renewal for the European Union , and the intended reforms provide a great opportunity for further improving the financial management of the European Union .
At times of renewal and reform , it is also important , however , to remember the lessons of the past .
I believe the Court plays a vital role in such circumstances by providing reports and opinions that not only identify existing problems but also make recommendations for the future .
The Court therefore looks forward to continuing to work together with its partner institutions to make the most of the current opportunities for further improving the European Union 's financial management .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Court 's annual report for 2008 .
I have already had the opportunity to thank the Court for the very good cooperation enjoyed again this year .
We have had a very fruitful dialogue and the report is very constructive .
As you have just heard President Caldeira state , the level of irregularity has decreased overall in recent years .
Things really started to improve five years ago , and , since 2004 , the ' red area ' , where the Court finds the most errors and for which it gives a ' red card ' , has been reduced by half .
For 2008 , the report shows a completely clean opinion on the accounts for the second year in a row , as a result of the major achievement of the thorough reform and transition to accrual accounting .
Secondly , for the first time , agriculture , taken as a whole , has now become ' clean and green ' .
This can certainly be attributed to the substantial simplification efforts of recent years .
Thirdly , the policy group entitled ' education and citizenship ' has also become green .
For research in general , things are improving and the Court points out that irregularities are essentially linked to the Sixth Framework Programme , which allows hope that the improved and simplified Seventh Framework Programme rules will bring a better result .
Again , as last year , the Court has found no red light for the management and control systems .
Moreover , all annual activity reports by Commission services are deemed by the Court to give reasonable assurance , with or without qualifications , that internal control systems ensure the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions .
This said , the report also clearly charts the work that still needs to be done .
The ' red area ' is now about 30 % , corresponding to cohesion spending , which is the one area where the Court has still not found significant progress in the level of irregularities .
This was perhaps to be expected , given that in 2008 , the Court did not audit payments made under the improved systems set up for the new 2007-2013 programming period .
In this regard , the Commission notes that the Court 's findings on cohesion largely coincide with our own general assessment .
For the structural funds , the Commission had reservations in 2008 because of deficiencies in the control systems for Belgium , Germany , Italy , Spain , Bulgaria , the United Kingdom , France , Poland and Luxembourg .
The Commission is not shy regarding transparency as to where the systemic problems lie .
The names of these Member States were published back in June in the Commission 's synthesis report .
The Court also reminds us of the essential role of complete and reliable information from all Member States on financial corrections .
We need this to prove that multiannual control systems work and to mitigate the effects of the errors detected .
The Court further recommends that the Commission should continue to strive to gain assurance from the annual summaries of all Member States , as well as from voluntary initiatives by certain Member States , in the form of national declarations , or by supreme audit institutions .
The Commission agrees that we obviously need to be able to count on quality inputs from Member States .
We see improvements , but we are also considering strengthening the legal base to accelerate the process .
Finally , the Court emphasises the importance of clear objectives , transparent and easy-to-understand rules , and effective supervision .
This reduces the risk of error and the costs of control .
However , it is not something that can be achieved from one day to the next and , of course , the upcoming reviews of the budget , the financial framework and the financial regulation present opportunities not to be missed .
What we need to do now is to improve assurances obtained from Member States for structural funds , striving for more simplification , which increasingly will require changes to the legislation governing the various programmes .
The revision of the Financial Regulation is currently under consultation , and the Commission will make proposals in spring 2010 .
We also need to define together an acceptable ratio between costs and risk - the so-called ' tolerable risk of error ' .
The European Parliament has , in the past , strongly supported the Commission 's efforts to achieve a positive statement of assurance .
Now that our efforts are becoming measurable , I hope I can count on its continuing backing to move forward .
The 2008 discharge procedure starts in the last days of this Commission and is expected to conclude in the early months of the next Commission .
Even though it concerns last year 's budget , let us make it a forward-looking procedure .
Mr President , President of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , today is a successful day for the Court of Auditors , but also for the Committee on Budgetary Control , for the Commission and , above all , for you Mr Kallas .
You have a highly successful track record and not all of your colleagues can say that about themselves .
In recent years , we have seen a clear improvement in budgetary and financial management and this improvement is due to the advice and consultancy provided by the Court of Auditors .
For this reason , I would like to thank the Court of Auditors very warmly and congratulate it on producing reports that are increasingly easy to understand .
The traffic light system is a good solution , because it sends out clear messages .
We have succeeded in raising the aspirations of everyone involved by the use of this system .
I would also like to thank the relevant offices of the Commission , because their work has been good and they have realised that something needs to be done in these areas .
However , 31 % of the budget is still coloured in red .
We will definitely be focusing on this in the years to come .
There are some areas which are in a better position according to the classification of the Court of Auditors , for example external aid .
However , we also know , of course , that external aid is only in a better position because it is not possible to control the budget aid and because the use of the funds , for example , via the United Nations , merits complaints by the relevant Director General , but not even a reserve in his annual report .
Our focus will be on the forthcoming 2008 discharge procedure for the structural funds and external aid .
There are more than 5 000 external aid positions in the delegations and more than 2 000 in the Directorate General for External Relations and in the development aid department in Brussels .
This is something which it would be good to discuss with the new Commissioner for External Relations .
In the case of the structural funds , we have made good progress by naming and shaming those involved , but we have definitely not reached the end of the road yet .
We must deal with the problems in this area at source .
You have mentioned some of our Member States and I believe that the Commission must significantly increase its efforts with regard to our two newest members , Romania and Bulgaria , otherwise we will have lasting problems there .
The Commission 's lack of strategy for these two countries is causing considerable concern .
They need more support , otherwise the EU , as a community based on the rule of law , runs the risk of ceasing to exist .
I would like to congratulate you and to tell you that you can rely on the solidarity and the highly constructive cooperation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) in the budget discharge procedure .
( Applause )

Mr President , allow me to begin in a very similar way to Mrs Gräßle , with an expression of great esteem for Mr Kallas and the Court of Auditors for their ongoing cooperation , which has meant that from year to year , when we look at the statistics , we see a clear improvement in management of the budget , reporting , annual reports and evaluations .
We also see the efforts which are made in these areas to ensure that our budgetary procedures are correct in every respect .
Secondly , we see the efforts which are made to reach agreement on areas which do require improvement , and we see that these areas are subsequently improved , starting with procedures and ending at management , monitoring , control and the form of the final report .
We are very concerned about those areas in which no significant improvement has been observed .
Mr Caldeira mentioned those areas in his speech .
May I return to two of them , which seem to be especially significant .
The first area is that of cohesion funds and funds related to regional policy .
From our point of view , something which is extremely important is that we receive answers to two questions .
Firstly , why is it that the programmes planned and declared by the Commission for the recovery of funds which have been spent improperly , or at least for explaining these situations , have not made any progress ?
Secondly , it was declared that the year 2008 would definitely be better . However , 2008 was just the same as 2007 , so those declarations have come to nothing .
We have a question which we will want to ask during the hearing of the Commissioners : were the measures envisaged properly envisaged , and were the declarations which were made correct and are they still valid ?
We welcome every kind of simplification , although not if this means accepting provisions which are primitive .
We welcome the formula of advance payment , because this makes it easier for the beneficiary countries to use the funds .
After all , the objective was quite simple - get the funds to the user , achieve the intended benefits , and achieve them on time .
However , it seems that , perhaps especially during the last two years , some of the funds have been used by beneficiary countries to improve the current result on the budgetary side , although not for implementation in accordance with the area envisaged for financial support .
Therefore , while we evaluate highly the direction in which we are moving , we do have certain reservations concerning some areas , which we will have great satisfaction in discussing during the hearing of the Commissioners .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome and thank the President of the Court of Auditors , with whom we have worked productively during this period .
As Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I have always maintained that the role played by the Court of Auditors is fundamental .
It is fundamental because the Court operates in a very sensitive sector , which people throughout the European Union watch with great interest and with a critical eye where the transparency , accuracy and legality of expenditure and of the management of public funds are concerned .
I believe that it must be reiterated today that the Court should always be guaranteed independence and autonomy when carrying out its work because this is fundamental if we are to be able to evaluate properly and to make good decisions .
Likewise , we ask the Court to put Parliament and the Committee on Budgetary Control in a position to carry out their own work as productively as possible .
We must find the right balance which allows public funds to be spent effectively and efficiently , because these funds are aimed at important objectives such as economic development and job creation .
At the same time , there must be severe punishments for serious irregularities and errors , which the Court has also uncovered in the last financial year , whilst an attempt must be made to avoid unnecessary formalities and red tape .
As Mr Kallas was also saying , Parliament must strive to find an equilibrium in the tolerable risk of error .
The report , which we have read with great interest , provides some insights , but also includes many grey areas .
We must strive to achieve the best results regarding these grey areas .
As my fellow Members have also mentioned , the main problems primarily concern the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
It is true that the Court , in doing its job , points out errors and irregularities in relation to these funds .
However , those who are able to look deeply into and to analyse matters can see that , behind the errors highlighted , there are even graver issues , as the judicial experiences of several countries in recent years demonstrate .
There may be fraud , there may be deception .
I am specifically referring to one or two errors revealed such as the contravention of rules on procurement , over-invoicing and so on .
We must endeavour to make improvements in this area .
I believe that the Commission should promote Member States which behave in a virtuous manner , and punish and penalise Member States which do comply with the rules .
Furthermore , I believe it is very important for OLAF to use the Court of Auditors ' suggestions as a starting point and to further improve its work because it is in everyone 's interest that it does so .
I think it is only through cooperation among various institutions , namely Parliament , the Court of Auditors and OLAF , that we will manage to safeguard the financial interests of all EU citizens .
There are certainly a great many positive things to say today .
For the second time in a row , we can speak of an unqualified opinion on the accounts .
The level of the irregularities is decreasing .
The traffic light system , whose lights all used to be on red , is gradually showing more and more amber , yellow and , in particular , green .
These are all positive aspects .
Another positive aspect is agriculture , which used to be a real source of concern .
For years on end , we have regarded IACS - the system ensuring common management of agricultural expenditure - as a good system .
We had seen Member States such as Greece failing to take part .
These are obviously all things that are moving in the right direction .
All the same , there are sources of concern .
These include cohesion , research and development , energy , transport , and the whole chapter on external aid , development and enlargement .
In my opinion , therefore , we must try to select a number of issues for attention from the discharge we are addressing today .
Cohesion will be one such issue .
I would remind the House of the notorious comment in paragraph 6.17 that up to 11 % of the expenditure in respect of the Structural Funds , European Regional Development Fund and European Social Fund should not actually have been disbursed .
In my opinion , we must ask the competent Commissioners many questions about this and look at the precise state of affairs .
Then there is external aid , development and enlargement ; the whole package of funds that we channel to the United Nations .
Once again , I read in the Annual Report of the Court of Auditors that - like other organisations - the Court has insufficient or even no access to the accounts of the United Nations , which means that large amounts of European funds channelled to this organisation cannot , in fact , be properly controlled .
A third issue to be addressed is the whole system of comanagement .
As the general rapporteur has pointed out , 80 % of all European funds are actually spent within the framework of comanagement , by the Member States and the Commission .
We must now , once again , exert pressure on the Member States ' finance ministers , in particular , to ensure that they shoulder their responsibility and issue a declaration stating that they have done their jobs properly , that their administration has spent funds correctly , and that this has been subject to controls .
I myself am responsible for own resources on the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The whole VAT dossier continues to cause me concern .
We have published various reports on the subject , including in the previous parliamentary term .
According to estimates , total VAT fraud Europe-wide amounts to EUR 80-100 billion .
The Court of Auditors has made a number of observations on this , too .
Therefore , I should like to devote particular attention to this matter in the discharge .
I should like to finish off by mentioning the discharge for the other institutions .
I myself am rapporteur for Parliament 's discharge .
In my opinion , the key issues in this regard should include public procurement procedures , where problems are apparent .
Finally , concerning the Council 's discharge , we granted that discharge earlier this week .
This Court of Auditors ' report , too , raises some very negative points about the Council .
In my opinion , we must continually exert pressure on the Council to grant access to its accounts such as to allow Parliament to properly control this kind of ... ( speaker moved away from the microphone ) too .
Mr President , today 's debate is one of the most important debates in the European Parliament , because our voters , tax payers and citizens of EU Member States are very interested in transparency in the operation of European institutions and , in particular , of the European Commission .
On the one hand , this is an argument for the eurosceptics , while on the other hand , we do know that in recent years , there have been many irregularities in this area .
I will remind you of the situation at the end of 1999 and the beginning of 2000 , when the Court of Auditors published devastating criticism of the European Commission , and it was , at the time , absolutely justified .
Today , we can see clear progress in this area , but I am drawing attention to the importance of this debate , because if we are looking for sources of greater authority for the European Union and EU institutions , then these principles of transparency are extremely significant .
If , last week , that authority was weakened by the way in which the most senior leaders of the European Union were elected , it is regained by debates just such as this one today .
I would like to stress that it would most certainly be good if Mr Caldeira could expand a little on something .
He spoke of six countries which return information in the wrong way , and mentioned two large countries , Poland and Great Britain .
We are surely justified in wanting to hear details of these improprieties .
I would like to stress that advance payments are a very positive development , but they do also have a certain disadvantage because , in fact , governments often use this money for electoral purposes .
Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my satisfaction that there appears to have been progress in respect of irregular payments from the EU budget .
This is a good thing , of course .
However , it has also been observed , at the same time , that there are enormous problems when it comes to cohesion - and cohesion is the second largest area of the budget , totalling EUR 36.6 billion in 2008 .
It is a massive problem for the ordinary taxpayers of the EU that at least 11 % of the total approved amount should not have been paid out .
This is a huge problem .
How are we supposed to explain that , year after year - and it really is year after year in this area - billions of kroner are paid out in contravention of the rules or perhaps even in a directly fraudulent way ?
In its recommendations , the Court of Auditors focuses on improving control mechanisms and simplifying the rules , and that is a good thing .
The question is , however , whether this waste on a massive scale really can be reduced just through monitoring and simplifying the rules , or whether what we are dealing with is fundamental structural failings .
Our group believes in solidarity .
We support the redistribution of money from the richest to the poorest regions and countries both inside and outside the EU , but , if you read the report , the question is whether the EU has found the right way of doing this .
Is it an effective way of working for every country to pay into a system that then grants subsidies to the remotest elements in the individual countries , including the fact that these are paid by the very richest ?
Everyone knows that the longer a line , the greater the risk of loss somewhere along the way .
There is therefore a need for us to have a fundamental debate about the whole issue of cash flows in the EU .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I am sorry to dissent , but as an experienced accountant , I do not share my colleagues ' optimism about the opinion of the auditors .
The Court of Auditors ' annual report on the 2008 accounts shows no significant improvement .
10 years after the resignation of the Santer Commission , and many promises of reform , the EU 's funds continue to be out of control .
The auditors state that the accounts are fair but fail to state that they are true , and indeed it is difficult to say they are true if they go on to express concern about the quality of the financial information .
The report reveals that , 10 years after the initiation of the administrative reform , the European Commission does not operate an integrated accounting system , and that directorates introduce transactions in their local systems , some of which have not even been blessed by the chief accountant of the European Commission .
Moreover , on the legality and regularity of the EU expenditure , the auditors only cleared 9 % of the expenses for the year 2008 , a percentage similar to the past .
They give an adverse opinion on 43 % of the budget , the part that relates to cohesion funds , research , energy and transport , external aid , development and enlargement .
For the remaining 48 % , they give a qualified opinion .
Such a report would call for the resignation of the board of auditors of any company and its subsequent liquidation , but here nobody is worried .
The auditors even identified an amount of EUR 1.5 billion that , in their own words , should not have been paid .
The first argument you will hear is that the auditors are not saying that it is fraud , but only errors .
They will say that fraud requires criminal intent , and we have to prove this , and then we need to call the police .
The second argument that you will hear is that the rules are too complex .
They have been saying this for years , but the rules have not changed , so should we then blame the European Commission for maintaining complex rules that encourage errors ?
The third argument is that it is the member countries which should be blamed for the errors .
Well , the treaties clearly specify that the European Commission is responsible for the management of the European Union funds , and in fact , it is the only body empowered to stop payments when it does not receive sufficient evidence that the funds are properly spent .
The fact is that these errors mean that taxpayers ' money has been abused .
But , to be honest , nobody cares about this .
It is just taxpayers ' money we are dealing with .
It is only the money of people who are now struggling to pay their mortgages and educate their children .
But all this is not enough .
On top of the EUR 116 billion payments for the year 2008 that have been audited by the Court of Auditors , another EUR 40 billion has gone out of the European Union coffers .
Thirty-five per cent of the budget is now hidden in a balance sheet account under the name of ' Prefinancing ' and for which the auditors cannot tell the European taxpayers if it has been properly spent .
These additional advance payments have been made precisely in the areas where the Court of Auditors found the biggest number of errors .
For how long is this Parliament going to allow taxpayers ' money to be abused ?
( NL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Dutch Party for Freedom , I should like to thank the President of the Court of Auditors for the institution 's 2008 Annual Report .
After all , this report has made us aware that approximately 11 % of the Cohesion Fund for 2008 should never have been spent .
This represents EUR 4 billion that has been swept under the carpet .
The Council , the Commission and - with a few exceptions - this Parliament too , for that matter , are anxious to remain silent .
My party considers this sordid .
I should like to hear what the Commission intends to do about this .
How will it make sure that those EUR 4 billion are returned ?
For example , is it prepared to ask the countries that should never have spent the money to pay it back ?
If not , why not ?
I should also like to hear from the European Court of Auditors whether , in the interests of the transparency of the Commission 's expenditure , the Court also examines all the declarations issued by Members of the European Commission .
If so , can the Court send those declarations to Parliament , and if not , why not ?
I should like to hear a response to this from the European Court of Auditors .
( PL ) Mr President , the debate on the vote of approval is more interesting each year , as Members of Parliament probe ever deeper into the details .
In this debate it is important , firstly , to ascertain the facts , secondly , to explain the causes of those facts , and , thirdly , to draw conclusions .
As far as the facts are concerned , then it is very interesting for us as Members of Parliament to note the methods employed by the Court of Auditors .
However , it is even more interesting that in the results section , the European Commission does not agree with the diagnosis made by the Court of Auditors .
During the debate , we would like to clarify the differences of opinion between the Commission and the Court of Auditors .
Secondly , it is very important to ascertain if we are dealing with mistakes , if we are dealing with improprieties , or if we are dealing with crimes .
Lumping everything together blurs the image , and confuses discussion on the subject as to whether we need to correct mistakes or call in the police .
As for explaining the causes , I would like to draw everyone 's attention to the fact that the document which we have before us shows that we have very serious improprieties in the public procurement system .
In relation to this , the problem is not only a question of financial movements , but is also one of explaining and simplifying matters related to public procurement .
The final matter concerns the conclusions .
There may be very different kinds of conclusions .
Firstly , conclusions concerning control methods , conclusions concerning responsibility , but also conclusions concerning future policy .
They are the easiest .
It is very easy to draw the conclusion that since the money is being spent incorrectly , and we still have doubts in this area , then the best thing to do is to reduce spending on that area of policy .
We should be very careful of such conclusions , because financial monitoring is one thing , monitoring of policy effectiveness is another , and a decision on future directions of EU activity is yet another .
( ES ) Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mr da Silva Caldeira in particular for presenting this report of the Court of Auditors , which has progressed from being an opportunity for scandal and calls to Europhobia to being a really constructive exercise , with clear motivational messages regarding the capacity for improvement of both the European institutions and the Member States , suggesting the instruments needed to make those improvements .
All of this has taken place without losing any of the growing rigour and professionalism of the Court of Auditors which , moreover , has been the first to apply to itself all the principles stated by Mr da Silva Caldeira .
It so happens that I have been a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control at a crucial time , and I thank you for the changes that you have made , because they are a great help to us .
I would , of course , also like to thank Mr Kallas , because he wisely listened to the European Parliament 's requirements expressed in the Committee on Budgetary Control , which was not an easy task .
The management control system is making progress , and we only hope that it will be extended and deepened .
I support the statement made not long ago that the best statement of assurance ever has been achieved , but although this is a success story for the three institutions present , the Court of Auditors , the Commission and Parliament , there is still a long way to go .
For example , we are still concerned about the obvious contradictions in the report , between the Court of Auditors and the Commission , in the important area of budgetary support and adaptation to national reform plans .
What is also very concerning this year is the control of the third pillar of the European Development Fund , joint management with organisations .
My colleagues from the United Nations , the African Union and other organisations have talked about this already .
It represents between 6 and 7 % of the EDF and , of course , efficient formulas need to be used or found in order to put an end to this intolerable lack of transparency .
As far as staffing is concerned , once again turnover is too high and there are too many temporary staff , which means that the sense of continuity that is so essential for this type of programme is being lost .
There is also a lack of systematisation of the controls that come from the delegations .
In addition , as the Court of Auditors says , there are significant errors and a high incidence of non-quantifiable errors , which should be improved .
We are , however , encouraged by the path that the Commission and the Court of Auditors have begun to take together in order to arrive at a definition of a tolerable margin of error , which we think is the right way to go .


( DE ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , Mr Caldeira , I can see both good things and bad things in the presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report on the EU budget .
First of all , I would like to thank the Court of Auditors for a clearer , bolder and more political report which is easier for us to understand .
The good areas include the management of the budget as a whole .
In contrast to recent years , this has improved .
This is , above all , the result of better management of funds in the area of agriculture and natural resources , which has been our biggest headache over the last few years .
For the first time , Mr Caldeira , you do not give an adverse opinion in your report and that is good news .
The report highlights the fact that wherever the EU itself controls and administers the funds , there is proper budget management .
Whether it is efficient is another matter .
I would like to congratulate Mr Kallas warmly in this respect .
It is to your credit and during your period of office that this visible improvement has taken place .
Congratulations !
However , it is now the responsibility of the Member States in particular to improve their control systems .
If there is continuing cause for criticism of budgetary management in the EU , this is not at an EU level - as we have now seen - but at the level of the Member States .
This is where the problems lie .
Cohesion policy , for example , which is implemented by the Member States and which receives around a third of the funds , is the major problem area .
You say that 11 % is irregular and the non-attached Member said that the figure was EUR 4 billion .
That is not correct .
It is over EUR 2.5 billion , which you specifically state is taxpayers ' money that should not have been spent .
We must say this quite clearly and we must introduce clear controls .
However , the consequence is that the European Commission must continue to exert pressure on the Member States and we will support you in this area , Mr Kallas .
We must implement a policy of naming and shaming .
We must publicly shame the wasteful Member States , which continue to exist , and describe the situation clearly .
Overall , you come to the conclusion that the regulations must be simplified .
We would like to support you in this and we would like to add one other request .
There must be an increased focus not only on regularity but also on efficiency , to ensure that taxpayers ' money is spent correctly .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to refer to Chapter 7 of the Court of Auditors ' report which concerns research , energy and transport .
First of all , I would like to express my considerable gratitude to the Court of Auditors for its thorough work .
However , it is clear from this chapter that the Court of Auditors is not able to award good marks to this area in its annual report .
This is an area in which expenditure amounts to more than EUR 9 billion .
According to the assessment of the Court of Auditors , the error rate is between 2 and 5 % .
In other words , on the basis of this calculation , between EUR 180 and 450 million has been incorrectly spent .
The Court of Auditors ' conclusion is that this is ' partially effective ' and I see this in terms of marks at school as at best a C minus .
In my opinion , it is strange that the Commission does not feel it necessary to give its opinion on this .
To me , the Commission 's silence seems highly eloquent .
In its recommendation , the Court of Auditors says that the Commission should continue its work of simplifying the financial regulations .
I agree with this .
The committee responsible has had discussions along the same lines .
However , I do not agree that the Commission , in giving its opinion on the Court of Auditors ' recommendation , is turning this recommendation on its head .
The Court of Auditors says that the aim of simplifying the regulations must be combined with the aim of cost-effective control which will be sufficient to ensure that the money is spent correctly .
In contrast , the Commission says that it wants cost-effective control and suggests that there is a tolerable risk of error , which must be taken into account from the start .
This is not a reasonable way of dealing with taxpayers ' money .
The Commission should rethink what it has said and Parliament should support the Court of Auditors in its critical activities .
Mr President , I welcome the report of the Court of Auditors and welcome a clean set of accounts without an adverse report on these accounts for the EU for the first time , especially after so many years of falling foul of this important process and a mission that would have put any private company in breach of multiple EU directives .
However , I would like to concentrate on the area of continued significant weakness , namely the area of structural and cohesion funds .
While the Commission may consider it is an achievement that only 11 % of the largest part of the budget - cohesion spending - contained errors , I consider it a shocking fact that it has been determined that almost EUR 5 billion of a EUR 46 billion budget should never have been paid out , as described by the Court of Auditors .

I have to say that my region of Wales , already in receipt of structural funds from that EUR 46 billion pot , could happily have spent and accounted for the spending of that additional EUR 5 billion .
Wales has not had to return any funds for mis-spending , despite the UK as a whole not receiving a clean bill of health .
Errors seem to be at the level of implementing institutions , and therefore I ask that the European Parliament and Commission call for the individual Member States to provide a thorough audit for the funds received .
In Wales , the Welsh Assembly government , via the various institutions , administers EU structural and cohesion funds and , therefore , to conduct a formal audit could not be too onerous .
However , currently , projects which were funded some seven years ago by the EU are only now undergoing financial audit by the Court of Auditors .
I am not sure what this achieves .
We need an annual contemporary signing-off which can identify errors and ensure compliance to the highest standard .
When taxpayers ' money is at stake , as it is across the EU in the case of the regional budget , standards of accountability can never be too high .
( NL ) I should like to say a few things about the European Commission 's expenditure in the framework of external relations .
According to the Court of Auditors , more errors were made in this field in 2008 than in 2007 ; and these errors were found in all the areas of external policy .
I find it shocking that many errors are occurring in procurement with regard to projects .
The Commission keeps a watchful eye over procurement procedures in the Member States , and so I receive regular cries for help from our representatives in municipalities and provinces concerning complicated , obscure procedures .
The fear of doing things wrong in the eyes of the Commission is great .
Yet who is the Commission to monitor our local authorities if it makes errors itself time after time in procurement concerning its own projects ?
What is the Commissioner 's own opinion of this ?
The Commission likes to present itself as the 28th donor .
I wonder how effective this is , and I find it regrettable , in itself , that the otherwise very good report by the Court of Auditors does not include detailed information on effectiveness , and that this subject is raised merely incidentally in separate reports .
Could information on the effectiveness of policy be included in future ?
To give an example , I read in the report that , with regard to budget support , there are insufficient controls on compliance with payment conditions .
In other words , the Commission has been handing countries a bag of money without applying sufficient controls .
What conditions does the Commission actually impose , however ?
Also , to what extent is it gauging whether budget support is actually helping countries ' development ?
I cannot find anything about this in the report , indeed , nor can there be anything there in view of the approach taken .
On a more general note , when I read how carelessly the Commission spends the funds allocated to it , I really wonder whether we would perhaps do better to leave development expenditure in the hands of the Member States themselves .
It is clear that the Commission has taken little notice of the recommendations of the Court of Auditors , and so I wish to ask the President of the Court whether it is not dispiriting to find , year after year , that the Commission has failed to put its house in order in this regard .
( NL ) In respect of the 2008 financial year , the European Court of Auditors has found many errors concerning the Structural Funds , regional development and the research programme .
This is due to the rules on grants being too many in number and too complicated .
The European Court of Auditors rightly underlines the importance of simplifying the rules .
In October , authorities from four Member States submitted to the President of the European Commission an opinion on reducing the pressure of EU rules .
They recommended the establishment of an external , independent commission to reduce the pressure of rules at EU level .
This represents a step in the right direction in the context of the better lawmaking strategy .
Where does the European Commission stand on this ?
Endeavours to improve financial management must not be limited to the simplification of rules , however .
Enhanced supervision and control are also needed .
The European Commission and the Member States must draw up an action plan to this end .
National management declarations to begin with , then , which must subsequently lead to a positive statement of assurance by Europe .
Does the European Court of Auditors consider such an action plan to be a useful instrument for improving financial management ?
In my opinion , such an action plan would help give financial management the political priority it so badly needs .
After all , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim is to ensure that EU expenditure ends up in the right place at the right time .
( NL ) The latest Annual Report of the European Court of Auditors again gives perplexing insights into the way the European Union handles European taxpayers ' money .
The Court of Auditors has ascertained on the basis of realistic samples that , in the 2000-2006 period , an estimated 11 % of the total amount of EUR 36.6 billion under the Cohesion Fund should not have been disbursed .
This means that more than EUR 4 billion in grants has been handed out erroneously .
Looking at the situation in Belgium , the Court of Auditors , too , says that a large proportion of the funds spent in Wallonia - Hainaut , in particular - was misspent .
This actually confirms what one of our fellow Members said in this House a few months before the latest European Parliament elections , which was that the European grants had not produced the desired results in Wallonia , particularly in comparison with other European regions , and that it was not only Wallonia itself but also the European Union that was responsible for ultimately approving these projects .
At present , most financial transfers are very indirect , passing through many intermediate stations .
Tackling this must be a priority and , at the same time , of course , the existing control mechanisms need to be improved .
( FR ) Mr President , President of the Court of Auditors , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , thank you President Caldeira for this very high-quality report , thank you Mr Kallas for all the work you have done , and congratulations on your new appointment within our European Commission .
We welcome this .
Regarding the annual accounts , as it did last year , the Court has issued an unreserved positive statement of assurance .
I would like to congratulate the accounting officer , Mr Taverne , and his predecessor , Brian Gray , while reiterating my incomprehension regarding the negative equity of EUR 47 billion , which is essentially due to the fact that we are not accounting for the claims that we have on Member States based on the commitments that they have made for staff pensions .
I would like to remind you that the total amounts to EUR 38 billion as at 31 December 2008 , which is an increase of EUR 4 billion per year .


Regarding the underlying transactions , President Caldeira , please could you make it clear to Parliament whether the Court is issuing a positive or negative statement of assurance ?
The Court 's opinion is divided into five paragraphs , which list opinions by political group , and I am having difficulty distinguishing this from the statement of assurance , provided for in Article 248 of the treaty , which also states that the Court may make specific assessments for each major area of Community activity .
Regarding the content , aside from cohesion spending , the observations are positive .
With regard to cohesion spending , there are too many errors .
I would also like to ask you whether you think that the number of surveys - for example , 49 for the Social Fund , which represents thousands of transactions - is sufficient for you to establish your opinion .
The main problem , however , still lies in the area of shared management with Member States and in the fact that too many errors are due to the complex way in which our European finances operate .
I would like to finish by talking about shared management and the audit chain , and to reiterate my proposal to include the national courts of auditors more in the process since , according to the Council 's Decision , we will never have national statements from the governments .
Article 287 ( 3 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon gives you this power to approach the national courts of auditors , President Caldeira .
I would like to reiterate this proposal .



( DE ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , Mr Caldeira , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank you , Mr Caldeira , for your introduction and I would like to thank you and the members of the Court of Auditors for your report .
Parliament will investigate carefully the information you have provided and will act on it in the coming months .
I was pleased that the previously unacceptable error rate of the common agricultural policy has fallen .
However , after reading the Court of Auditors ' report , I have the impression that one Member State , namely Romania , is responsible for the majority of the remaining irregularities .
It seems that we must put more emphasis in future on training staff and implementing control systems correctly in the new Member States , if possible , before their accession .
The European Structural Funds , which many of my fellow Members have already mentioned , represent another cause for concern .
It is true that the number of irregular payments has fallen when compared with the previous year , but there are still huge problems in ensuring that aid funding is handled without irregularities occurring .
I would like to say to the Eurosceptic parts of this House that we are talking about 11 % of the total payments and not 11 % of the budget .
This amounts to EUR 2.7 billion and not EUR 5 billion .

I admit that this is still EUR 2.7 billion too much , but we must be accurate for the sake of honesty .
These irregularities relate mainly to excessive payments and the incorrect use of funds .
For example , if European Social Fund ( ESF ) money is used to pay the salary of a public administrator or if European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) money is used to buy a building plot , then the people concerned obviously do not have sufficient information about the correct use of aid funding or the Member States do not have the will or the ability to administer the funding correctly , or perhaps all of the above .
When we revise the application procedure , we must put in place clear , transparent rules which are easier to understand .
The Member States must ensure that the applications are monitored more carefully at a national level .
It is clear that any waste or any irregularities in relation to European taxpayers ' money is too much .
However , anybody who takes an impartial look at the EU and at this report from the European Court of Auditors will find little cause for offence .
It offers a number of starting points for our work , which consists of making Europe better and more efficient every day .
On this basis we will implement the discharge procedure for the European Commission .
( NL ) I should like to thank the Court of Auditors for its crystal-clear Annual Report , and I wish to express my particular thanks to Commissioner Kallas for the effort he has put in over recent years .
In my opinion , he can rightly claim to have made a great deal of progress during that time .
I should like to highlight three aspects of this Annual Report .
The first is the fact that the biggest problems still lie with the Member States .
Many of my fellow Members have already given the example of regional policy , which I can only underline .
Therefore , I should like to put the following question to the Commission with regard to the national declarations that exist in some Member States : could you perhaps come forward with a specific proposal to make these compulsory for all the Member States of the European Union ?
The second aspect I wish to emphasise is the volume and complexity of the European rules : another issue that has already been raised by many fellow Members .
Can we perhaps start a fundamental debate on the way we wish to spend our funds and the rules underpinning this ?
In my view , at present , this is based too much on suspicion and too little on trust and , when all is said and done , that just breeds more irregularities .
The final aspect is agriculture .
It is excellent , of course , that the whole agricultural sector has received a green light for the first time , but we should not pat ourselves too hard on the back .
Rural development is where the major problem lies , and let that now be the very policy area within agriculture where we see major expansion in coming years .
Also , the important thing is not only lawfulness but also efficiency as , with regard to the agricultural funds , we are still greatly underperforming in the achievement of our environmental and nature objectives .
Mr President , European finances do cause great concern to my constituents and to people in Britain .
The UK is , after all , the second-largest net contributor to the European budget , so other Member States might benefit from remembering , when they are debating this money , that a large part of it comes from British taxpayers ' pockets .
If there is one single issue that drives a wedge between British people and Brussels , it is a perception that their money may be treated frivolously within the EU .
The same is true in other countries as well .
This is not just a debate about a set of accounts , but a fundamental breakdown in trust between the institutions represented here and the people we represent back at home .
We must take note of this auditors ' opinion .
Yes , it is better than previous years , but just as a businessman thinks twice before doing trade with a company that has in any way a qualified opinion , so our residents will think twice about their relationship with the EU so long as qualifications remain .
We cannot pretend it is the auditors ' fault .
Auditors do not spend money : bureaucracies and governments do , both here and in our home countries .
We must clean up their acts .
However , even a clean audit opinion in itself is not enough .
Ever since I was 18 years old , I have received a monthly statement from my bank .
The numbers add up .
The audit opinion would be clean .
But I know I have not always spent my money wisely .
If we are to deserve even a shred of respect from our taxpayers back at home , then in this dire economic time , we must treat their money with respect .
My message to politicians both in our home countries across the EU and in this unnecessary , expensive second chamber in Strasbourg is that we must stop wasting taxpayers ' money .
( DE ) We need a revolution in democracy !
Mr President , Commissioner , welcome to the new world of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This represents an opportunity for you .
For 11 years , I have been following your reports in this House , and before that as a journalist , and when it comes down to it , they are all very similar .
However , now you have the opportunity to look to the future .
Make use of the professional competence of this House - we are not gathered here today just by chance in this Chamber ; I can see Mr Søndergaard and Mr Chatzimarkakis , Mr Staes and on our side , my fellow-combatant Mr Ehrenhauser - and restructure the work of the Court of Auditors .


Take a look at what works elsewhere , for example in Germany , where it is possible to evaluate the cost-effectiveness and meaningfulness of expenditure , and in Austria , and develop a concept , perhaps as part of an initiative report from Parliament , which describes how the things that you do can be done much better , so that you can genuinely fulfil your obligations .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , we MEPs owe it to every tax-paying European citizen to monitor with the appropriate attention the proper , justified and legal use of their taxes in the European Union .
We owe this to every tax-paying European citizen , regardless of their nationality .
Fellow Members , I believe that the European Court of Auditors carried out a thorough , professional job when they drafted their 2008 report .
I would therefore like to thank President Caldeira and every member of the Court of Auditors .
I also think that suitable technical cooperation has developed between the European Court of Auditors and the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control , thereby guaranteeing that Parliament can perform its monitoring task in an appropriate manner .
Credit is also given to Commissioner Kallas for the definite improvement which can be noted over the last few years in terms of the European Commission 's financial management activities .
At the same time , I agree with my fellow Members who say that the Court of Auditors ' report contains not only positive points , but also downright appalling and alarming ones .
Those items which we must definitely mention include the fact that the Court of Auditors had to declare that the error rate for the use of cohesion funds was 11 % .
In my view , in order to rectify the errors , we must establish without fail exactly who was responsible for what omissions , when and where , so that we can guarantee that we rectify these errors for the next time .
Mr President , when I meet my voters I often describe this institution as a computer , where the Member States provide the hardware , the Commission provides the software , Parliament is probably the keyboard where you can interact , and in that sense , the control by the Court of Auditors is certainly the control panel of the computer .
We never purchase a computer on the basis of looking at the control panel , but none of our computers works for a long time without a proper control panel system inside .
I would like to congratulate the Court of Auditors on being an appropriate control panel for this institution and improving , with every year , its own work , but also reminding us to do our own homework on improvement .
What I learn from the Court of Auditors ' reports after being here for six years is that we often make mistakes and that we should try to remind colleagues back in the Member States what they have to do .
But for me , the most important message is that , when the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , we need to reduce the complexity , to provide better conditions for our expenditure at local level and to get the money in time to those who are applying for it , whether they are small- and medium-sized enterprises , researchers or farmers , back in our countries .
The message for us is that we have to improve skills at local level .
We have to further reduce the complexity at European level .
We have to go for better cooperation among Member States ' auditing systems and we have to work together in the future .
Thank you for the last five years of cooperation .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Court of Auditors for an excellent piece of work and also Mr Kallas - it is good that you are continuing .
Hearing the British Members express their criticism is all well and good , but from what I have seen in the newspapers , a lot of British politicians have been less than honest with their money .
This does not , of course , mean that we cannot improve , but it remains to be seen whether the situation in the Member States really is so much better than that in the EU .
In the areas where the EU is directly responsible for the budget , the errors are small .
The shortcomings are with the Member States .
EUR 2.7 billion is , of course , a very large amount .
It is an unreasonably large amount and it is totally unacceptable .
It is a large portion of the EU 's budget and the Member States have a clear responsibility in this regard .
As several of my fellow Members have already said , I think that the Commission ought to ensure that those countries that are refusing to release their financial accounts and submit an auditor 's report do in fact do so .
As Commissioner or the Commission - you do not , of course , know what responsibility you will have in future - you should ensure that these countries do , in fact , improve so that the information is gathered and the supervision can be monitored .
Europe 's taxpayers require this .
There is also a need for a better and more efficient monitoring system through which it is possible to highlight examples of good practice .
Mr Søndergaard suggested something at the end of his speech which may nevertheless be the way forward , namely to come up with a completely new budgetary system that gives the Member States better control of the cash flows .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , you may be familiar with the film Groundhog Day , about a man who wakes up to the very same day over and over again ?
Although I am in only my third year as an MEP , I already feel like the protagonist of that film .
Every year , the Court of Auditors comes here to tell us that , unfortunately , it is unable to give us a statement of assurance and , every year , the European Commission does its level best to emphasise every ray of hope .
Admittedly , there has been progress - for example in the field of agriculture - but the underlying problems remain .
Of course , you could increase the permitted error rate , as the European Commission is proposing , but that smacks of moving the goalposts .
If players fail to score , their coach does not go and widen the goal , but instead sees to it that they play better .
This requires teamwork .
Indeed , a positive statement can be obtained only through teamwork - between the European and national auditors - and by means of the national management declarations , as has already been said .
Unfortunately , the fact is that some countries are still rather freer with European money than with their own , national , funds ; it is easier to go shopping with someone else 's credit card than with your own .
Yet you will be confronted with the bill , Commissioner .
If you and your successor do not manage to get the control activities right , it will be bad not only for budgetary control in the European Union and for you , the European Commission , but also for the legitimacy of us all and of our work .
Therefore , you can be sure , Commissioner , that Parliament will be watching you and your successor very closely in this regard .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Caldeira , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking Mr Caldeira and his team .

His report will be very useful to us in our deliberations which lead up to the granting of a discharge .
I have a sense of déjà vu , because as far as I can tell , the Council is once again conspicuous by its absence , just as it was last year .
I am being so critical because the Council , as one of our major community institutions , cannot and should not stand outside this debate .
We rightly expect all the Member States to provide control and transparency , but we also expect this from our own institutions and the Council is jointly responsible for what happens or does not happen in the Member States .
Of course , the irregularities in the budgets do not affect the Council 's budget as severely as they do the agricultural sector , but nevertheless , we will also have questions about public procurement , late payments or overdue payments and repeated overestimating .
We will be discussing this with the Council in the next few weeks .
It is true that errors are not the same as fraud and that the recovery of payments is a useful tool .
Another good tool is the process of naming and shaming in the area of agricultural policy which has proved its worth in Bavaria and in the rest of Germany .
I believe that we should continue to use this method because it has become clear that the Member States and the companies involved react to it .
We expect the Swedish Presidency to be ready to discuss this over the next few days and also ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( FI ) Mr President , Mr Caldeira , Commissioner , I wish to thank the European Court of Auditors for its admirable work for the benefit of the European taxpayer .
The EU accounts allow a 2 % margin of error .
I would say that it is salaries and other administrative costs in particular that need to be dealt with more accurately .
We cannot allow any uncertainties when it comes to these .
There are , however , other cost groups where it would seem to be difficult , or even impossible , to achieve a 2 % margin of error .
According to the Court of Auditors , as much as 11 % of the total sums spent on cohesion policy are sums that should not have been spent at all .
The situation was also the same in the two previous years .
As the situation is such that the 2 % threshold cannot be reached , I would like to ask whether the Commission or the Court of Auditors has thought about whether the 2 % figure should be reviewed , so that year after year , we do not have to say that there is no way we will achieve the threshold this year and we will not do so next year either .
In future , we will have to be more careful and function more cost-effectively than we do now , and the application procedure will have to be simplified .
( PL ) Mr President , an analysis of the Court of Auditors ' annual report on budget execution for 2008 leads us to the conclusion that the situation is better than in previous years .
Especially pleasing is the fact that it has been possible to extend significantly correct management of the budget .
We have observed an exceptionally clear improvement in the case of expenditure on agriculture and rural development , which account for over 40 % of the EU budget .
This is a crucial change in comparison with earlier reports .
It is a result of reform and simplification of the CAP .
We now pay out funds based on simple technical requirements .
On the other hand , the Auditors show up some areas of dispute , because they found that among the applications for funds made by Member States in the area of cohesion policy , 11 % contained mistakes .
I stress that I am talking about applications .
It might seem to many people that this unfavourable data is the result of carelessness on the part of the Commission or Member States .
There may certainly be a little truth in this , but I think the problem lies elsewhere .
The main reason for this large number of financial shortcomings in the area of cohesion and regional development policy is the existence of over-complicated and complex legal regulations which , indeed , the Auditors admit in their report .
I encourage the Court of Auditors further to intensify cooperation with their counterparts in Member States .
Finally , I would like to say that we must devote more attention to the problem of education and to giving better information to beneficiaries of EU and institutional policies which implement and manage specific programmes .
In conclusion , in my opinion , the Commission should make every effort , most of all , to simplify financial regulations while retaining basic monitoring mechanisms which prevent abuse .
However , very often the beneficiaries of particular European funds struggle with a forest of regulations which are not completely clear , and which , in practical terms , make it impossible to produce accounts which would fully satisfy the Auditors .
This should be changed , and I stress : simplify and inform , but also monitor .
( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to congratulate the Court of Auditors on their excellent work , as well as the European Commission , and say that I am very pleased , because I can see that the overall situation has improved .
I should like to emphasise in particular that this is the first time that agricultural spending is no longer in the red .
Things are going better overall , but there are still problems with expenditure on cohesion policy , to which several of my honourable colleagues have already referred .
However , I am quite optimistic about the future .
We must also look at the good news .
The system for recovering EU funds is working : in 2008 , EUR 1.6 billion were recovered and more recoveries are under way , proof that the system is working properly .
The percentage of fraud uncovered is extremely low and has been identified in just a few isolated cases .
There are only problems in a few Member States , proof that the system as a whole is working well and that the objectives of cohesion policy are being achieved .
In the long term , the system of joint management needs to be reviewed and a greater share of the final responsibility transferred to the Member States , thereby helping to simplify the rules .
The Treaty of Lisbon makes provision for this in Article 310 , on the basis of which cooperation is allowed in implementing the budget between the European Union and the Member States , contrary to the exclusive responsibility of the Commission hitherto .
Finally , I should like to point out that the Court of Auditors ' message on the need to simplify the rules has reached the Council and the Commission and I honestly hope that the changes ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) The 2008 report once again gives cause for penetrating analysis and action , including on the part of the European Parliament .
I thank you for this report .
This approach - this cooperation - has led to demonstrable improvements over recent years .
Nevertheless , as coordinator for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I wish to make a few comments on regional policy in particular .
Is it true that the 11 % error rate in regional policy is based on those three Member States , and how does that relate to your projections ?
Is it true that most of the shortcomings were found in the procurement procedures ?
Is it true that it was too soon for the report to reflect the improvements in the expenditure under the new , current , regulation 2007-2013 ?
As you know , many improvements have been made to this over the last year .
If that is the case , and in view of those changes - those improvements in the current legislation - we can continue to work in the vein of that upward trend of improvements in the period up to 2013 .
It is also important that these improvements in the transposition of European legislation be implemented much more emphatically in the procurement rules , that there be improvements in the powers to overcome obstacles and in enforcement , particularly in the Member States .
After all , there is strong friction here in the relationship between the European and national levels .
Therefore , we do have to name the countries concerned .
This 11 % figure will then be able to change from red , which is unacceptable , to yellow and finally to green .
That is why citizens have elected us , to obtain more results and greater clarity in this field .
I am also happy to take on board the suggestions for simplification contained in your report .
( DA ) Mr President , the Court of Auditors has my heartfelt thanks for a sound and very serviceable report .
Listening to the debate here today , I am put in mind of a Danish saying , where we talk about whether your glass is half full or half empty .
This , in other words , is a question of whether you are an optimist or a pessimist .
It seems to me that there are perhaps far too many people here today who have been far too optimistic .
The Commissioner , too , has been too optimistic .
Quite simply , I do not think this is good enough .
Had a Danish finance minister been responsible for this budget , where less than half of it can be accepted as error-free and where less than half of it - 47 % - is green , the minister in question would , in fact , have been out of a job .
I find it highly regrettable that there are still so many things that need to be done and I find it highly regrettable that things are moving as slowly as they are .
I realise that it is difficult and I realise that the rules can be very complicated .
I also realise that progress has been made , but it is not good enough .
Looking at the speed at which we have improved the green part of the budget , you can see that things are moving too slowly .
I call on the Commission to take its share of the responsibility .
You have the tools . You need to react more rapidly .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the focus until now has been on the cohesion fund and this is certainly justified because of the size of the budget .
However , I would now like to draw attention to an area in which only EUR 2.7 billion was spent last year , but which causes significant problems .
The European Court of Auditors , which I would like to thank warmly at this point , has produced a semi-masterpiece , as it has succeeded in bringing transparency to the fragmented administration in the area of development aid and in clearly identifying the problems which continue to occur .
I would not like to go as far as saying that this area has no universal principle and no transparent structures , but it does have considerable problems .
There have been improvements , for example , in the payments for projects , but nevertheless it is still the case that no audits can be carried out on some of the projects because the receipts are missing , not to mention the fact that some receipts are not even provided in the first place or that there are no opportunities for follow-up audits .
The subject of budget aid once again involves particular problems because it is not possible to follow up or trace the money and what it is used for .
In my opinion , we should carefully consider finally integrating the European Development Fund ( EDF ) into the general budget , for reasons of transparency , traceability and manageability .
This would allow us to combine and coordinate the EDF with other fields , such as development aid , foreign policy , neighbourhood policy and other policies in the same area , so that we could obtain a complete and transparent overview .
This is my proposal .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been stated , the European Court of Auditors 2008 report first and foremost gives us some positive news : the percentage of EU expenditure , characterised by high levels of irregularities , has gone down from 60 % in 2005 to 31 % in 2008 .
This is a significant result ; it signals a positive approach that we must continue to follow .
As far as the Structural Funds , and more specifically cohesion policies , are concerned , there continue to be problems and difficulties .
I believe that we should focus our attention on these areas in the coming months and years .
With regard to the Structural Funds , when compared with the Court 's analysis of the period 2000-2006 , the management and monitoring systems for the period 2007-2013 are giving rise to stricter regulations and greater reliability and transparency in terms of expenditure , as well as to greater accountability on the part of the Member States .
The Court of Auditors strongly emphasises the need for greater simplification .
Therefore , much work needs to be done in order to further simplify the rules .
Quality of economic growth and transparency in the use of Community resources are two objectives of the same battle which we need to wage .
I believe we need to do this by also making our debates concerning ourselves and , above all , concerning the citizens , more public .
Cohesion policies , the Structural Funds and regional policies are , and will , remain a crucial element of the European project .
They have given substance to the European Union 's fundamental values .
We must work together to guarantee efficiency and transparency in the coming years .
Mr President , I thank the Court of Auditors in particular for putting forward this morning , in a very clear way , the contents of a massive report giving us the good and the bad - and thankfully not the ugly because , to some extent , we have cleared up the worst aspects of our accounting practices .
I want to concentrate in particular on agriculture which , because it has been given a relatively clean bill of health , has virtually been dismissed in this debate .
I do so because I want to caution that we may be going back to the future .
It is worth remembering this morning that agriculture has improved because we have decoupled , to a large extent , payments from production .
We are giving the payments directly to active farmers , active producers , and therefore the possibility of errors has been much reduced .
However , through the vehicle of modulation we are now taking that money and using it in the area of rural development , about which serious concerns have been expressed , hence my comments about our possibly going back to the future .
I also worry about how we can account for issues like water management , climate change and biodiversity .
Think of the complexity of the rules that will surround all these things - and rightly so - if public money is being spent in that direction , and the difficulties and cost of complying with those particular rules .
We are looking at a review of the European Union 's budget thanks to the former British Prime Minister , Tony Blair , whose government does not have a particularly clean record when it comes to its own sets of accounts .
Again , under that review we will be looking at spending money in areas which the Court of Auditors clearly has concerns about , particularly in the field of research and innovation .
Let us therefore be very careful that the good work we have done will not be unpicked by what we are about to do .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when I was at school , the teachers often said : Trust is good , control is better .
( The speaker agrees to answer the question of another Member , in accordance with Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )

( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to ask you whether you had noticed that , in the course of this important debate , Mr Martin , who has given us all plenty of advice , entered the Chamber at 10.00 , spoke at 10.09 and left the Chamber at 10.12 ?



( DE ) I am reminded of two basic rules from my childhood .
I was once told : ' When someone speaks to you , let him finish talking .
If you ask a question , then at least wait for the answer ' .
On that principle , it would have been nice if he had stayed in the House , so that he could follow the debate in Parliament .
That is my opinion .
The controls and the improvements suggested by the Court of Auditors make a significant contribution to the more effective and more economical use of EU funds .
As a Member with an interest in agriculture , I am particularly pleased that the use of funds in the area of agriculture was given a positive assessment and that on average , no significant irregularities were found .
However , this is on average and that is precisely where the problem lies .
There is a saying in agriculture that on average , the lake was half a metre deep , but the cow still drowned .
In other words , when , on average , everything is correct and when the overwhelming majority of countries are able to apply the administrative regulations appropriately , it is then in particular that we must deal with the countries which do not toe the line , the bad guys .
It is important to name names in this respect .
Mr President , please do not give in .
You can be more specific in what you say and Parliament will give you its support .
The situation regarding the error rate in rural development is rather different .
Even though the error rate is lower than the previous year , it is still significantly higher than that for agricultural expenditure .
However , I must say at this point that the majority of the problems identified are due to the incorrect application and lack of understanding of complex EU regulations .
This does not necessarily mean that money is being wasted .
We must all work together to modify and improve the EU regulations , so that the Member States can apply them more easily .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Court of Auditors ' report for 2008 concludes that there has been an overall improvement in terms of the legality and regularity of the European Union 's budgetary transactions .
Nevertheless , it says that expenditure associated with cohesion policy is still problematic , since it contains the most errors .
The funds available for cohesion policy represent nearly a third of the European budget .
It is one of the most fundamental and also one of the most symbolic policies of European integration and of the principle of solidarity that is at the heart of it .
As such , we need to be demanding and ensure that the procedures are applied properly .
We do , however , need to take into account the specific characteristics of cohesion policy , which is widely decentralised and therefore managed by regional authorities in the Member States .
The errors observed by the Court of Auditors are not a result of attempts to defraud on the part of the project promoters , but a result of the complexity of the conditions for eligibility .
In my view , the solution is not , therefore , to make the procedures more cumbersome , but to simplify them , both at Community level and in the Member States .
At Community level , simplification measures are under discussion in the Council and in Parliament .
At national level , personally I am working towards simplifying French procedures , in close cooperation with elected representatives and national and local decision makers .
In this period of economic slowdown , it would be particularly unfortunate for project promoters , of which there are still many , to have difficulty accessing the European funding available to them .
( FI ) Madam President , we are dealing with an important matter , and I want firstly to say that the management of the budget has got a lot better .
There are problems , however , and I wish to mention a few of them .
The first is the institutions ' policy on buildings and property .
When I was drafting the budget for the 2008 Parliament and other institutions , I noticed that things were not really right in this area .
I would hope that we can launch a thorough investigation into why the price paid for properties and buildings of the institutions is higher than the average market price .
When the study has been completed , we will know whether there is something dubious about all this or , alternatively , that everything is all right .
The second matter I wish to draw your attention to is the situation regarding Romania and Bulgaria , which is something that has already been mentioned here .
We know what the problems are , and we have to find ways to help Romania and Bulgaria , so that things can be sorted out .
This is also a political issue .
After all , what is the point of enlargement if we accept as members countries that cannot organise the management of their budgets adequately ?
The third matter particularly concerns external actions linked to the United Nations , though in any case , we need to be able to carry out checks to ensure that the public know that everything is in order .
More than anything , however , we need to realise that the number of areas free of error has risen , and for that we have to thank Commissioner Kallas and the European Court of Auditors .
Both have done excellent work .
( Applause )
Madam President , a simple question .
It has been stated that many of the breaches in compliance are due to a lack of understanding of the procedures and regulations .
Do you accept that this is the case ?
And , if so , what percentage of breaches would be due to this unfortunate situation , not to deliberate breaching of the rules ?
( BG ) I , too , would first of all like to congratulate the representatives of the European Court of Auditors for the report which they presented , and Commissioner Kallas for the evidently much-improved effort on the part of the European Commission in relation to European funds expenditure .
Coming from Bulgaria , I can see at first hand that the Commission is extremely strict with regard to the expenditure of funds , and its actions definitely have an impact .
I would like to raise one issue linked to the fact that this is the last report from the European Court of Auditors under the current treaties .
The following report next year will now be based on the Treaty of Lisbon .
This contains a number of questions which have been asked and which have still not received an adequately explained response , including with regard to creating the budget and the procedures for spending the budget .
I believe that all the institutions , including the European Parliament , along with the Council and European Commission , of course , not to mention the active involvement of the European Court of Auditors , should do their utmost to come up with a response to these issues so that we think the same way on them .
( FR ) Madam President , I am not taking the floor under the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure ; I simply wish to lament the fact that the Council bench is hopelessly empty .
The Council is a budgetary authority , and we also note that we have many problems in the Member States .
I wanted to express this regret , Madam President .
( NL ) I have been present throughout the debate .
One of the most crucial questions I have heard - and I would ask Mr Caldeira explicitly to explain this carefully - is what is the situation with the 11 % under Cohesion Policy that should not have been disbursed ?
Various explanations have been given for this in the debate .
Some have said EUR 4 billion , others have said EUR 2 billion , and so on .
I think it exceptionally important for the start of the discharge exercise that you explain to us clearly and unequivocally what is really involved here .
I should also like to extend my special thanks to Commissioner Kallas for the work he has done in recent years .
I think the Committee on Budgetary Control always experienced cooperation with you as very constructive .
We did not always agree , but you will probably soon be granted another term of office in the new Commission , a new post , and I wish you all the very best in this .
I would like to say to Mr Martin that I saw that he was asking for the floor on a personal matter , and that I will give him the floor , but in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , I will do so at the end of the debate and after the Commission .
( HU ) Madam President , I completely agree with Mr Audy .
The Council is very conspicuous by its absence , as are the leaders of the political parties .
As a vice-chair of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament myself , I felt that the chairmen of the other groups did not think that this debate was important either .
However , the Council is the most conspicuous by its absence .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank all of the MEPs who have spoken .
Their comments will certainly be very much appreciated by all those who work at the Court of Auditors and who were behind the report submitted today .
In the time allotted to me in such an intense and interesting debate , it is a little difficult to answer all the questions that have been put to me directly .
I would first like to address the question from Mr de Jong , who asked me whether I was discouraged about not being in a position , as the President of the Court of Auditors , to give a positive DAS .
My answer would be that , as an auditor , I would be delighted to give such an opinion when the time came , but it is not the job of auditors to be happy with the opinions that they give .
Auditors must have a solid basis for their opinions , drawn from evidence on the ground .
To be very frank , as an auditor I prefer giving an opinion such as the one we have given this year .
I will not tell Mr Audy whether it is a positive or negative opinion , but it is a realistic opinion that highlights the points on which progress has been made .
We have seen that there has been a sharp fall in the number of errors in some areas , in particular in the area of agriculture , but there are also areas where more care is needed .
Therefore , rather than being optimistic or pessimistic , as an auditor I prefer to be realistic .
I think that this is the way that our message should be understood with regard to prospects for the future .
Several MEPs have asked what can be done to solve these problems .
The Court of Auditors has made its contribution in this report and in previous reports by pointing out that its recommendations in relation to improving the supervisory and control systems in the Member States are important , and by stating , with regard to the Commission , that it is equally important to simplify the regulatory framework , which means not making things more complicated than they need to be .
We cannot move from a stage in which we want to do everything and control everything - which requires excessive controls - to a stage in which there is no supervision at all .
Otherwise , we will not be able to find the right balance to enable us to achieve the objectives of the policies .
Several of you have said that this report does not talk about how efficiently the funds are used .
Did the few errors or irregularities identified prevent projects from being completed ?
Obviously , the Court of Auditors is supposed to give an opinion in its reports regarding the financial statements , which is a clearly positive opinion , and on the underlying transactions of these accounts .
This is about whether the transactions comply with the rules that they are supposed to follow .
However , the Court of Auditors also provides you and , in particular , the competent parliamentary committees , the Committee on Budgetary Control , with all of our reports relating to the effectiveness of the policies and whether the funds in the different areas are being used correctly .
I hope that you will find significant information in those reports in terms of what could be done better in the context of these policies .
However , as it says in our report - and I emphasised this in my speech - it is important to seize this opportunity that the reform of the financial regulation and the new framework for the financial perspective are offering us for the future , and the opportunity that the budgetary reform is giving us to consider some fundamental issues .
Allow me to conclude , Madam President , by saying that our methodology complies with international auditing standards .
We consider our samples to be appropriate for drawing our conclusions .
Mr Audy asked the following question : are your samples of sufficient size ?
The answer is yes .
Obviously , if we had more resources , we could possibly do more work , but our resources are limited and we are supposed to manage our resources carefully .
Finally , a word on the role that the Court of Auditors and the courts of auditors in the Member States can play in the future .
We always work with the courts of auditors in the Member States and with the national auditors by cooperating with one another and trusting one another .
This approach is provided for by the treaty - and reaffirmed by the Treaty of Lisbon - and in following it , we are doing our best to ensure that , by and large , we can bring added value to the role of external auditing in the European Union .
Those are my very brief final remarks , Madam President , as I did not wish to take up too much of your time .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , thank you for this debate and for the good words addressed to the Commission .
I have two points relating to the past , from 2008 and recent years .
Firstly , one important thing was underlined : transparency .
I want to remind you that together we have made a big breakthrough .
All information about beneficiaries of EU funds is now public and this has also been one of the major changes during this period .
The second fact from the past is that we discussed how much money has been lost and how much money should be recovered , amongst other things .
I would like to illustrate this with one number , from what is a very complicated title .
It is in Annex VI to our Synthesis report and is the ' summary of waivers of recoveries ' , which actually means an amount of money which is completely and irreversibly lost .
In the 2008 Synthesis report , this was EUR 18 380 363.22 , which is under 0.01 % of the EU budget .
This is lost .
We have discussed all these billions which have not been properly managed in the structural funds , but something is recovered finally .
The process is not perfect and we have to work hard on this and sometimes errors are corrected .
It is a long process and we must take it very seriously .
Now some points for the future .
In the very near future , we will start discussions on the new Financial Regulation and the new budget perspectives .
Very many things are linked to this process .
National declarations and the participation of Member States need a stronger legal basis .
We can clearly go ahead with this simplification , discussed so much and so many times here .
As President Caldeira has already said , objectives are defined by more than 500 programmes accepted by the Commission , Parliament and Council .
Every programme has its own legal basis , its own objectives , and everything must be measured , including the money which has been spent in accordance with these objectives .
That is a key issue .
At the last plenary session when we discussed the discharge for 2007 , one idea was to reduce the number of programmes and to have bigger projects and bigger programmes which are much easier to survey .
This is a key issue and , as one Member said was the case with rural development , you cannot measure objectives - especially in external actions , where you have very political objectives - and say that those objectives are being achieved .
This is a key issue , but one within the framework of the future discussions on financial regulations .
Concerning dialogue , which was underlined here as important , I must say that we have tried to do our best to have good dialogue with Parliament , with the Committee on Budgetary Control and with the Court of Auditors .
I myself like to debate everything with people with different views , different attitudes and different assessments .
That is normal life .
What I do not like is that some people deliberately and constantly use incorrect facts .
You cannot have a dialogue when the facts are not correct .
We can have different assessments , different interpretations and different views , but the facts must be correct .
I strongly wish that in our future dialogue , this principle will also be respected .
( Applause )
Mr Martin , do you wish to speak at the end of this debate ?
( DE ) Madam President , I am sorry that I have to take this opportunity to make a personal remark which , according to the agenda , I have been given three minutes for .
However , I will not need three minutes .
I took a very constructive approach in my speech and in the debate I pointed out very constructively what could now be done on this new basis .
In order to be able to come to this assessment , I followed the debate this morning very closely .
I was in the chamber much earlier than my fellow Member stated , left later and am now here again .
I feel that it is a great pity that Mrs Gräßle obviously feels it necessary to make personal attacks which really are below the belt .
I would like her to be constructive and I would like to see fewer incorrect stories by her in the German newspaper the Bild Zeitung .
I would prefer to hear constructive suggestions about how we can rescue the situation and how the Court of Auditors can be given the ability to do this .
In addition , it is a great pity that Mrs Gräßle , in particular , is the person who unnecessarily makes the work of the non-attached Members more difficult , discriminates against us , prevents us from accessing information , does not allow us the opportunity to work with employees and then feels that it is worthwhile attacking us on the basis of incorrect facts .
You should learn about democracy , Mrs Gräßle .
We will stop there .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
It is true that there are still significant deficiencies in some areas , in particular , in the case of cohesion policy , but the fall in the error rate in the area of agriculture and natural resources to below 2 % gives me cause to look optimistically to the future .
Particularly given that this area makes up the majority of the European Union 's spending , the comparatively low error rate of 2 % can be seen as satisfactory .
In future , we should put all our efforts into two areas .
The first of these is cooperation between the Commission and the Member States .
The aim here is to identify inaccurate and incorrect data in all the different areas of spending and to correct the errors .
The second area involves improving the EU 's methods for paying EU money to the Member States and recovering it from them .
I would like to congratulate the Court of Auditors on its annual report on the implementation of the EU budget concerning the financial year 2008 .
I would like to draw attention to the paragraph concerning the European Union agencies , in which the Court of Auditors states that it has issued an unqualified opinion for all the agencies audited , with the exception of the European Police College .
At this stage , it is relevant to recall that we faced a similar situation for the 2007 discharge .
The Court of Auditors has published a report containing a statement of assurance with reservations regarding the accounts and underlying transactions of CEPOL , indicating in particular that appropriations had been used to finance private expenditure .
The rapporteur asked for the discharge to be postponed for CEPOL , followed by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
However , the vote in plenary on 23 April 2009 rejected this proposal by 226 votes for and 230 against , with a massive mobilisation of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
Given that the Court of Auditors has today raised further problems regarding CEPOL , it is essential that we acknowledge the obvious error that was made in granting discharge in April by voting against the opinion of the rapporteur and of the committee responsible .
Google 's project to digitise the world 's book heritage ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on Google 's project to digitise the world 's book heritage by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs - B7-0224 / 2009 ) .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you will all be familiar with Google , the internet search engine .
You will probably also know about the new Google Books Project , which everyone has been discussing over the last few months .
The aim of the project is to scan in books from libraries and make them available over the internet , so that readers have quick and easy access to a large number of works on the web .
From the perspective of readers and internet users , this is a wonderful idea .
However , what does it mean for authors , creative people , artists and publishers ?
What part will they play in the publication of their work on the web ?
We must look closely at these questions over the next few months .
You may already be aware that publishers and authors in the US have initiated legal proceedings against Google with regard to the scanning and publication of works on the web .
As far as I know , the legal dispute has been resolved and the parties have settled out of court .
However , the questions remain unanswered and they relate not only to the situation with Google , because there are certain to be similar cases in future .
We must deal with these questions as quickly as possible .
Does copyright need to be adapted in the digital age ?
Do we need to change existing structures ?
In this respect , I am thinking particularly of the role of the collecting societies , which we have often discussed in Parliament .
Are new monopolies being created on the web ?
How should we react to this ?
How will this change the structures in our countries , for example , with regard to the bookshops in the regions ?
What are the opposing interests in this case and how can we find a suitable balance between them ?
Authors and publishers want to receive a financial reward for their work .
This also applies , of course , when their works are made available on the internet .
Libraries want to put their archives on the web without having to sign a licence agreement with every copyright holder first .
The interests of consumers are clear .
They would very much like to have quick and easy access to the content on the web .
We have not yet reached the point of being able to discuss possible solutions , but we need to ask ourselves a lot of questions and that is the purpose of the written question submitted to the Commission by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Do we need to make distinctions in order to resolve the copyright issues , for example , with regard to content ?
If so , what distinctions should be made ?
The Commission seems to be moving in this direction , as it is first of all focusing on the situation of the library stocks .
Should there be a process of mass digitisation in future , or is our existing licensing system sufficient to resolve the problem ?
How can copyright clearance be simplified in the internet age ?
As you know , copyright is primarily a national right and in this respect , we must once again ask ourselves : is this still an up-to-date approach ?
How should we deal with orphan works in future , in other words , books whose copyright holder cannot be identified or located ?
Should we perhaps distinguish between literary works and scientific or academic works ?
For example , the authors of novels earn their living from the publication of their books , but when scientists make their papers available on the web , they are primarily interested in making a name for themselves in their field of research and are less reliant on the money that their work earns .
There are numerous questions that we need to ask ourselves and I am pleased to be able to discuss them with you .
I would like to consider one last important point and that is once again the subject of collecting societies .
Look at how easy it is nowadays to download music from the internet .
You simply go to iTunes and buy songs for 20 , 30 , 40 or 50 cents .
What are the implications for the collecting societies ?
Do we still need them ?
I would be pleased if the Commission could once again give us an idea of what the current situation is .
In Parliament , we have been asking the Commission for years to take a look at the collecting societies .
To put it rather imprecisely , these are also monopolistic bodies , which have been established over a period of decades .
I am interested to know what the Commission is planning .
My final point is that if you take a platform like Google , which makes everything freely available , this will result in a monopoly being created on the web .
We need to consider how the situation should be handled in order to ensure that we do not end up with just one supplier , who then decides on the conditions for access to content on the web .
I am looking forward to a debate with you over the next few weeks and months and I will be interested to hear the Commission 's response to the first question from the Committee on Legal Affairs .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Committee on Legal Affairs for raising these questions .
You raised so many big and fundamental questions which definitely need to be discussed in the coming months .
This issue is definitely intensive , interesting , exciting and very future-oriented .
I will first of all give an overview concerning this concrete question .
First of all : the Google Books Project .
In essence , it is an initiative aimed at providing a tool to find , search and buy books for a wide audience of users .
For rights holders , it may represent an additional channel of trade , and so an additional source of revenue .
Let me add that in Europe , the Google Books Project is deployed in collaboration with libraries and concerns only public domain books .
In-copyright books are only included in the Project by way of the Google Partner Programme addressed to publishers willing to conclude agreements with Google .
The Google Books class action settlement concerns the Google Books Project in the United States and aims to conclude a litigation procedure which has been going on for over four years .
If approved , it will provide an additional source of revenue for rights holders but also , and most importantly , make the hitherto unavailable out-of-print and orphan works available for online search and access to US users .
Moreover , its financial incentives may bring rights holders of orphan works out of the shadows .
Now , when it comes to the Google Book Search Project , the Commission sees the Google initiative as a demonstration that new business models are evolving to provide almost instant access to vast numbers of works to an increasing number of consumers .
Because the European Commission favours the digitisation of books in European libraries and beyond , and because digitisation of books is a task of Herculean proportions , where private sector support is needed , the Commission favours initiatives such as Google 's Book Search Project as long as they respect intellectual property rights and do not lead to the distortion of competition .
When it comes to the Google Books settlement , the Commission has been actively engaged in consultations with European publishers and with Google .
In September 2009 , the Commission organised a public hearing bringing together European stakeholders and the settlement parties to exchange views and seek clarification on the various elements of the agreement .
But meanwhile , important changes have occurred .
Due to numerous objections raised about the initial settlement by Google 's competitors , foreign governments ( France and Germany ) and the US Department of Justice , the terms of the settlement were revised and these revisions were submitted to the US Court on 13 November 2009 .
First , the revised settlement has been significantly narrowed in scope .
Now , only books either registered with the US Copyright Office or published in the United Kingdom , Australia or Canada by 5 January 2009 are covered by the settlement .
All other books are outside the scope of the settlement .
Consequently , only United States , United Kingdom , Australian and Canadian authors and publishers will , in future , be represented on the board of the Books Rights Registry , the body that administers the terms of the settlement .
Secondly , publishers from countries other than the United States , the United Kingdom , Australia and Canada will now have to negotiate individually to become part of Google Books services in the United States .
The new version of the settlement gives rise to two remarks .
First , being outside the settlement is not always an advantage .
When you are out , you can no longer control what Google does with the copies they have scanned up to now .
Second , publishers from EU Member States - apart from the United Kingdom - will now no longer participate in a major transformation of the book market .
The Google Books Project in the United States will receive a major thrust forward , with no European publishers any longer a part of it .
Even though services negotiated under this settlement will only be available to United States users , this absence could be detrimental to cultural diversity .
In this regard , the Commission has been calling , and will repeatedly call , on Member States : firstly , to intensify their digitisation policies ; secondly , to explore the possibilities for public-private partnerships for digitisation ; and , thirdly , to ensure that all digitised material becomes available through Europeana .
If Member States do that , the Google Books settlement may turn out to be the catalyst , not a threat , for Europe 's initiatives in the area of access to digitised culture .
This brings me to your second question .
The debate on the Google Books settlement has shown that Europe cannot afford to be left behind on the digital frontier .
Europe has to act swiftly .
To this end , the Commission is fully committed to working on a copyright framework that will facilitate large-scale digitisation of European library collections .
We believe that copyright rules have to be flexible enough in order not to overly complicate the creation of online libraries .
Madam President , I would like to thank you for your statement , the Committee on Legal Affairs for its question , and Mrs Niebler for her comments and the Commissioner for his answer .
These are extremely important matters for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection as well .
The process of digitising books opens up great new opportunities , but it must - and I emphasise this - must serve the interests of publishing and readers , that is to say , European businesses and consumers .
The previous version of the agreement with Google threatened the monopolisation of the entire literary output by one private firm , a threat which has not yet been completely eliminated .
It was Google that scanned millions of copyright titles from all over the world .
To date , it has made use of these scans illegally , only applying the US principle of fair use without asking the authors or publishers for their agreement .
The new agreement continues to flout a basic principle of the Berne Convention , which says that copyright holders have to be asked for permission before their works are used , and not simply be given the option to opt out , all of which would put the responsibility , effort and costs on the author 's shoulders .
The agreement applies to books from all over the world published in English in countries which are covered by the Convention .
When it scanned the books , Google drew on the categories of out-of-print and orphan works .
Both of these categories are very loosely defined .
It is quite often possible to find the authors of orphan works if you put your mind to it .
Out-of-print books are often works which the authors or publishers have deliberately taken out of print .
Does this not entail the danger that Google may be depriving publishers of the freedom to establish their own publishing policy , and authors of potential earnings ?
On the issue of consumers : the publishing industry may be undermined in the long term by the Google Project if the copyright holders are not paid the royalties due to them .
To allow them to remain competitive , publishers will stop producing valuable , expert-reviewed , costly books .
For consumers , this will effectively mean high-quality publications being replaced by cheap , unverified , unimaginative publishing , additionally accompanied by ubiquitous advertising .
I therefore expect the European Commission to devise a policy which will allow the development of further digitisation , but without impacting negatively on creativity and on the interests of the market and of readers in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the agreement between Google and the US publishers contains some undoubtedly interesting elements and some important prospects for new things for us as well .
However , together with these positive aspects , it is important to evaluate the problematic issues it contains too .
For the agreement to be positive , we need to change the way we look at the whole complicated issue of copyright , overcoming the conflict between the demand for freedom of access to online cultural products and the exclusive protection , without exception , of copyright .
It is true that the system devised by Google would give users as a whole the great opportunity of accessing works , especially those that are out of print or difficult to find bibliographically and , at the same time , would give authors and publishers the opportunity of refreshing their own cultural offering and of expanding their readership .
However , it is also true that , due to the fact that the agreement covers only books and works registered with the US Copyright Office or published in the United Kingdom , Canada or Australia , and that no specific measure is envisaged for European works or for those of the rest of the world - so far , moreover , Google has merely stated its general willingness to reach similar agreements with other countries as well - Google finds itself , by virtue of that agreement , in a monopoly position , not least because of the enormous advertising resources that will be harnessed for the new system .
The impact will also have consequences for European cultural industries , first and foremost , because of the delay that Europe would encounter in terms of the whole library digitisation project .
What is more , a great many European books have already been registered with the US Copyright Office since the 1980s .
As a result , they would be subject to the new rules for accessing the Google system .
Many more European works have been held in US libraries that have offered Google the possibility of digitising its own catalogue .
The European Commission has launched a European project , which to date has had less of an impact than Google Books is expected to have .
The agreement between Google and the US cultural industries thus raises the issue of the need for a synthesis between protection of copyright and of production and accessibility for users , not least in view of the technological revolutions of the last decade .
The risk is that Europe will lag behind when it comes to the development of this potential new model .
I tell you straight , Commissioner : I do not find the proposals that have been stated here adequate for resolving the problem confronting us .
We need a solution that unifies the countries of Europe and that does not put the burden of responsibility for the action to be undertaken on the Member States .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I welcome the action of the Committee on Legal Affairs in putting this timely question to the Commission .
The book digitalisation project impacts on several European and Member State policy areas , such as copyright , competition , library digitalisation and culture , and as such requires both debate and measured consideration .
The digitalisation of books has many clear benefits in both cultural and economic terms .
It will make literature and learning more accessible to the digital generation .
It will contribute to the dissemination of knowledge and culture .
It will give students , academics and universities increased access to information and research .
For Europe to be at the forefront of a successful knowledge-based economy , we must move forward with new technologies and stay ahead in the knowledge race .
My own Member State , Ireland , was known as the island of saints and scholars , with a great tradition for producing literature ; and the encouragement and promotion of reading and literature is always welcome .
Unfortunately , I have to say that most of the saints are gone .
However , the digitalisation project must not proceed at the expense of the creative process behind literature and the livelihood of the many stakeholders must not be negatively impacted upon .
It is important to stress that digitalisation must only be accepted when the rights of the stakeholders , including authors , publishers , illustrators , graphic designers and literary translators , are represented and protected .
Given the potential threat of digitalisation to the print book market , it is essential to ensure that the rights of holders are fairly remunerated , and this is an issue that I raised directly with the Commission last October .
In their response , I note that the Commission has already launched a public consultation and has held hearings to exchange views with stakeholders .
I welcome these positive steps and , if the European Union copyright legislation is to be adapted , there must be an increased engagement with stakeholders so that the change reflects their interests while , at the same time , facilitating a knowledge-based economy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a result of the activities of Google Books , the European strategy of taking a slow , targeted approach and of highlighting the many concerns that have been expressed during the course of this strategy has simply been overtaken by reality .
We are faced with Google 's comprehensive digitisation of books , including books by European authors , who have not given their consent and who are now surprised and annoyed to find themselves in Google Books , where they do not want to be .
On this subject , I would like to say first of all that when we talk about copyright , it is not simply a question of money .
It is also about the sovereignty of authors , who should have the right to be involved in decisions about whether , how and in what form their books are digitised and used .
This is a central question and a major necessity .
Related to this is the highly critical question of so-called orphan works , whose authors cannot be located .
We need to find an effective and practical solution to this problem .
Each and every one of us has experienced the situation of lending a much-loved book , not having it returned and then not being able to buy it anywhere because it is out of print .
Google Books would , of course , be a very good solution in cases like this , because it would preserve treasures from the world of literature and other related areas , which would otherwise disappear from our cultural heritage .
However , the solution must be designed in such a way that the whole thing makes sense .
Google Books cannot simply ignore all the issues on the basis of an assumption .
An attempt must be made to find the author and to protect his or her rights .
This is where the collecting societies come into action and I would like to see a fair solution being introduced .
As Mrs Niebler said , we need to discuss the role of the collecting societies in this context .
Everyone has the right to reject new technologies but , of course , they also have to live with the consequences and they may find in future that they do not form part of the extensive pool of knowledge which has been created .
This is the central issue today .
Perhaps statutory exceptions are needed in order to provide a relatively effective solution to the problem .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , for book-lovers in my constituency in the East Midlands and EU-wide , this is good news .
I believe this is a book revolution about to begin , and I welcome the Commission statement .
The initiative by Google is an inevitable and logical step forward given the advancement of the digital economy with new market drivers and new consumer demands .
I believe this kind of private sector innovation should be welcomed as long as it allows space for competition in the future and fair protection .
Libraries , whilst an important store of information , are vastly underused resources , with nine out of ten books not being accessed , and there are many thousands of books unavailable to consumers due to their being out of print or the non-viability of publication .
Online books will provide authors with the opportunity to gain some recognition and indeed some money back for their works .
However , the fact that this kind of settlement providing mass digitisation of books cannot be applied to the EU is one of the most illustrative examples of the EU 's fragmented copyright laws .
We have to make a European copyright framework fit for purpose in the 21st century .
Europe must seize the opportunity to take the lead and to ensure that the digitisation of books in Europe is facilitated , but also that the Google Books settlement takes into consideration European copyright law .
We should encourage European players into this space as well in different languages and genres .
For those like me who like the feel of a page between their fingers , this will not replace the need for fabulous bookshops like those in my East Midlands constituency .
Indeed , far from doing away with bookshops , the ability to access online books provides us with a whole new way of learning and access to culture .
Far from destroying our libraries , it will help them to be archived and protected and provide our consumers with more choice of how they access books for the education and pleasure .
It is an opportunity for authors to expand their market and their audience .
I believe this is the beginning of a rediscovery of great works and the uncovering of a cultural explosion .
It is something we should welcome and positively encourage .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many of us have said that Google is practically a global monopoly , which is trying to appropriate the cultural , literary and journalistic heritage of the whole world .
Europe should not allow itself to be controlled by Google .
Moreover , Google 's strategy of offering the service free of charge is merely a façade , since it makes commodities out of intellectual works in return for more than USD 23 billion in advertising revenue each year .
As you said , Mr Kallas , Europe needs to undertake a digitisation programme .
However , the actions brought by authors in the United States against Google Books for plagiarism of their works should not mean that a digitisation model is established here that would also make a commodity out of original literary , journalistic or scientific works .
From this point of view , we would like to know exactly what the Commission means by the frequently used term ' collective licence ' .
The idea of creating a European market for authors rights greatly concerns us from this point of view .
We should not confuse intellectual works , which are common heritage , with the spirit of business , which involves turning culture into a commodity .
In our view , the European Union , together with the Member States , should therefore guarantee the authors ' rights , the intellectual property rights of writers , journalists and scientists .
The public digitisation systems launched in a number of Member States should be supported and combined with the European project , Europeana , in order to prevent the private appropriation of public cultural property .
Before making any decisions , I think that Parliament should initiate a European strategic conference bringing together the European institutions , the Member States , authors ' unions , libraries and even public telecommunications operators , to create a European public digitisation model that respects authors and their works and which makes them accessible to as many people as possible .
This project , together with Europeana , should work alongside the other systems that exist in the world .
( FR ) Madam President , the tasks of digitising Europe 's literary heritage for the purposes of not only preserving and remembering it , but also of distributing it and promoting its influence , and of providing Europeans with access to their fantastic culture , are major challenges which public authorities should have a greater involvement in .
At the moment , Google is in the firing line because its commercial strategy involves an attempt to gain a crucial , long-term edge by establishing a monopoly not over the content of a global virtual library , but over access to this content , and also by footing the bill for this digitisation process in return .
I join my colleagues from Europe 's right-wing parties in totally opposing any exclusive situation resulting in a monopoly .
We can overcome the other major issues concerning intellectual property and compliance with copyright for out-of-print and orphan works .
Legislation can be adapted to accommodate them .
However , the real question is this : what alternatives exist in Europe ?
The Europeana site , which has been up and running for a few months , only has 5 % of Europe 's works online .
Half of its content comes from sources provided by France which , for once , is leading the way with Gallica , the portal of the National Library of France , and with the INA ( National Audiovisual Institute ) .
However , the funding provided is a pittance in relation to what is needed .
Google is prepared to invest EUR 15 million a year in rapidly digitising and making available up to 20 million works in 10 years .
How much are we prepared to put on the table ?
If we cannot answer this question , Google , I am afraid , will be the only player able to meet the needs of the libraries themselves .
( PL ) Madam President , the potential benefits and possibilities which the Google Books Project offers consumers , researchers and the majority of publishers and authors for the preservation of cultural heritage is , really , beyond dispute .
We must not , however , treat the legal consequences lightly , and it is on these that I , as a representative of the Committee on Legal Affairs , would like to concentrate .
Firstly , the conditions which need to be met are , of course , clear .
I am thinking of the need to respect copyright and of the establishment of a suitable system for paying royalties to authors .
Unfortunately , the Google Project is based on an Anglo-Saxon legal system and on North American market realities which are completely inadequate for the European Union system .
In connection with this , Google 's activity in the European Union encounters obstacles , not only of a legal nature , but also of an ethical nature .
Google assumes that a copyright owner who does not want to be part of an agreement is obliged to inform Google of this .
This is not , of course , in accord with our law , which assumes that before scanning a book and making the scan available , it is necessary to obtain the author 's consent and to pay the appropriate fee .
Another matter relates to what are known as ' orphan books ' , in other words , works for which it has not been possible to identify the copyright owner .
In the majority of the Member States , collecting societies represent the interests of known copyright owners , and also of currently unidentified copyright owners , for example , by securing income from sales for a certain period in case the copyright holder is found in the future .
I would also like to point out the need to adapt European legal provisions in the area of copyright to the challenges of the digital era .
At the same time , I fully support the opinion of Mrs Reding and Mr McCreevy , and also what was said today by Mr Kallas , that digitisation of works protected by copyright must fully respect the principle of copyright and the fair remuneration of authors , so that they can benefit from access of the wider European public to their works to the greatest degree .
For we must not , of course , squander this opportunity in Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , the opportunities offered by the internet have inspired Google to revive in cyberspace books which are out of print , forgotten , or which have vanished in the mists of time .
The grand idea of creating a modern counterpart of the Alexandrian Library has , however , given rise to disputes on the issue of copyright .
The agreement reached two weeks ago satisfied the Authors Guild and the Association of American Publishers and some of their European counterparts .
It allows titles published in four countries to be scanned and made available against payment .
These countries are the United States , the United Kingdom , Australia and Canada. internet users from these countries will be able to read 20 % of e-books free of charge ( with the costs covered by advertisers ) and will have to pay to read the remaining 80 % .
From the author 's and the publisher 's point of view , this will have a two-fold benefit .
In the first place , it will generate a one-off payment from Google of USD 60 to 300 for the right to scan the book and , in the second place , 63 % of the profits generated from the e-book through the Google Books service .
In other words , authors will make money from publishing even a single page of their own books on the internet .
Yet few people take into account the fact that non-British European users of Google Books , for example a Belgian or Polish internet user , will not even have access to those 20 % of e-books .
The service covers mainly English-language titles , and any European publishers or authors wishing to join the programme will have to deal with Google themselves .
Europeans will have free access only to the least attractive categories of book - titles which are in the public domain and whose copyright has long since expired , for example , books in the Bibliothèque nationale de France which have not been taken out for 200 years .
This will not result in a complete electronic library of European titles being built up .
In addition to certain reservations regarding the Google Project , such as the company 's monopoly on the preparation and distribution of e-books and the need to pay it a share of the revenue and advertising , I believe that the lack of a unified system of copyright in the European Union will make it inefficient .
The legal commotion surrounding Google has shown the consequences of the lack of uniform copyright law in the European Union as well as the impossibility of giving a unified response to the Google Books initiative .
It is plain for all to see that harmonising copyright in the European Union has become an urgent necessity .
Madam President , Google is an American company we all know well , providing online services which many of us use on a daily basis .
As their European headquarters is located in Ireland , I know they are an excellent employer and real leader in cutting-edge internet technology .
The digitisation of books , such as the Google Books Project , has the potential to unlock huge volumes of the world 's collective knowledge and cultural heritage .
We should support efforts to make books searchable , readable and downloadable .
We all agree that a digital library of the scope Google is proposing will mean real benefits .
This is especially true for our libraries in Europe , which store books dating as far back as the 17th century .
Few people are able to see those books , but putting them online will allow the world to study and enjoy their contents .
However , the question we must , as Europeans , ask is whether that vast array of knowledge and culture should be monopolised by one private American company .
I have no doubt Google wish to uphold their famous motto ' Do no evil ' .
However , what guarantee would we have that they would not use monopoly power to price these books above the range of ordinary citizens ?
Public access to such resources is of paramount importance .
In fact , we must do all we can to support our own digital library .
Europeana makes available online nearly five million items .
Its mission is to offer the widest possible public access to cultural collections from across Europe .
I regret that only France has contributed seriously so far and that others , including Ireland , have contributed little .
Given that my own country has such a rich and impressive literary history , I call on the Irish Government to participate more fully in the Europeana project .
We must cherish public access to our shared European culture and heritage .
The clear message to all European cultural institutions must be to digitise and to digitise now .
( EL ) Madam President , it is a question of principle that we must encourage access to information and education .
At the same time , we should also facilitate access to European and world culture , in which the written word does indeed occupy a special place .
In this sense , the digitisation of books and free access to them is desirable , but only on the condition of what we are debating today , namely absolute protection for intellectual property .
However , we have similar institutionalised instruments in the European Union .
I refer , in particular , to Europeana , which we must strengthen and promote further .
Europeana is a library , school , film library and music archive all in one and , of course , it respects intellectual property rights and grants free access to all citizens .
The means therefore exist .
The question is how we can use our powers , as the European Union , to become pioneers and not simply monitor developments in the private sector .
( HU ) This is yet another example of our migration from Gutenberg 's galaxy to the digital one .
The slow pace of the legislative process is the reason why the business world has overtaken us .
The legislative process must speed up .
We need to avert anarchy and we need to prevent the formation of monopolies .
We must guarantee freedom to readers , writers and retailers alike .
We must also guarantee cultural diversity and equality for minority languages .
We must do our utmost to eliminate digital illiteracy .
This is what we have to do , and it is no mean task .
Madam President , I am responsible for the new report on Europeana , and I am convinced that we have to find a very good balance to respect , on the one hand , intellectual property rights and , on the other hand , to give easy access to all our users .
That means we need very clear definitions on how to reform copyright , and we therefore need the work done by the Commission on which sort of European fair use we want and clear definitions on what are orphan works .
I would like to find out from the Commission whether , if we really do not want to fall behind the United States , we should finance the digitisation of European works of art and fund Europeana to a greater extent from the new Lisbon Strategy .
Otherwise , we will leave it to Google , and that would not be the best solution to avoid the monopoly structure we already have .
( PT ) Madam President , this is very ironic , is it not ?
What Google has done , taking on intellectual property and reproducing it for private usage , was clearly illegal at the outset , according to the conclusions drawn by the US Department of Justice itself .
On a smaller scale , this is what we call piracy .
Why should there be any difference between individual users who do this and an enormous company like Google ?
Therefore , our first principle should be that the major players should not be granted any special privileges .
Our second principle is that we cannot be dependent on the goodwill of a monopoly .
Like many of those present here , I find Google an interesting company .
I think that their idea is an innovative and good one .
However , what if they later raise prices , as , say , the publishers of academic journals are doing , increasing prices several hundred-fold ?
What if they restrict access to certain books ?
They have a quota of 15 % for books that can be censured .
We need a digital library that is truly global , regulated by a global consortium , including universities , to ensure that quality is not being held back , and national libraries ; a consortium in which Europe will , of course , have far greater power of leadership and decision making than it does at present .
It started with books ; the next thing will be works of art in European museums .
Europe cannot afford to miss the boat on this matter .
( HU ) While we are talking at the moment about the digitisation of the world 's book heritage by a private company , in this case , Google , it seems as if we are only dealing with the present .
It was stated in one speech that those of us here will continue , at any rate , to use printed books .
However , whatever option we pave the way for , it will offer future generations as well an opportunity or a disadvantage which we obviously have to deal with .
Therefore , the main issue here is not only , as has been said , that this will affect Europe 's cultural industry .
No , such a decision will influence European culture .
In fact , there is an extreme danger that a company will own the world 's cultural heritage or , looking into the future , its cultural present .
This is why it is imperative for Europe to devise its own clear strategy in this area .
( PL ) Madam President , firstly , digitisation is a huge opportunity to make our cultural , European and world heritage available to as great a number of Europeans as possible .
This fits in very well indeed with the objectives of the new Lisbon Strategy .
However , it seems that , firstly , this requires standardisation of the whole question of orphan works .
First and foremost in this area , we should have harmonised European solutions for management of incomes derived from orphan works .
Member States have different solutions here .
Secondly , publication of out-of-print works requires special supervision .
In my opinion , the question of out-of-print works should be harmonised .
We cannot allow a situation to arise in which there is not strict regulation of out-of-print works .
Thirdly , we cannot accept the opt-out method in the European legal system , because this allows Google to digitise works without the author 's consent .
I think we should adopt broader measures for the European Union in this area .
I also think that if we want to compete , in the positive sense of the word , with Google , or also to cooperate with the company , we should certainly speed up work relating to Europeana and , in particular , bring about an acceleration of work in this area in the Member States .
Madam President , I have a little story to tell to illustrate my point .
Probably the first copyright case in the history of the world took place in Ireland 1 500 years ago , when a monk called Finian invited another monk called Columcille to his monastery .
Finian was writing a manuscript at the time .
Columcille discovered it and got up each night to copy it .
Finian was not pleased and he asked for it back .
He did not get it back so he appealed to the High King .
The High King heard the case and made a judgment , which was - I will say it in Irish first - do gach bó a lao , do gach leabhar a chóip , or ' to every cow her calf , to every book its copy ' .
That is as relevant today as it was 1 500 years ago , because copyright and intellectual rights have to be guaranteed .
So I say , ' to every cow her calf , to every book its copy ' and to every author and artist their copyright and intellectual rights .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is doing its utmost to develop the digital field in our society .
It seems to me that Google - and particularly its books project - has appeared as a great integrating factor for the European Union , because , as you know very well , - and this is in all papers - copyright so far has been explicitly in the hands of Member States and national legislation .
Now we need some kind of common approach , for which the Commission is very happy to provide proposals .
The next Commission will definitely take all these issues very seriously and this will be a high priority .
We agree that the books need to go online and fast .
They will go anyway , whether we want it or not .
The most important thing is that authors need to be paid for online books .
We are planning a framework directive on these issues - including collective societies , which need to be transparent and accountable to their members .
The framework directive will appear somewhere between autumn 2010 and spring 2011 .
We should not fall behind , and we are proposing simple EU rules on orphan book works and also books which are out of print .
The EU proposal will ensure that books are only digitised with prior permission , and there will also be a serious search for orphan works .
Let us continue this discussion .
Once again , we would thank the Committee on Legal Affairs , and the honourable Members Mrs Niebler and Mr Lehne , for their initiative in initiating this interesting debate .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Google Books , the new service offered by Google , has given rise to a number of controversies recently .
The project is based on free access to large numbers of scanned books , whereby four million of the scanned books are by European authors .
The situation raises questions about limiting internet freedom and about the challenges faced by legislators as a result of a dynamically developing information society .
As the European Commission rightly points out , the digitisation of copyright books should fully respect the principle of copyright and properly reward authors , who have the most to benefit from the wider European public accessing their works .
At the same time , however , the Commission has raised the question of the suitability of the European system of copyright for meeting the challenges of the digital age : does the present acquis allow European consumers access to digitised versions of books ?
Does it guarantee payment to their authors ?
The Google Books Project makes books available to a far wider readership than a conventional library would .
The free distribution of books on the web , however , has come up against restrictions similar to those that have appeared in music publishing .
The law has not kept up with the development of digital communications , so a new legal framework needs to be created which makes it possible to regulate a changing reality .
There also needs to be a compromise between the benefits of projects such as Google Books and authors ' rights in terms of being rewarded for their works .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 and resumed at 12.00 )

Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
1 .
European Year of Volunteering ( 2011 ) (
- Before the vote :
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would very quickly like to thank Parliament , all the committees , the rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs for their work on this report .
We have prepared a report which raises the profile of the voluntary sector .
There are 100 million people throughout Europe who work in this field , and each day they selflessly give their time for the good of others and our community .
This is the work we have done , increasing the budget and improving local activities and EU-wide activities for the benefit of the associations .
I would like to thank Mr Šefčovič and the Swedish Presidency for the excellent work we have accomplished together .
I think that this year will mark the beginning of Parliament showing a true interest in this area , which someone called the backbone of our society .
Once again , I would like to thank all those who have worked on this important report .
2 .
EC / Ukraine agreement for scientific and technological cooperation (
3 .
Terms of Reference for the International Partnership for Energy Efficiency Cooperation ( IPEEC ) and the Memorandum concerning the hosting by the International Energy Agency of the Secretariat to the International Partnership for Energy Efficiency Cooperation (
4 .
Enlargement strategy 2009 concerning the countries of the western Balkans , Iceland and Turkey ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
Colleagues , I now have an announcement to make which is perhaps very appropriate as we have just voted on our report on the 2009 enlargement strategy .
I am very pleased to inform you that we have with us here today a delegation of Members of the Croatian Parliament , the Sabor .
( Applause )
They are led by Mr Mario Zubović , who has just concluded the tenth meeting of the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee .
Dear Members of the Sabor , we welcome you to our European Parliament here in Strasbourg .
As you can see , we debated about enlargement this week and we want Croatia to join the European Union as soon as possible .
( Applause )
You are , of course , facing the last and challenging rounds of the negotiation and we warmly encourage you to step up your preparation efforts .
Dear colleagues , we look forward to welcoming Croatian observers to the European Parliament very soon and we look forward to sitting with you in this House in the course of this parliamentary term .
Many thanks for your visit here today .
1 .
Elimination of violence against women ( vote )
2 .
A political solution with regard to the piracy off the Somalian coast ( vote )
3 .
Smoke-free environments ( vote )
4 .
The ratification and implementation of the updated ILO conventions ( vote )
5 .
FAO World Summit on Food Security - Eradicating hunger from the face of the earth ( vote )
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( RO ) I wanted to highlight above all the quality of the efforts made by Gabriele Albertini in drafting the motion .
I also wanted to say that I voted in favour of this motion , given that enlargement is an important political gesture for the EU .
I also want to point out that I have voted differently from my political group on several issues , basically linked to Kosovo , as I hold a different view to the majority of European countries about Kosovo .
Therefore , I voted differently on Amendment 17 in Article 19 , Amendment 22 , Amendment 24 and also after citation 4 in point 10 .
I still regard enlargement as being very important , but I also believe that the differences expressed by five of the Member States must be taken into account .
( ES ) Madam President , the votes of the Spanish socialist delegation on Kosovo support international non-recognition of Kosovo 's unilateral declaration as an independent State .
( BG ) I voted against the enlargement strategy resolution because it contains many flattering words about the progress Turkey is making under the Copenhagen criteria .
I do not see any sign of this progress .
Fellow Members , please understand once and for all that Turkey is a country which , less than 100 years ago , committed genocide against the peoples within its borders and peoples which had recently liberated themselves from Turkish rule .
Today , Turkey still continues to commit genocide , and its population and political class are proud of these actions committed by their country .
Twenty years ago , Turkey sponsored terrorist organisations and exported terrorism .
It continues to foster close links with terrorist organisations even to this day .
If we want to have a country in the European Union which is still proud of genocide and sponsors terrorism , then go ahead and accept it .
However , I am definitely against this .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report , but I would like to raise one important issue with regard to it .
In my view , we in the European Parliament and the European Union need to ensure that all countries aspiring to membership of the European Union demonstrate compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
It is very important to make sure that human rights , democracy , freedom of opinion and the rule of law can be implemented .
Today , we also voted on women 's rights and for women to have the right to a life in which they do not have to put up with violence .
I think that it is very important in this connection to ensure that the rights of women and children are implemented in any country that wants to join the European Union .
With respect to all this , I am mainly talking about Turkey .
Turkey has to implement speedy reforms and changes if it is to be ready to join the European Union , although I do not myself share the belief that that will happen in our lifetime .
It is nevertheless most important that we in the European Union jointly adhere to the agreed rules , the Copenhagen criteria .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have also voted no , because I am of the opinion that Turkey must first fulfil all the criteria , before we can make such a positive statement here .
In particular , I would like to highlight the border dispute between Cyprus and Turkey , which has still not been settled this year , and the illegal occupation of Cyprus , which has not yet been brought to an end .
However , I did not want to vote against the other accession candidates .
I would particularly make an exception in the case of the Balkan States which I would like to welcome here in this House as soon as possible .
( PL ) Mr President , I abstained from voting on this resolution , although the question is important , and even very important .
However , I do not see why the question of combating violence against women should be taken together with the question of reproductive choice .
During the debate on this subject yesterday , some of the speakers were talking nonsense .
Mrs Senyszyn accused the Catholic Church of oppressing women .
It would be difficult to say something more absurd .
In Poland , there are no honour killings , circumcision of girls is not a general practice , there is no selective abortion , there are no temporary marriages , and people are not stoned for actual or claimed adultery .
Women do not suffer discrimination by the law in any way , and all instances of violence against women are universally condemned , both by the citizens and by the Catholic Church .
Fortunately , extreme statements of this kind did not find their way into the resolution , so I only abstained .
( IT ) Mr President , I have voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the elimination of violence against women .
I am dedicating my vote to the nearly seven million Italian women who are subjected to violence by men each year .
Of course , I also dedicate it to all those women in Europe who find themselves in the same situation .
At times , we are tempted to believe that this is a phenomenon that takes place on the fringes of our society when , in reality , violence against women is carried out above all within the home .
Thus , it is a phenomenon which directly affects us .
Elderly women have greater difficulty in protecting themselves .
Therefore , we must not forget about them , because violence is not only physical ; it is also cultural .
It can also mean denying a person their freedom of movement .
Moreover , before reaching adulthood , women are young girls , and violence against a young girl will prevent her from enjoying life forever .
I therefore hope that , from this point forward , Parliament will take concrete measures to ensure that all this does not remain just a good intention .
( SV ) Mr President , violence against women is a widespread problem throughout Europe and , indeed , the world .
In Sweden alone , with a population of nine million , 380 women are abused every day .
A fifth of the female population is subjected to violence and 45 % of all women between the ages of 16 and 64 have , at some time in their lives , been victims of acts of violence .
This is absolutely appalling .
Being subjected to violence in the home is a horrendous violation of personal integrity .
Men and women should have the same chance of physical integrity .
The violence that goes on across our continent is evidence that the work of promoting equality in Europe still has a long way to go .
The EU cannot continue to ignore these facts .
I therefore welcome the resolution on elimination of violence against women and call on the new Commission and the Council to also assume their share of the responsibility in this matter .
I intend to ensure that the Commission is forced to table a proposal to improve the situation with regard to violence against women .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this resolution wholeheartedly because I think that we need to join forces across political groups towards a common goal - to denounce , raise awareness of and combat all forms of violence against women .
I am particularly sensitive to the women in conflict as I shared , provided help during , and lived through , all the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina and partly also with the Red Cross in Darfur .
I think that we now have a fantastic instrument with the Stockholm Programme to enable us to move from words to action .
I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency for having included empowerment and combating violence against women in the Stockholm Programme .
I will definitely work towards there being a priority , in the implementation of the Stockholm Programme , for combating violence against women .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to stress that the subject of violence against women is extremely important , and I am very glad that the European Parliament has taken up this problem .
Worthy of particular attention is the problem of the most aggressive and brutal sexually motivated crimes , which are committed against women but which do not always meet with an adequate reaction from the justice system in some European countries .
Sentences handed down by courts in such cases are often extremely lenient , which in some cases causes women to lose motivation to report the drastic incidents which have happened to them to the law enforcement authorities .
This leads to the existence of invisible crime statistics .
This is why , in cases of these most drastic and serious crimes against women , where violence is used and which are sexually motivated , we should give greater attention to efforts at standardising sentencing , to give a sense of security and also a certain feeling of justice and moral satisfaction to women who have been affected in such a cruel way .
I would like to stress that I could not vote in favour of the final text of the resolution because of its ideological and radical attitude to the question of abortion , an attitude which conflicts with Christian values .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to give an explanation of vote on the question of combating tobacco smoking , if possible .
A very short statement .
Mr Wojciechowski , the rules state that we must deal with one subject after another .
We have just discussed the subject of the elimination of violence against women and we will now be moving to the subject of a political solution with regard to the piracy off the Somalian coast .
One thing at a time !
( NL ) The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) voted against the motion for a resolution on Somalia , and I should like to explain why .
The PVV takes the view that the monitoring of vessels off the coast of Somalia is not a task for the EU ; instead , it is one hundred per cent a task for NATO .
Europe has no army , nor does it have any business being there .
This is one hundred per cent a job for NATO .
The PVV also takes the view that marines should be present on merchant ships to make it possible to resist direct attacks by pirates .
To reiterate then , the piracy in the sea surrounding Somalia must be stopped , but not this way .
( SK ) The recommendations of the Council on non-smoking environments have the aim of assisting the Member States in their efforts to protect people more effectively from tobacco smoke .
This is in accordance with international obligations arising from the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control .
I support the recommendation .
Smoking continues to be the most frequent cause of diseases which lead to premature deaths .
These include cardiovascular diseases , cancers and chronic diseases of the airways and , to a lesser extent , of reduced fertility in young women and men .
At a time of demographic crisis and the development of new fertility methods which are financially costly , we should focus more on raising awareness .
It is necessary to begin in the family in order to protect our children from the negative effects of smoking .
I would like to conclude with an important request for consistent monitoring to include responses to the activities of the tobacco industry aimed at torpedoing anti-smoking measures .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to speak about two aspects of the smoke-free environment .
Firstly , I have voted in favour of the Member States being given the authority in this area , on the one hand , because of the concept of subsidiarity and , on the other hand , because we do not have any authority .
Although I am very much in favour of a smoke-free environment , I believe that in this case we should play by the rules .
The second aspect is that I find it annoying that the European Union subsidises the cultivation of tobacco .
This will be phased out and I have also voted in favour of this , because I cannot bring it into line with the other idea of banning smoking altogether .
Therefore , we must be consistent .
If we want to combat smoking , then we should not subsidise tobacco cultivation .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the German conservative group ( CSU ) would like to see clear and practical rules for the protection of non-smokers being introduced throughout Europe .
However , in my opinion , ' throughout Europe ' does not necessarily mean ' from within Europe ' .
Many Member States already have in place regulations for protecting non-smokers and others are in the process of introducing regulations of this kind .
I do not believe - in common with the majority of my fellow Members in the European Parliament , which is very pleasing - that we in Brussels must impose regulations for the protection of non-smokers or that we are able to do this more effectively .
The European Union has no authority in this area .
We are only responsible for health and safety at work .
This is where the problem lies , because for me the most important issue is protecting children and young people and this group , which specifically needs protection , would not be covered by regulations that refer only to health and safety at work .
Therefore , the Member States must take action in this area .
I have voted in favour and I am pleased that this amendment was accepted .
Mr President , I come from a country which has introduced a ban on smoking in the workplace .
Indeed , I was a Member of the Irish Parliament at the time and I fully supported the ban .
However , we are in a slightly different position here in the European Parliament , where we have to consider the principle of subsidiarity .
While indeed there may be an issue with regard to the protection of workers ' health - we have legislation in this area already , such as on exposure to electro-magnetic radiation - we cannot ask , as we did in paragraph 7 , that Member States , where smoking bans already exist , respect the principle of equality between different types of establishment in the hospitality sector .
Yesterday , we voted on the role of national parliaments and their powers on proposed EU legislation in the area of subsidiarity under the new Lisbon Treaty , so we have to be very careful that we are coherent in the way we vote .
Finally , I was talking to my colleague at the very beginning and missed the vote on the European Year of Volunteering .
I want to state that I fully support the Parliament proposal for that Year , having led the campaign to ensure that 2011 was designated during the last parliamentary term .
( FR ) Mr President , I feel slightly emotional explaining this vote as my own mother was born in the tobacco factory in this very city of Strasbourg where my grandfather worked .
This factory has just closed down .
When the service in France for producing tobacco and matches , which was a public service at the time , was turned into a limited company , its employees were told that this would be of no consequence to their jobs .
Today , we can also understand the concern of other public service sectors confronted by the same problems .
In actual fact , we can definitely understand and justify the campaign against smoking , with its harmful effects on people 's health .
However , unfortunately , French tobacco production has disappeared .
The tobacco factory in Strasbourg has closed down , but people are still smoking .
They are continuing with tobacco imported from abroad .
This is why I personally support the prices set for European tobacco growers , at least for as long as people go on smoking in Europe .
I prefer to see it grown here rather than imported from elsewhere .
( PL ) Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak .
I support the action being taken by the European Union to reduce tobacco consumption , but I do not think this action should be based on reducing support for tobacco producers .
This is because tobacco production is not related to its consumption .
If we reduce or eliminate production , or if we withdraw support from farms which produce tobacco , there will still be consumption , only it will be consumption of imported tobacco .
Fighting the tobacco producers is not the way to reduce smoking .
That would be rather like trying to reduce beer consumption among young people by starting with a fight against hops producers .
This is why I endorsed with my vote the position which says that production of tobacco does not influence its consumption .
( SK ) The food crisis is not only an economic and humanitarian problem but also a question of world peace and security .
I was delighted to support the approved resolution , even though I have reservations over the solution to the question of world hunger .
The meeting of the World Summit on Food Security did not take the direction desired by the organisers .
Even though the fight against hunger is a problem with socio-economic , financial and cultural dimensions , the discussions in the meeting were restricted just to the technical level .
Even FAO Director-General Jacques Diouf was disappointed with the meeting and with the fact that representatives of western countries did not participate in the meeting .
The representatives of the developed world did not adopt any concrete obligations .
I cannot help seeing the question of solving hunger and poverty as a media topic rather than a concrete problem requiring an urgent solution .
The foundation of solidarity is a willingness to assume real responsibility when meeting with others who are in need .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - The UKIP admires volunteering and recognises the contribution to society it can make .
However , this report called for the naked politicisation of volunteering for EU purposes , and for the use of the British taxpayers ' money to achieve this politicisation .
Thus , we could not support the motion .
in writing . - The notion of volunteering is crucial in modern day societies .
It is something that is done out of the free will of the person concerned and can have an incredibly positive impact on the lives of many .
The European Year of Volunteering is hence an important initiative .
I am in agreement with the rapporteur .
It is for these reasons that I have chosen to vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal in recognition of the many volunteers who do invaluable work without the recognition they deserve .
Without their contribution to society , for which they receive no monetary remuneration , the United Kingdom would be a lesser place .
While against the whole principle of European citizenship , I recognise the value of the service provided by volunteers .
Therefore , I supported this proposal .
I voted in favour of Mr Scurria 's report on the European Year of Volunteering ( 2011 ) , advocating greater support from the institutions of the EU for this sector , which involves millions of European citizens and is essential for the promotion of solidarity and social inclusion .
I believe that both the budget and coordination need to be increased at Community level , so as to consolidate the initiatives that form part of the European Year of Volunteering , such as awareness campaigns and transnational exchanges focusing on ideas and good practice .
The most basic definition of volunteering is goodwill in action .
It is offered without charge , and it is generous , freely given and without strings .
It is also a fundamental pillar of any society , as the work of thousands of volunteers , young and old , acting in a formal or informal capacity , in the fields of health , welfare , education , the environment or culture , makes a difference to thousands of lives every single day .
In view of this , we should welcome the initiative of launching a European Year of Volunteering , which will give due prominence to the anonymous faces of these volunteers , making us all aware of their tremendous work and seeking to create more favourable conditions for them to carry out their activities .
This idea is in line with those of the Democratic and Social Centre - People 's Party , the first and only Portuguese political party to look at the issue of volunteering and make practical proposals to help volunteers , giving them the dignity and recognition that they deserve .
We voted in favour of this report , despite certain contradictions and small parts of it with which we do not agree .
Volunteering undoubtedly plays an important role in society , promoting the value of solidarity and mutual aid , contributing to social integration and helping to overcome discriminatory views , among other aspects .
The report tackles basic aspects , such as social support for the volunteer , focusing on issues like health , safety and training , and the distinction between paid work and voluntary activities .
Nevertheless , we believe that it needs to be ensured that volunteering does not come to substitute action by Member States , and that it must not be used as a way of fulfilling needs which are the responsibility of the social services .
We advocate the need to promote the activities of non-profit organisations through effective and sufficient support .
Such organisations include : cooperative groups ; collectives and local societies ; local residents ' associations ; sports , leisure , cultural , youth organisations , and those aimed at children .
We must also emphasise that voluntary work is equally dependent on workers having free time , and that it is incompatible with exploitation , irregular or excessive working hours , low salaries and job insecurity .
in writing . - It is with great pleasure that I have voted in favour of naming 2011 as the European Year of Volunteering .
It is a great boon to the numerous voluntary organisations in all of our Member States of the EU .
I would like to point out that sporting organisations play a central role in volunteering and , despite this not being stipulated explicitly in the legislative text , nevertheless needs to be acknowledged .
Indeed , the largest voluntary association in Ireland is the Gaelic Athletic Association .
The efforts of all involved in this great institution need to be duly recognised and lauded .
Mr President , volunteering represents the expression of European social values such as solidarity and non-discrimination .
While it contributes to the personal development of volunteers on the one hand , it creates social cohesion on the other .
Therefore , it requires due recognition and support from the European institutions , the Member States , local and regional authorities and various members of civil society , each according to their individual expertise .
The European Year of Volunteering ( 2011 ) will enable the activities organised in this field to take on a European dimension , and therefore the hope is that this will have a major impact on civil society .

The estimated EUR 3 million for preparatory initiatives in 2010 , the increase in European Parliament-approved appropriations to EUR 8 million for 2011 and a high percentage - 1.8 % to be precise - of cofinancing for the projects , will indeed enable the objectives set to be achieved , with the various levels working together .
Finally , it is worth mentioning the role that volunteering , if supported properly , can play with regard to retired workers , given the growing number of elderly people in civil society .
I voted in favour of the draft report on the European Year of Volunteering for a number of reasons .
It is well known that voluntary activities offer a two-fold benefit : for the individual and for society .
On the one hand , volunteering offers citizens the chance to learn and acquire new skills and for self-development .
On the other hand , it also has a social function , contributing to the creation of a sense of solidarity and belonging .
Bearing in mind the ever-growing interdependence of local communities in a globalised world and , at the same time , the worsening extent of individualistic behaviour , it is becoming vital to encourage social participation by citizens .
I am referring in this instance to activities involving both young and old alike .
Furthermore , I think that the exchange of experiences first-hand between volunteer organisations from the most diverse corners of the European Union has a major impact , given that the values motivating them all are the same .
The purpose is identical : to raise the standard of living and improve the quality of life , ensure a high level of employment , improve social cohesion and combat exclusion .
In other words , these are precisely the values on which the European Union is founded .
in writing . - Despite the request for a budget increase which I opposed and voted against at the committee stages , I nonetheless fully support the Report on the European Year of Volunteering overall .
Volunteers are often unsung heroes .
They make an immeasurable impact in their communities and on people 's lives .
In tough economic times like these , volunteering becomes all the more important and that is why I and others who brought this report forward are keen not only to raise awareness of the benefits of volunteering , but also to create a European Year where properly-funded initiatives will provide volunteering organisations the opportunity to encourage new volunteers to come forward .
We must ensure that the European Year of Volunteering is used as a platform for recognition of the contribution volunteers make to our communities , but also use this as an opportunity for us to better understand the barriers to volunteering and what we can do to help remove them and push volunteering forward .
This is an example of what the EU should be doing - exchanging best practice in areas such as volunteering rather than creating more and more needless bureaucracy .
I supported the report on the European Year of Volunteering in 2011 , intended to promote dialogue and the exchange of good volunteering practice between authorities and stakeholders in our Member States .
With the increase over recent years in individualistic behaviour , the quest for new ways of individual expression , or even the changing demographic trends , civic participation has undergone major changes .
Therefore , volunteering must also adapt to enable a larger number of people to get involved in volunteering in different ways and at different times in their life .
This can mean tapping the potential offered by the elderly and defining new forms of involvement with greater flexibility in terms of duration and ways to participate .
Europe , which has a long volunteering tradition , must help release the potential this offers .
Volunteering provides those involved with a channel for learning ( it is obvious that participation in voluntary activities provides citizens with new skills , contributes to their personal development and increases their sense of belonging to society ) .
It also embodies such European values as solidarity , civic participation and non-discrimination in sectors as varied as education , culture , the environment , social welfare or health .
I endorsed the report on the European Year of Volunteering ( 2011 ) .
In the Member States of the European Union , we must give more importance to the question of volunteering , and should plan political action which supports the work of volunteers .
The amendments proposed by the European Parliament introduce many significant changes to the Commission 's proposal , and these should be included by the Council .
The budgetary amount earmarked for achievement of the objectives of the European Year of Volunteering ( 2011 ) , which amounts to EUR 6 million , is insufficient ( by way of comparison , the budget for the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion is nearly three times higher ) .
Volunteering is a gratuitous and unpaid activity , but this does not mean that it does not generate any costs .
Volunteering needs financial and political support from all interested parties : non-government organisations , governments , administrative bodies of both national and local government , and businesses .
Political commitment should be seen in the form of favourable policy which supports the development and infrastructure of volunteering .
This matter is especially important for Poland , which will hold the EU Presidency in 2011 .
I would like to ask the Government of Poland to follow the example set by the European Parliament and take action to increase financial support for the European Year of Volunteering .
I fully support the proposal to designate financial means for the creation of an interactive database for volunteers and voluntary organisations , which would be accessible to all stakeholders and which would continue to operate after 2011 .
The year 2011 will be the European Year of Volunteering , and will be intended to honour and distinguish volunteers and their contribution to society .
It is a wonderful proposal .
Volunteering occurs in many different forms all over Europe , but everywhere , irrespective of the place , it is characterised by the fact that people want to help others without being paid , or they willingly get involved in environmental protection or work to ensure that every citizen can live with dignity .
It is worth stressing the fact that volunteering unquestionably has a positive influence on the developing identity of Europe , which has its roots in these values and is a good basis for developing understanding between citizens of the different social groups and countries of the entire European society .
In addition , volunteering is significant for integration , social policy and education .
We should also remember that it has great significance for intercultural dialogue and dialogue between generations , and it contributes to the development of social responsibility .
Volunteering also has economic value , and we must not forget this .
It is , indeed , an unpaid and gratuitous activity , but this does not mean , however , that it does not involve any financial outlay .
For this reason , it is important that volunteering receive support from the European Community .
Volunteering requires policy based on friendly relations , which will support its development and infrastructure .
I think that supporting the reward and recognition of voluntary activities by using certain financial means will motivate individuals , businesses and organisations .
I would like to explain my vote on the report of Marco Scurria on the proposal for a Council Decision on the European Year of Volunteering .
Personally , I consider unpaid voluntary activities to be an important part of our society .
In my own country , the Czech Republic , the most numerous and long-established voluntary organisations are the voluntary fire fighters .
Their traditions go back a long way to a period when the need to avert catastrophic elemental disasters such as fires always brought together a few dozen volunteers whose aim was to protect their own property and that of their neighbours and other people they lived with .
The most widely-spread and oldest organisations involved in voluntary work also include the Czech Red Cross , the Czech Tourists ' Club , the Sokol gymnastic association , the Junák youth organisation and the voluntary mountain rescue service .
All of these people who help in schools , hospitals and sports clubs or in the mountains , or who travel abroad to provide aid , deserve recognition .
In this regard , it will surely be wholly beneficial to dedicate the year 2011 to this theme .
For this reason I voted in favour of the report .
It is generally possible to welcome any agreement which improves cooperation with states neighbouring the European Union .
If we compare the position of the states neighbouring the EU , then we see that - after Russia - the most important partner is Ukraine .
The exchange of information in the fields of science and technology , the joint implementation of programmes , worker exchanges and the sharing of expertise in the area of managing scientific and research institutions , these are aims that can only be supported .
However , I would like to raise a specific reservation over the method of assessing the agreement .
If the authors introduce efficiency indicators such as ' number of work trips and meetings ' , and even ' number of different areas of cooperative endeavour ' then I have serious doubts as to the familiarity of the report 's author with the issue in question .
Section 7 , ' Measures Against Fraud ' , makes a quite desperate impression , while statement 8.2.2 makes me question my sanity .
In the age of electronic communications , I cannot understand why a ' report ' on an agreement requires work trips and participation in meetings on the part of specialists and officials from the EU and Ukraine .
In conclusion , I am happy to support this framework agreement because I know that in the Sixth Framework Programme , developments in science and research were already being integrated very actively and with genuinely good results .
The aforementioned reservations notwithstanding , the GUE / NGL group supports the decision of the Council .
in writing . - The UKIP is not opposed to cooperation in the field of energy efficiency , but insists that such cooperation must be conducted by democratically elected governments and not by their unaccountable proxies in an anti-democratic supranational organisation such as the EU .
As we face a flood of applications for EU membership , the vote on this resolution could not have come at a better time .
The EU is a rock of stability on this continent .
It cannot remain a club which is closed to other European states , but it cannot open its doors indefinitely either .
The European Union must , above all , make a success of the enlargements it has already carried out for the new Member States .
As for the other states knocking on its door , the prerequisite for initiating any accession negotiations remains strict compliance with the Copenhagen criteria ( democracy , rule of law , human rights , gender equality , market economy , etc . ) , along with unconditional observance of international law .
Accession negotiations with candidate countries must be based on objectively measurable criteria , such as respect for rights and economic criteria , and avoid any kind of subjective reference based on values , religion or culture .
In my view , what we therefore need to do is as follows : confirm the Balkans ' suitability for EU membership ; remember that enlargement and consolidation are inextricably linked ; insist , in the case of Turkey , on compliance with the accession criteria ; and , in the event of the negotiations ' failure , propose a special association agreement .
In spite of all the criticism that can be levelled at it , it has been unequivocally shown that many countries harbour an enormous desire to join the European Union .
The brutal and turbulent history of several of these countries , particularly in the Balkans , has strengthened their conviction that they would be free of both the expansionist tendencies of their neighbours and the influence of Russia if they were sheltered under the umbrella of the European Union .
Looking at the countries on the list , it is relatively easy to spot the inequality between different countries in terms of their enthusiasm and espousal of the conditions for joining the European Union .
As I see it , Iceland stands out from this group , as its tradition of democracy , the high living standards of its citizens and its respect for the community acquis put it first in line for the accession process .
Aware of the need to adhere strictly to the criteria set out in Copenhagen , and to meet the commitments resulting therefrom , the European Union should not , through blind obstinacy , refuse to embrace those who show themselves ready to do the same .
This resolution is yet another case where , in relation to enlargement and a statement published by the European Commission , entitled ' Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2009-2010 ' , the majority in Parliament wants to acknowledge Kosovo , even saying that they ' welcome the Commission 's intention to strengthen its relations with Kosovo , including exploring the possibility of Kosovo 's participation in Community programmes . '
This encourages the future accession of a territory that has proclaimed its independence in blatant violation of international law , ignoring the fact that it is a state that is the product of an illegal war , a state that operates on the basis of an illegal statute which is not recognised by the UN .
Neither is the issue of Turkey adequately covered , given that this country continues its military occupation of an EU Member State - Northern Cyprus - and does not respect the rights of the Kurdish people as it should .
In view of this , although we believe that the issue of EU enlargement is primarily a decision for the people of each country that wishes to join , we voted against the report as it stands due to the negative aspects of the strategy that it seeks to follow , although this has no legal value .
in writing . - I voted for Amendment 4 .
I very much believe that we have to underline that by non-muslims , we first and foremost mean the Christians , therefore a mention of Christians explicitly next to other religious communities is needed .
Christians are still persecuted in Turkey and it remains one of our biggest concerns .
Christians and their communities are still not able to exercise their belief freely as they should be in a democratic state .
I am convinced that Turkey will be ready for EU accession at the moment when it becomes as easy to raise a Christian church in Turkey as it is to raise a mosque in Brussels .
The process of EU enlargement should always be carefully considered and any new accession should always respect the common points of reference between the countries that make up the EU .
I understand that the accession of Turkey is seen as grounds for a preliminary debate , yet this indicates that there are doubts which , at the very least , justify this debate .
The debate would include issues such as whether Turkey can , geographically speaking , be considered part of Europe , whether its secularity is merely the result of the army which keeps it in check , whether an EU with borders stretching to Iraqi Kurdistan would be wise , and whether , due to its enormous demographic mass , Turkey 's accession would throw the EU off balance .
Moreover , there is a non-negotiable obligation to respect the Copenhagen criteria , the first of which has to do with human rights .
With regard to the resolution on the Commission 's enlargement strategy paper for 2009 , we would like to make it clear , on behalf of the Spanish delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , that the fact that we supported it overall does not in any way mean that we agree with the recognition of Kosovo as an independent State .
We feel that Kosovo is an exceptional case , and we would like to point out that it has not been recognised by Spain or by four other Member States .
Consequently , both in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and today in plenary , we have supported the amendments that were in line with our viewpoint .
Our vote in favour of the resolution is due to the fact that we do not want our position on Kosovo to be understood as a negative attitude to the enlargement process that the countries of the Western Balkans , Turkey and Iceland are now involved in .
I strongly oppose the Commission 's enlargement strategy with regard to Turkey .
The clear majority of EU citizens is against Turkey joining the EU and yet they must help to fund payments of billions of euros to Turkey in its role of official accession candidate .
Turkey is not a European country , either geographically or culturally , or in terms of safeguarding human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The enlargement strategy takes almost no account of the concerns of the citizens of Europe .
Instead it represents the geostrategic interests of the US .
In addition , the unresolved conflicts on Turkey 's borders will become EU problems if Turkey were to join .
I regret the fact that the entire enlargement strategy , which includes Iceland and the western Balkans as well as Turkey , was discussed as a whole and this made it impossible to have a proper , selective , differentiated debate .
The arrogance with which the subject of Turkey 's accession is being handled is reflected in this procedure .
The unwelcome voices of those opposed to accession , who represent the majority of the population , are largely being ignored .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the Commission 's 2009 enlargement strategy paper concerning the Western Balkan countries , Iceland and Turkey , since 6-15 years ago , Lithuania , together with the Baltic States and other Central and Eastern European countries , was in a similar situation to the candidate countries .
Membership of the European Union gave my country and the other new EU Member States and their citizens many new opportunities , and helped to boost the economy and to strengthen democracy and human rights .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union will have a new , more powerful engine that will drive our ship forward more successfully and through the waters of the financial and economic crisis , taking us to a new stage of EU enlargement .
Only once they have joined the EU will the Balkan countries , the infamous ' powder keg ' of Europe , where the world wars were sparked off , be able to remove the barriers to cooperation between the citizens , the business structures and the cultural and scientific experts of the various states that have appeared there in recent years .
It is important not to close the door to Turkey , which can be said to be Europe 's link to the Muslim world .
Turkey 's rapprochement with the EU is changing this country in a good way and there is evidence of many positive steps to strengthen democracy and human rights .
Although we are not yet discussing EU membership for Ukraine , Moldova or the countries of the South Caucasus in concrete terms , such a prospect in the future can contribute to stability , economic strengthening , reduced corruption and the consolidation of the rule of law in these countries .
The EU enlargement process is taking place at the moment against the background of a harsh , far-reaching recession , which has hit both the EU and the countries involved in the enlargement process .
I welcome the progress made by Turkey in meeting the criteria for joining the European Union , especially the fact that this country signed the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Nabucco pipeline .
The implementation of this agreement remains one of the biggest priorities in the area of EU energy security .
I support the requests made to the Turkish Government to continue reforming its social policies , to improve social dialogue on the labour market , as well as to step up efforts in the area of women 's rights and gender equality , especially when it comes to combating gender violence .
in writing . - We vote against the motion for a resolution ' The Commission 's 2009 enlargement strategy paper concerning the Western Balkan countries , Iceland and Turkey ' by Gabriele Albertini , because we believe that neither Turkey nor the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shows any progress in meeting the Copenhagen criteria , nor do they demonstrate any political behaviour which would allow them to become EU members We hope to improve their efforts in order to meet the accession criteria , a fact that will be examined in the future .
In any case , we do not wish to vote for a motion for a resolution that will give rise to vain hopes and will be used exclusively for internal consumption .
The motion for a resolution on the European Commission 's current enlargement strategy is very balanced .
It rewards the progress made by the accession candidates but , at the same time , clearly identifies the problems .
Turkey , in particular , has taken a major step backwards .
Therefore , I welcome the explicit criticism of the serious threats to , and genuine restrictions on , freedom of speech and of the press .
The completely disproportionate tax penalty imposed on the opposition Dogan Media Group is a targeted attack against those who criticise the government .
Objections have rightly been made to the discrimination against religious minorities and Turkey 's refusal to implement the Ankara protocol .
In addition , it is also important that we take a careful look at Turkish foreign policy .
Its openness towards Armenia and the Kurds has so far been nothing more than gesture politics and has even been opposed by the Turkish parliament and by large sections of the population .
The statements made by the Turkish Prime Minister also call into question Turkey 's hoped-for role as a mediator between East and West .
Turkey 's flattery of the Iranian President , its invitation to the Sudanese President , who is wanted for genocide , to attend a conference , and its dealings with Israel , seem to indicate that it is turning away from the West .
Therefore , our call for the Turkish Government to coordinate its foreign policy with that of the EU and to drop its objections to the cooperation between NATO and the EU is simply consistent .
in writing . - I am in favour of the EU being open to countries who meet the criteria for membership .
I am concerned that this resolution presents enlargement as being imperative for the countries in question as well as the EU .
It does not conceive of the possibility that it may be in the best interests of the countries concerned to remain outside the EU for a variety of social , economic or other reasons .
EU membership is a big step for the countries concerned and it deserves the fullest possible debate and consultation involving the citizens of those countries .
For this reason , I abstained .
The International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women is an incentive by the UN and the Council of Europe which aims to discuss and give greater visibility to the victims of domestic violence and other types of mistreatment .
The situation of this issue in Portugal is worrying .
The number of crimes of domestic violence recorded by the Portuguese Association for Victim Support ( APAV ) has increased by 9 % on the same period in 2008 .
According to the APAV , physical and psychological abuse , threats and sexual assaults have seen a major increase compared with the 2008 figures .
Twenty-six women have died this year in Portugal already , as victims of domestic violence .
Nonetheless , the vast majority of acts of violence are not reported through fear and shame .
The EU needs to step up its efforts to combat this issue .
I agree with the need to encourage Member States to draw up national plans of action for combating violence against women .
We support any initiative that might help to change attitudes , in conjunction with the organisation of a European Year to combat violence against women , so as to expose it and alert both the public and the authorities to this worrying situation .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the elimination of violence against women as I believe that the Commission and the Council need to consolidate EU action in this area .
The EU urgently needs a more comprehensive policy on combating violence against women , specifically through the Commission drawing up a draft directive to ensure a clear legal basis for combating all forms of violence against women , including trafficking .
We should acknowledge and welcome the fact that the Spanish Presidency makes this issue a priority in its plan of action .
In a week when the frightening figures for cases of domestic violence have hit the headlines in Portugal , I believe that violence against women and children is a topic that requires consideration and serious action by governments .
I condemn all kinds of violence , but particularly when it is used against those who are in a more vulnerable position - socially , economically or emotionally - as children and women often are .
The Member States should therefore seek to eliminate all forms of violence against women and children , especially trafficking for sexual exploitation , sexually motivated attacks and domestic violence .
Respect for human life and dignity is not consistent with crimes whose victims are many European women and children , which is why firm policies on the prevention of violence and the punishment of its perpetrators are necessary .
On the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , we wish to raise awareness of this serious social , economic and political problem that undermines women 's rights in many different areas , including at work , among their families , and in society in general .
Violence against women is a violation of human rights and an obstacle to their participation in social and political life , and in their public and professional life , preventing them from acting as full citizens .
Although the many types of violence vary according to culture and traditions , economic and social crises of capitalism increase women 's vulnerability , both collectively and individually , adding to their exploitation and driving them towards poverty and marginalisation , which also feeds the trafficking of women and prostitution .
It is therefore crucial that we consolidate financial measures and policies that are genuinely committed to strengthening the role of women in society by promoting equal rights on both a Community and national level , and by implementing real plans to combat all forms of violence against women , along with eliminating residual discrimination and protecting and supporting victims .
As we mark the 10th anniversary of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , it has to be said that the preventive measures which have been implemented with this purpose in mind have not achieved the expected results .
How can we explain this phenomenon ?
Judging from the debates which have been held in this Chamber , we can put a label on it : gender inequality .
If this inequality was the fundamental cause of this phenomenon , countries in northern Europe , which are renowned for their very progressive culture and customs , ought to have the best results .
In fact , this is not the case ; if anything , it is the opposite .
According to the Norwegian daily newspaper Aftenposten , 6 % of young women in Sweden aged between 15 and 25 have been raped in one year .
Courage is required to be able to say that the rise in acts of violence against women has coincided with the mass arrival of immigrants from outside Europe whose culture and traditions are totally opposite to ours .
The burkha , forced marriages , polygamy , female genital mutilation , honour crimes and other forms of behaviour from another era are unacceptable .
It therefore makes it absolutely absurd to continue to encourage this immigration while wanting to combat violence against women .
It makes perfect sense for the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality to remind us , as we mark the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women , that , in spite of the countless legal instruments and UN declarations , not to mention the numerous resolutions in this Parliament made over many decades , we are still far from a situation of zero tolerance with regard to violence against women .
There is no denying that violence by men against women is a violation of human rights and must be punished as such .
This Parliament must therefore remind Member States of their obligations to reinforce their legislations and policies to enable them to combat effectively all forms of violence against women .
Unfortunately , we have again over-egged the pudding in the resolution tabled before us and , in particular , we have ignored the principle of subsidiarity .
Making a request to the Council and Commission for a legal basis to be created for combating all forms of violence against women displays the height of ignorance of the treaties .
A legal basis cannot be created .
It either exists or not .
Asking for a further high-level conference to be held will only incur expense which would be better allocated to specific measures .
I welcome the vote in the European Parliament on the resolution for eliminating violence against women on this International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
The declaration of this day by the UN in 1999 and the adoption of this resolution today are valuable instruments for reminding national governments of their obligations arising from the international treaties concerning the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women .
This is why I support this resolution , with an immediate request for Member States to reinforce their national legislations and policies on combating all forms of violence against women .
At European Union level , it is particularly vital to guarantee assistance and support for all victims of violence , especially those affected by human trafficking , regardless of their nationality , as well as to ensure protection for women who are victims of domestic violence whose legal status might depend on their partner .
When we talk about violence against women , we are discussing something that is clearly a reality in all the Member States , as one in four women is a victim of violence .
In an EU that sees itself as the champion of rights and freedoms for all its citizens , we must make every effort to put a stop to this scourge .
The adoption of this draft resolution is a very important step towards finding new solutions , hence my vote .
I voted in favour of this resolution as violence against women is still a problem which is all too prevalent in Romania and worldwide , making it necessary to adopt urgent measures to combat this scourge .
Legislation is no longer the problem , but its application in the situation where many women are reluctant to report to the authorities the acts of violence they are subjected to , preferring to endure the suffering in silence .
I believe that a powerful campaign is needed across the whole of society , based on continuous , long-term activities aimed at influencing attitudes so that everyone realises that violence against women is not permitted and not excused .
I agree that coordinated action is needed at the same time from the authorities and civil society in order to support victims of domestic violence .
in writing . - I welcome Parliament 's commitment to this cause .
In particular , it is critical to ensure that the women in some of the most vulnerable circumstances , such as in ' trafficking of women ' , fall under this assistance .
I am appalled that the ECR Group , which contains the British Conservatives , has submitted an amendment to this proposal which reduces its coverage .
I would point out that many victims are those who live in poverty or are immigrants or from minority groups within our populations .
Removing these women from assistance aimed at helping these most vulnerable people is as illogical as it is inhuman .
I am equally appalled that the Greens should disagree and promote deletion of sensible wording covering tolerance of prostitution , where it is clear much violence against women occurs .
Women are easy victims for any form of violence due to their unequal position in all class societies , in which they are open to class and gender oppression .
Physical abuse , rape , trafficking and so on are forms of violence which demonstrate the gender dimension of the class aspect of female inequality .
However , violence is a social phenomenon with specific economic , political and social causes .
These causes , which are rooted in the capitalist relations of production , cannot be eliminated as long as these relations exist .
The grassroots movements must demand measures to prevent this phenomenon and relieve the victims , women and children , by seeking radical changes in favour of the people at social and political level .
We radically disagree with the creation by NGOs and private individuals of counselling centres and agencies to support maltreated women .
The state alone must be responsible for these .
Not only will the measures proposed in the resolution be unable to eliminate the problem , because they do not touch the causes ; they also seek to manage and hence perpetuate the problem .
in writing . - The ECR Group fully supports and stresses the great need to increase awareness and action to combat violence against women .
However , we do not support calls for an EU legal base and further directives ( as in paragraphs 10 , 11 and 27 ) to address the problem .
Whilst we acknowledge that work needs to be done in this area , we believe this is an issue for nation states to legislate upon .
Furthermore , the ECR Group believes that the issues of sexual and reproductive choice and health rights are an issue of conscience for each individual Member and Member State to decide .
For these reasons , the ECR Group has chosen to abstain .
Somalia is one of the most blatant cases of the total breakdown of the central power and the return to a belligerent , tribal way of life , as the country is an epicentre of violence and instability which spreads far beyond its own borders .
The coasts of Somalia have been constantly threatened by armed groups which not only fight for control of the coastal areas , but also carry out intolerable acts of piracy against other vessels , especially commercial , cargo , fishing , humanitarian aid and leisure boats .
The severity and frequency of these events demands an uncompromising reaction from the whole international community , which must include the European Union .
The EU must commit itself to combating piracy and doing everything within its power not only to analyse its causes and consequences , but also to mobilise all Somali and international forces that are available and equipped to deal with it .
I must also praise the entire crew of the Portuguese frigate Corte-Real , in the person of their commander , who have distinguished themselves in the fight against this scourge , and have recently been the subject of a tribute by the International Maritime Organisation .
When discussing the issue of Somalia , we need to remember that there is no military solution to the crisis there , and that we must take into account the country 's lack of financial resources , caused at an international level by the debt crisis , which created a vacuum that was exploited by illegal fishing in its territorial waters , and which was one of the main reasons why Somali fishermen lost their livelihood , as the Somali Government was forced to suspend the country 's coast guard due to a lack of resources .
One of the essential issues , therefore , is to ensure the supply of technical and financial aid , including support for a process of conciliation and mediation between the parties involved in the civil war .
The Commission and the Council should thus review their political strategy for Somalia , including Operation EUNAVFOR Atalanta , and should focus on the more general situation in the country at present , particularly the need to address the humanitarian situation on the ground and help to eradicate the underlying causes of this catastrophic situation which is causing suffering to millions of Somalis .
Finally , we would like to stress that resources intended for aid and development , or the European Development Fund , should not , under any circumstances , be used for military purposes .
in writing . - I am deeply proud to see the UK leading the work of the EU 's first naval ESDP mission , Operation Atalanta , with a British Commander at its head and its operational HQ in the UK .
Atalanta 's work in the protection of vessels delivering food aid to displaced persons in Somalia and in protecting vulnerable vessels off the Somali coast is vitally important .
Labour MEPs echo calls for the unconditional release of all hostages including the two Britons - Paul and Rachel Chandler from Kent - held by Somali pirates .
Our thoughts continue to be with their family , and we praise the ongoing efforts of the UK Foreign Office , who are using all possible connections in East Africa to negotiate the pair 's speedy release .
Finally , on the scope of the Atalanta mission , we note calls in the resolution for its expansion to be considered .
However , I want to put on record that we believe that at the current time , this is not a prospect , and to underline that we must focus on the continued success of the current mission as it stands .
The current situation off the coast of Somalia is wrong on every level and has an impact on all countries .
I think that it is therefore crucial that , pending a political solution to the problem of Somalia , and while there continues to be instability in the area , we should follow a strategy of heightened security for Operation Atalanta , even reinforcing the latter in terms of the means of action open to forces deployed in this operation .
I voted against Resolution because I think that piracy is not a military problem but a development problem .
I therefore believe that the problem should be dealt with at its root , and that the solution cannot be a military one , either by land or by sea .
The officer responsible for Operation Atalanta stated that a maritime solution is impossible , and that the situation in the area needs to be stabilised .
I think we need to tackle the problem of governance , the stability of institutions and economic development in the region .
However much we paper over the cracks , the problem will persist .
By voting against the resolution , I also want to condemn the privatisation of the actions that are within the remit of the armed forces , as in Spain , private security companies are being allowed to go out on vessels with weapons of war .
Moreover , I think we need to put an end to the pirates in Somalia , but also to the foreign pirates that are pillaging in Somali waters .
in writing . - The relative success of Operation Atalanta , now renewed for a year , underlines the fact that although the European Security and Defence Policy has the potential to achieve significant results for Member States , it is still unclear why NATO alone could not match this and thus avoid duplication .
But piracy remains a clear and present danger in the seas around the Horn of Africa .
We need to redouble efforts to defeat this menace , not only to protect our shipping , but to send a clear message of our resolve to the agents of al-Qaeda currently enjoying safe haven in Somalia .
National security does not end at national borders .
Leaving the scourge of piracy unchecked will multiply the EU 's security concerns in the long term .
I also urge the Commission to reconsider how more political support for the relatively stable , prosperous and democratic breakaway former British territory of Somaliland could help to tackle the threat of piracy in the region .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on a political solution to the problem of piracy off the Somali coast because sea piracy is a real problem and will continue to be a problem in waters off the Somali coast .
The EU must protect maritime vessels passing through this region by means of international negotiations and protection measures .
One part of the solution requires international support in bringing stability to Somalia .
The other part of the solution is Operation Atalanta , recently launched by the EU in order to stop piracy off the Somali coast .
Six frigates , three maritime patrol aircraft and 1 200 personnel from the United Kingdom , France and Greece will take part in the operation .
Other states will contribute to the operation in the future .
Operation Atalanta has succeeded in providing protection for high-risk cargos by escorting them .
Thirty-six pirate vessels have been intercepted and 14 direct attacks have been avoided .
However , to be able to enjoy the benefit of this escort , the responsible national bodies and the sea vessels must notify Operation Atalanta and request protection .
It is vital that sea vessels avoid taking needless risks and request , on an official basis and in good time , protection from Operation Atalanta .
in writing . - We are in favour of robust international action to deal with piracy and have no doubt that the Royal Navy and allied navies from the US and other European nations will do a good job .
However , we see no reason for the EU to run up its flag on a naval operation .
We are opposed to the interference of the EU as an institution in defence matters .
This brings no additional military capability and merely duplicates or adds complexity to the well-tried arrangements under NATO .
Operation Atalanta was conceived as a political opportunity to add a maritime dimension to ESDP during the French Presidency .
Despite the presence in the seas off the Horn of Africa of the US-led Combined Task Force 151 and a NATO Maritime Group , it was decided to concoct yet another fleet and a further command chain .
We are also deeply concerned by proposals for an ESDP training mission to Somalia at a time when the EUPOL mission in Afghanistan has been a failure and many European countries have been unwilling to provide troops and police for urgent training missions in Afghanistan .
Incidentally , we do not recognise such terminology as ' EU fishing vessels . '
I welcome this resolution enabling Parliament to support the Commission 's highly voluntary anti-smoking policy .
Exposure to cigarette smoke is the main cause of death and illness in Europe , with smoking imposing a heavy burden on health care systems as well .
I hope that the Commission 's measures will go further and that in the years to come , we will have the right to a healthy environment in all closed spaces and in the workplace .
I cannot fail to mention that we still have a hypocritical policy in Europe .
We want to have fewer health problems caused by smoking , however we support the retention of subsidies for cigarette manufacturers , even though they are gradually being reduced .
I think that the common agricultural policy should be defined to reward products which help maintain and improve people 's state of health , not jeopardise it .
I hope that the Council meeting in December will discuss protection for children , especially in cases where they are exposed to smoking by adults in private cars or in other closed spaces .
I believe that adults have a responsibility in this respect , and where the legislator can intervene , it must do so .
I believe that we must protect non-smokers from passive smoking , but also make smokers aware of the impact of their addiction on themselves and others .
They must not be left in any doubt about this .
In Belgium , we also have a head-start on this issue because our country has already advocated a total ban on smoking in the hospitality sector and at all places of work by 2012 .
Having said this , I would still like to express two concerns .
Firstly , are we heading towards a society that imposes blanket bans ?
What do we do about individual responsibility ?
I feel a sense of unease about a society resembling the one described by George Orwell in his novel ' 1984 ' .
Secondly , if smokers have to be made to break their harmful habit for themselves and others , this must be done with the utmost respect .
Tobacco is a drug .
Banning it completely would be tantamount to denying that most smokers are in a state of dependency .
A total ban may be regarded as an act of exclusion , which may prove to be counterproductive .
Why , therefore , have we not provided the option of reserving areas specifically for them ?
Despite voting in line with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I must express some concerns I have about the present motion for a resolution .
Firstly , I believe that smoke-free policies should be decided by the Member States and that the role of the European institutions , while respecting the subsidiarity principle , must remain at the level of non-binding recommendations .
On the other hand , I also believe that Member States should promote smoke-free policies , but that they should not impose any restrictions on freedom of choice for operators , particularly in the hotel sector , where owners should have the option of being smoke-free or not .
Against this backdrop , the act that was recently passed in Portugal was a well balanced one .
My second concern is with the proposed end of direct subsidies linked to tobacco production .
As Portugal is also a tobacco producer , I think that this type of policy needs to be extremely carefully analysed ; otherwise it could be severely detrimental to farmers who find themselves unable to continue production without being given a viable alternative .
This is my opinion on item 9 of this resolution .
The protection of human health and the quality of life of employees at their places of work and that of the general public forms the basis of this resolution , and that is why we voted in favour of it .
It is necessary to increase the protection of non-smokers by preventing passive smoking , but also to create the necessary conditions for monitoring and encouraging smokers to give up the habit .
The policy of prohibition should be implemented in situations where it is shown to be necessary .
As for direct production-linked subsidies , we advocate the incentives for reconverting tobacco production facilities .
We believe , however , that we should not create a situation where we have to promote the importing of tobacco from outside the EU and thus benefit the big business of multinational tobacco companies .
I voted in favour of deleting item 13 from the original text , which read : ' Calls on the Commission to submit a proposal to Parliament and the Council for legislation on a smoking ban by 2011 in all enclosed workplaces , including all enclosed public buildings and public transport in the EU , in the field of protection of workers ' health . '
The deletion was approved , in keeping with the subsidiarity principle in this matter .
I believe that there is still a long way to go for each Member State in creating smoke-free environments , carrying out effective awareness campaigns and applying best practices for the implementation of Article 14 ( measures to reduce demand are dependent on levels of addiction and those giving up smoking ) .
I do think , however , that these actions should be implemented by each Member State , in the first instance .
The original text of the resolution mixed up and confused the production of tobacco with its consumption .
I therefore welcome the adoption of the amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which removes part of item 9 from the original text , deleting the references to the production of tobacco .
These two changes have improved the final resolution .
I consider the remaining points positive , so I have voted in favour .
I abstained in the vote on the resolution on smoking .
I have never smoked in my life , but I find this constant harassment of smokers completely anti-freedom .
The current bans are more than sufficient .
I distance myself from this constant , counterproductive harassment .
The desire to get rid of tobacco plantations in Europe will result in increased imports from third countries .
Health policy and , therefore , the protection of non-smokers clearly come under the authority of the Member States and should not be the subject of central regulations .
The Member States must have the freedom to determine the extent to which they want to protect non-smokers .
It must be made clear that the EU has no authority in this area .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution for next week 's summit of EU health ministers .
Mr President , I voted in favour , though I would have liked to see a tougher resolution .
Smoking is the greatest single cause of premature deaths in Europe .
Tobacco smoke is an environmental pollutant that contains over a hundred compounds that do harm to the health .
Nevertheless , parts of Europe allow not just users of tobacco but those around them to be exposed to it .
Passive smoking is a moral problem , because those who suffer have no choice .
It is necessary , in particular , to protect children .
Studies suggest that a child whose parent uses tobacco actually ' smokes ' every fourth cigarette that his or her parent smokes .
Every year , smoking leads to the premature death of almost 100 000 Europeans .
Many Member States have already implemented some excellent measures .
When Finland finally also banned smoking in restaurants and bars there was an outcry .
Now , two years later , people are only grateful .
That reflects the nature of public health policy : lasting results might be achieved through prevention and awareness-raising , but it takes the resolve of the legislators to deal with the resistance .
I disagree with some of the other Members here that the Community does not need binding legislation on health and safety at work .
It needs to be recognised that the recommendations have not been sufficient everywhere .
I do support paragraph 13 of the resolution , in which the Commission is urged to put forward a legislative proposal for smoking to be banned in indoor workplaces and also on public transport .
Smoking is expensive for society , and , furthermore , the 70 % of Europeans who do not smoke end up paying the bill .
I therefore agree with the view that Parliament expressed in 2007 that the content of the Tobacco Products Directive needs to be made more stringent and incorporate the liability of the manufacturers for the costs of health care due to the consumption of tobacco .
The Union first needs to take the mote out of its own eye .
It is high time we brought the gradual phasing out of subsidies for tobacco farming to a complete end .
Mr President , I voted for the resolution supporting smoke-free environments because I believe that it is vitally important to monitor the progress being made towards the widespread introduction of smoke-free environments in the European Union and to facilitate the exchange of good practice between Member States and the coordination of the policy for protecting citizens against the risks of smoking .
I also voted in favour of keeping paragraph 9 , declaring the end by 2010 of the direct production-linked subsidies for tobacco growing because of its implication for health issues .
I also support my fellow Members from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety who have reminded us that smoking remains the number one identified cause of death and illness in the European Union . Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I voted to remove the explicit reference to the year 2010 in paragraph 9 of the motion for a resolution .
In my country , tobacco growing is a vitally important and critical industry for a large part of the population in regions where it is their only form of livelihood .
One of those is also the region which I come from , Blagoevgrad .
My country was one of the eight largest tobacco growers in Europe which , a year ago , wanted current subsidies to be extended until 2013 , in spite of the agreement stipulating that the link between the amount of resources allocated and the production volume had to end by 2010 .
Every time we meet with tobacco growers , one of the questions they most frequently ask is : What will become of us ?
I cannot promise them miracles , but we are working in collaboration with our government to devise measures which will not allow them to be left without any choice , having lost their principal means of livelihood .
Fellow Members , I can understand the arguments of those who are campaigning against smoking .
However , I urge you to ensure that we do not mix up the fight against smoking with the risk of us destroying tobacco growing in Europe .
I call on you at a time of economic crisis to ensure that we remain prudent and wise .
I agree with all reasonable measures aimed at combating smoking and protecting non-smokers , which is why I voted for this resolution .
However , I must express some doubt about the effects which any kind of measures directed against tobacco growers would have .
Romania currently has approximately 1 600 hectares of tobacco plantations providing a production of roughly 3 000 tonnes .
However , a small volume of tobacco is grown in Romania , compared to the quantity required for Romanian processors , estimated at approximately 30 000 tonnes .
The difference in quantity , of approximately 27 000 tonnes , is made up by imports , mostly from regions in Africa or Asia .
If we discourage tobacco production in Member States , we will only encourage even more of these imports from third countries , to the detriment of European producers .
This is a proactive and ambitious resolution we are dealing with .
However , I am dismayed by the vote cast by a majority of my fellow Members , Christian-Democrats in particular , who , in the wake of intense lobbying by relevant pressure groups and stakeholders , have rejected Article 13 .
They believe therefore that Europe does not have its place in this debate and provides no added value in terms of guaranteeing European citizens healthy areas in all public places , at work and on public transport .
In other words , they are not bothered about discrimination being created among workers in Europe .
Just to give one example , people in Ireland will be very well protected by a national law , while we can only wonder if , one day , people in Greece or the Czech Republic will have this chance , or rather this right .
As further proof of their ' brainwashing ' by pressure groups , they have also rejected Article 9 , which simply refers to one of the reforms to the common agricultural policy already decided on , namely the end by 2010 of direct production-linked subsidies for tobacco growing .
The proposal in the resolution dealing with non-smoking areas envisaged a considerable change - the imposition of a smoking ban in pan-European public institutions and public spaces .
The intention of the resolution was to task the Commission with preparing the necessary legislative act , which would come into effect in 2011 .
Although very many delegates , including myself , voted for a ban on smoking in public rooms ( in particular , workplaces ) , the People 's Party unfortunately took an opposing position .
The majority of Parliament has not shown any consideration for protecting the health of every European citizen and , in particular , those people who do not smoke themselves , and yet are forced to breathe in smoke in public spaces and , as a result , suffer health problems themselves .
I hope that this subject does not end up in oblivion , and also that it goes up the current agenda once more , since many Member States have not thus far imposed a ban on smoking in public places , although they have had the opportunity to do so .
I share the concern , through this resolution , of making progress in the battle against passive smoking imposed on those who do not smoke .
However , some people are taking advantage of the situation to insert a provision in this resolution opposing the subsidies paid to tobacco growers .
I am personally in favour of providing this support to those practising what is a dying art .
You should be aware that tobacco accounts for less than 10 % of what goes into cigarettes ; are so many questions asked about the additives that account for more than 90 % of their content , and about their harmfulness ?
in writing . - Given that over 40 million people die of hunger and poverty each year , including one child every six seconds , and that the global food crisis is one of the major threats to peace and security in the world , I have voted to support this timely Resolution .
The Resolution calls for the Commission to conduct a full impact assessment of the EU 's policies and programmes in the areas of agriculture , development and trade in order to guarantee a coherent , sustainable policy approach to global food security .
As the Resolution stated everyone has the right to safe and nutritious food , the European Union must act to ensure these policies can deliver sustainable food security .
We Danish Social Democrats believe in the phasing out of the EU 's agricultural aid .
Today , we gave our backing to the resolution on the ' FAO World Summit on Food Security ' - a resolution that focuses on the major challenges we are facing in relation to eradicating hunger and ensuring better opportunities for developing countries in future - but we very much reject the glorifying statements that the resolution makes about agricultural policy and aid in paragraphs 3 , 9 and 14 , amongst others .
The Swedish Conservatives have today voted against the resolution on the FAO World Summit on Food Security .
We are concerned about hunger in the world and believe that a focus on food security is important .
However , in contrast to the resolution , we Swedish Conservatives believe that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) is part of the problem rather than the solution and that it needs to be reformed .
There is a strange situation in the world today : a billion people are suffering from obesity , yet at the same time , a billion people are starving .
This situation is disastrous and requires effective measures , particularly on the part of the wealthy European Union .
However , we do not believe that the EU 's common agricultural policy , as it currently stands , is the solution .
Our agricultural policy has been successful in the past , but it has no place in the future .
Since this resolution opposes the revision of the current European system for agricultural aid ( something that could benefit the climate , the world 's poor and Europe 's farmers ) , we could see no other alternative than to abstain from the vote .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the FAO World Summit on Food Security - Eradicating hunger from the face of the earth , because I believe that urgent measures are necessary to put a stop to this scourge , which affects a sixth of the world 's population .
In light of the impact of climate change on agriculture , particularly reduced productivity due to water scarcity , especially in countries which are already struggling with these problems , we must ensure that we develop coherent agricultural policies that are consistent with protecting the climate and fighting hunger .
We Swedish Social Democrats have today chosen to vote in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the FAO World Summit on Food Security .
More than a billion people are currently suffering from starvation .
Extreme oscillations in prices and a dramatic increase in the price of food on the world market have also caused a global food crisis , which has made it even harder for the poor people of the world to obtain access to food .
However , we would like to point out that we do not share Parliament 's view that we should not reduce market support measures and aid payments to farmers within the framework of the EU 's common agricultural policy .
We do not believe that these support measures and payments will help to bring increased security of food supply to developing countries in the long term .
On the contrary , these measures will have the opposite effect .
Subsidised , cheap European food is being exported to developing countries and , on account of its competitive prices , it often knocks these countries ' own food production out of the market , so denying these countries the chance of more long-term self-sufficiency .
No one can remain indifferent to this global problem when they know that 40 million people die every year of starvation and that a child dies of malnutrition every six seconds .
The European Union is the foremost donor of development and humanitarian aid , but only a small part of this is channelled towards the agricultural sector , which could meet the food needs of thousands of people who continue to suffer from malnutrition .
The European Union should therefore review its aid and development policies as a matter of urgency , and give greater precedence to supporting agriculture in developing countries , a sector which is the source of income for more than 70 % of the workforce .
The common agricultural policy must also adapt internally to the crisis that we are undergoing , which includes higher production costs for European farmers , by refraining from dismantling its market support measures and / or reducing agricultural subsidies , giving special attention to the support of small and medium-sized farmers and their access to credit , so that they can keep up their levels of production in spite of the escalating costs of materials needed for production .
Although we do not agree with all the points made , we chose to give our approval to this resolution , as it underlines the importance of principles that we consider fundamental to a real fight against world hunger , particularly :
Emphasising that ' the fight against hunger must be based on recognition of the right to food sovereignty ' ,
Recognising ' the right of local people in every country to control farmland and other natural resources vital to their food security ' .
The resolution also draws attention to the importance of agriculture in combating hunger and stresses the importance of farmers ' incomes .
It remains to be seen whether , in the future , this Parliament will live up to what it has approved here today , or whether , as is often the case , it makes these good points , but later , when it needs to actually put them into practice , goes back on its word and approves legislation that violates these principles .
We should not forget that the successive reforms of the common agricultural policy , following the liberalisation of agricultural markets undertaken by the World Trade Organisation and coinciding only with the interests of the big agri-food companies , have contributed to the impoverishment of the global agricultural sector .
Agricultural production should be used primarily to feed people , not to benefit export monopolies .
We , the Danish Liberal Party 's MEPs , voted in favour of the resolution on food security as we want to emphasise the importance of the EU taking global responsibility in the fight against hunger and poverty .
We are opposed to paragraph 9 of the resolution , however , which puts question marks against the continued liberalisation of EU agricultural policy .
The Danish Liberal Party wants to see a gradual abolition of agricultural aid plus the establishment of common rules that ensure a level playing field for Europe 's farmers in terms of competition .
Long-term food security is one of the central challenges of the common agricultural policy .
Especially in the light of food shortages , we must emphasise the importance of a strong CAP which will take on a key role in future in overcoming global challenges .
This means that adequate long-term funding for the CAP is required .
The CAP is an important element of the EU food and security policy and after 2013 , it will play a significant role in development policy and in external food security policy .
Therefore , perfectly functioning ecosystems , fertile soil , stable water resources and further diversification of the rural economy are the highest priorities .
International cooperation and solidarity , together with balanced trade agreements which promote , rather than jeopardise , food security are an essential element of global food security and this is where a strong CAP can make an important contribution .
Net food importing countries are hardest hit by rising food prices , yet many of these countries throughout the world are the least developed .
The EU must take measures to counteract this .
Hunger is a scourge that is affecting increasing numbers of people .
As the EU is a place of solidarity , it has to be at the frontline of combating this growing problem .
The world food crisis is one of the major threats to global peace and security , so all global and European food security policies need to be stepped up .
The authors of this resolution , although forced to highlight the problem of hunger and the problems raised at the Food and Agricultural Summit in general , have nonetheless concealed the basic cause of the problem , namely the capitalist system of exploitation and the strategy which the EU also loyally serves so that capital can profit .
The food production and distribution multinationals are uprooting farmers and concentrating the land , thereby striking a heavy blow at poor and average farmers .
The working and grassroots classes , even in developed capitalist countries , are finding it harder and harder to safeguard healthy , safe food , while the food multinationals are raking in massive profits and buying up huge swathes of land , especially in Africa , calculating that food production needs to double by 2050 .
The EU leads the way in the liberalisation and privatisation of all food production factors - water , energy , transport and technology - and is imposing the same on third countries through the WTO and bilateral agreements .
The CAP underpins the policy of uprooting small and medium-sized farms and supporting the monopolies and their profits .
Farmers and workers are fighting against this policy , fighting to overturn this system of exploitation and secure sufficient , healthy , safe food for everyone .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Nicaragua
The next point is the three draft resolutions on Nicaragua .
Mr President , the policy of the current President of Nicaragua , Daniel Ortega , proves the continued relevance of the old communist maxim : ' once we have gained power we will never give it up ' .
In the 1980s , the Sandinistas were unable to maintain an armed dictatorship and , forced by international opinion , had to accept democratic rules of play .
Ortega was elected President in elections in 2006 .
The Sandinistas returned to power .
From the very outset , he began to use the tried and tested methods of intimidation and elimination , under a variety of pseudo-legal pretexts , of any kind of political competition .
The Sandinista apparatus began to duplicate state apparatus , following the example of the Cuban Committees for the Defence of the Revolution .
In December 2008 , the European Parliament drew attention to the campaign of harassment being perpetrated by state authorities , parties and people associated with the Sandinistas against human rights organisations and their members , journalists and representatives of the media .
Amnesty International wrote of the violence which followed local authority elections .
Attacks and beatings of journalists multiplied .
Now , by manipulating the Supreme Court , Ortega is trying to bring about changes to the Constitution which would allow him to stand for re-election .
We can foresee , with a high degree of certainty , that the next step will be proclaiming himself President for life , for Fidel Castro is the model for the populists of Managua and Caracas , and there have never been free elections under Castro .
I call on the European Commission to draw conclusions from this situation and to check , in a situation of the violation of international human rights standards , if there is not a need to reconsider existing cooperation agreements with this country , so that the human rights clauses do not turn out to be merely empty words .
Mr President , last Saturday , in response to an appeal from opposition politicians , tens of thousands of Nicaraguan citizens demonstrated against the policy of President Daniel Ortega , a policy which is leading directly to the introduction of a dictatorship in Nicaragua .
I will remind you that on 19 October , the Supreme Court decided to remove constitutional obstacles which prevented President Ortega from standing for a further term of office .
The fact of this change itself is not outrageous , because , of course , there is no such law in many European countries , but what is outrageous is the way in which this decision was made .
As we all know , President Ortega does not have a two-thirds majority in Parliament , and so he had to turn to violating the constitution in order to remove the ban on his re-election .
If we allow Daniel Ortega to run for President again in 2011 , we may wake up in a situation in which Nicaragua is controlled by a real dictatorship .
Therefore , I would ask the European Commission to draw attention to this problem during further negotiations on the EU-Central America Association Agreement and to use every possible means to turn President Ortega back from this road .
author . - Mr President , I am very thankful for the support in this House for the delegation of Liberal International which I led to Managua .
We came in peace on the invitation of a parliamentary majority to speak about the Constitution , the election , the election campaign and human rights and civil liberties .
We were cursed , we were called pirates and that kind of thing .
We were threatened with expulsion from the country , threatened with being persona non grata , and it was said that we were staging a golpe - a coup d 'état .
But , more importantly than that , they cursed my country and they oppress their own people .
I think that the European Union should monitor what happens in Nicaragua and should send observers to the elections in 2011 and support the democratic opposition .
I also hope that we will do the same and will be objective regarding the result of the election in Honduras .
Let us see whether the elections on Sunday are free and fair , and let us make a decision then .
It could be that , if we recognise the result of the elections , it will put an end to the constitutional crisis in that country .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , there is an alarming trend in today 's Latin America to consolidate populist regimes by extending the mandate of current presidents - preferably for eternity .
This was Hitler 's way to power .
Lenin 's was that of indifference , but the results were just the same .
These presidents with extended powers have not been able or willing to improve the quality of life of their subjects .
Cuba is a murky and painful example of how lives of normal people have been mutilated and spoiled for decades .
In Nicaragua , we can see a warning example that such kinds of rulers do not change .
They return to power only to misuse it once again .
It is , therefore , our task now to condemn strongly these violations of the Nicaraguan Constitution and to link this issue with much more efficient control over the use of funds given to Nicaragua for development .
It is very disappointing that the Organisation of American States has not reacted to these flagrant violations of the constitution by one of its member states .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that Mr van Baalen has returned to Europe safely and that he was only expelled when he was already on the plane .
Having said this and on a more serious note , I would like to say on behalf of my group that we are not getting involved in this game .
What I mean is that , while the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) refused us an urgent debate on Uganda about the laws against homosexuals and another urgent debate on Iran about the executions being carried out there , they would now like us to get involved in the game of being for or against Ortega , with the demonstrations going on over there .
That is just not on !
I think that the urgent debates held in this House , with the aim of actually providing assistance to people or causes experiencing difficulties , must not be used to serve our MEPs ' personal political interests .
Therefore , my group has decided not only not to sign this resolution , but not to vote and to oppose what is going on here .
This brings discredit upon the European Parliament .
Mr President , along the same lines , I think that it is not only sad but clearly shameful that a sitting as important as this , on urgent matters , is being manipulated in this way , and I am therefore surprised not only that the subject today is Nicaragua , but also that on other occasions when we were supposed to have discussed much more serious matters , that did not happen .
Today , moreover , we have the added factor that other subjects that were on the agenda have been dropped precisely because this one has been included .
This is entirely inappropriate from the point of view of the content of debates on urgent matters .
For example , we could and should have discussed the Western Sahara .
We should have discussed the current situation of people such as Aminatou Haidar , who is at present suffering as a result of a clear violation and deprival of her most fundamental rights .
We should also be discussing the situation of the very many people who are in refugee camps , or in the occupied areas of Morocco , a context on which a clear position is really needed .
All of this could have been debated today , and this is not the case because the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is making us talk about a subject that I do not think deserves the consideration or has the significance appropriate to this type of sitting .
Mr President , this is a regrettable debate about a false state of urgency that does nothing but discredit the European Parliament .
The urgent thing would have been to debate the recent tragedy caused by Hurricane Ida when it hit El Salvador at the beginning of November .
This hurricane caused more than 200 deaths and missing persons , destroyed infrastructures and essential equipment , particularly in the areas of health , education , water and sanitation , exacerbating poverty in the country .
The urgent thing would have been to discuss the availability of extraordinary funds and the redirection of available EU funds to the emergency situation , launch a plan for reconstruction and risk reduction , and support the people of El Salvador .
The urgent thing would have been for this Parliament to condemn the military coup in Honduras and demand the return to power of President Zelaya , who was legally elected by the Honduran people .
The urgent thing would have been to demand respect for the fundamental rights of the people of the Western Sahara .
Unfortunately , none of this was possible due to opposition by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Therefore , as my colleagues have already stated , we refuse to collaborate with this false state of urgency , which is a disgrace to the European Parliament .
( DE ) Mr President , I agree wholeheartedly with the previous speakers .
I would like to remind everyone that the Colombian President also attempted to extend his term of office in breach of current Colombian law and , therefore , this matter should also be taken up .
Most importantly , however , I would like to highlight the fact that the Friedrich-Naumann foundation in Germany , a foundation which has close links with the German Free Democratic Party , was involved in the coup in Honduras .
There was a debate about this at least in Germany .
The foundation 's scholarship holders distanced themselves from this policy in an open letter .
We must not forget that Mr van Baalen is the president of Liberal International and on the website of the Friedrich-Naumann foundation , it states that he discussed the possibility of a coup with the armed forces in Nicaragua .
I think it is appropriate that in these circumstances - and this has not been contradicted - a country such as Nicaragua is bold enough to expel a politician of this kind .
In all honesty , we must admit that the situation would be just the same in Europe .
What is happening here is nothing more than a transparent attempt to discredit and publicly shame those countries , states and governments in Latin America which are trying to introduce more social policies .
On behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I would like to say clearly once again that we will not support this .
Mr President , I do not understand the reaction from our esteemed colleagues on my right-hand side in this hemicycle on the choice of subjects that we are debating today .
I do not understand why it is not urgent to take the floor , discussing the issue of the treatment of one of the Members of this Parliament who has visited a country exercising his right as President of Liberal International .
I do not understand why we cannot take the floor and speak about this issue and also speak about this new tendency in Latin America to try to change arbitrarily the constitution of the country and stop a tradition that has always existed concerning one or two terms of office of the Head of State in that country .
Already , our esteemed friends here have talked about four other subjects , and I would like to know when we are going to discuss the matter at hand , given that there are only three subjects on the agenda .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LT ) I wholeheartedly support the opinion of my group that this matter should not be included on the agenda , as there are much more relevant and much more pressing problems throughout the world .
If we are to discuss Nicaragua , we should firstly talk about the fact that this is a country with the highest debt in the world and that it is one of the poorest countries in Latin America .
The communist experiment was not the answer there , but neither was the neo-liberal experiment .
It is a country where there was too much interference by the superpowers , America and the Soviet Union , and that is why that country is constantly on the verge of civil war .
It is understandable that there are strong-arm tendencies there and those must be condemned .
However , let us not forget that we also have strong-arm tendencies in Europe .
Therefore , let us concentrate on far more important matters .
( DE ) Mr President , various things have already been said on this matter .
One speaker explained that this is the wrong subject for debate , because there are more urgent issues that involve more significant violations of human rights .
That may be the case , but I believe that we Europeans , who work to ensure that values such as human rights and freedoms - for example , the freedom of the press - are respected everywhere , must defend this freedom whenever we become aware that it is under threat .
It was also said , for example , that the Friedrich-Naumann foundation was involved in the coup .
As a member of the FDP , I explicitly reject this claim .
These are rumours which have been spread around and which are completely without foundation .
My third point is that it was said that Mr van Baalen was accused of discussing a coup and this is why he was expelled from the country .
If you cannot openly discuss all kinds of subjects - for us this is part of the freedom of the press and of speech , two freedoms which we have here and which we value highly - is this really a reason for expelling someone from the country , simply because a subject of whatever kind was discussed ?
The fact that this happens in public is no justification for expelling someone from the country , simply because a discussion took place .
This is totally the wrong approach .
Mr President , Nicaragua remains one of the poorest countries in the Americas .
The fact that President Daniel Ortega has failed to improve his country 's situation , despite myriad Socialist utopian promises upon taking office , would suggest that Nicaragua needs a change of leadership now .
The country 's constitution permits Heads of State to serve only one term , sometimes a wise policy in a region prone to instability , but Ortega is once again showing his contempt for parliamentary democracy and the rule of law by abusing the Constitutional Court 's powers .
In this respect , he is no different from his fellow leftist Hugo Chávez of Venezuela .
Both men have made their names denouncing caudillos , but they themselves are turning into caudillos of the Left and , as such , represent a genuine threat to regional democratic stability , especially given the chaos in nearby Honduras .
Daniel Ortega has failed his people and his country many times over .
If we truly believe in democracy and freedom , we cannot ignore the plight of the citizens of Nicaragua .
( DE ) Mr President , one thing has come out of this rather difficult debate .
The Member from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has indirectly confirmed that the question of a coup really was the subject of these discussions .
She has defended what took place by using the argument that it must be possible to talk about anything , even a coup .
That is one remarkable result of this debate which helps to clarify the situation and I am grateful for this .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable colleagues , as you know , the European Union is engaged in a difficult dialogue with this country aimed at preserving democracy and restoring its citizens ' trust in the country 's democratic institutions .
At the same time , the EU is trying to maintain a balance with our long-standing commitment to support the development and stability of this developing country and the Central American region more generally .
Since the municipal elections held in November 2008 , which were tainted with allegations of widespread fraud , international donors ' confidence in the current government has fallen to an all-time low .
Failure to respect fundamental democratic principles , including free and fair elections , led the donor community to systematically review their cooperation portfolios and , in certain instances , reorient or suspend cooperation activities until conditions improved .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner took the decision to suspend all budgetary support payments to Nicaragua as of 1 January 2009 .
This decision had been preceded by a discussion with Member States in the Council .
Following numerous contacts with the Nicaraguan authorities which gave credible commitments that corrective steps would be taken , the Commission proceeded at the beginning of October with a single payment of EUR 10 million of our budget support programme to the education sector .
This represents a small part of the funds that have been suspended , which amount to an additional EUR 46 million .
There was criticism last week in the Development Council that there were no previous discussions on this with the Member States .
Without going into the details of this , I think it is very important that , when we take that kind of decision , we have a kind of a procedure whereby we at least try to make sure that the European Commission and the Member States are taking the same line with respect to individual states .
If , in the end , it is not possible , then of course everybody is allowed to do what he or she thinks to be necessary .
The government of Nicaragua has announced that the next regional elections in 2010 and the general election in 2011 will have national and international observation teams .
The government has already officially invited the EU to carry out an observation mission .
The government has also committed , inter alia , to improving its civil registry and electoral role with the support of an EC project and to appoint credible and professional electoral authorities next year .
On the other hand , recent developments , such as the ruling by the Constitutional Chamber , certainly cast a shadow on the seriousness of the Nicaraguan Government to live up to its commitments .
The EU has , on a number of occasions , most recently by means of a local troika démarche on Monday 21 November , expressed concern on this development .
At the end of the day , implementation of these commitments will be crucial for the progressive resumption of our budgetary support programmes .
We continue to work in close cooperation with the Member Sates as well as with the European Parliament , as this debate shows .
Whether it is timely or not is , of course , a matter that should be looked at by Parliament itself .
The item is hereby closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Laos and Vietnam
The next item is the four draft resolutions on Laos and Vietnam .
Mr President , we once again have an urgent debate on Vietnam and Laos .
It is true that we have had other similar debates in the European Parliament , but we cannot really allow the current urgent debate to go unheeded .
We are , in fact , fairly concerned .
Since 2006 , when Vietnam was removed from the United States ' blacklist for repression and human rights violations , the level of repression against human rights activists has been on the rise .
I would like to mention just one case which I think is typical , that of Mrs Tran Khai Thanh Thuy .
She is a writer , blogger , journalist and activist who is currently in prison for vague reasons , the most plausible of which is that she was defending freedom of expression and human rights in her country .
She is diabetic and in a poor state of health .
We fear for her life and are demanding not only adequate health care for her in prison , but also her immediate release .
I love Vietnam .
Vietnam is a great country and will take over the presidency of ASEAN in 2010 .
I believe that adopting measures which are more in line with international democratic standards could only help strengthen its moral authority further .
Mr President , the human rights situation in Vietnam is disturbing .
Religious persecution , in particular of Christians and Buddhists , is the order of the day .
Anyone who speaks out in favour of freedom and human rights is intimidated and kept under systematic surveillance .
At the end of September , hundreds of monks from the Bat Nha monastery were attacked .
Major damage was caused to the entire monastery complex while the police simply sat by and watched .
The monks who sought refuge in the nearby Phuoc Hue temple were beaten up .
This sort of abuse must not be tolerated .
It is outrageous that the numerous calls from the European Union and other parts of the world for improvements in the human rights situation have simply been ignored .
There are hundreds of reasons for at last introducing changes , particularly as next year , Vietnam will hold the presidency of the ASEAN group of countries .
The situation in Laos is not much better .
At the beginning of November , more than 300 peaceful demonstrators calling for more pluralism and democracy were brutally beaten up by the secret police .
All efforts to bring about a political dialogue in this country are crushed immediately by the single ruling party .
The 5 000 Hmong refugees who are currently living in camps in northern Thailand and who are a persecuted minority are also in an appalling situation .
They have not been granted the status of refugees .
The organisation ' Doctors without Borders ' , which was represented here in Parliament this week , has said that it is almost impossible for it to provide humanitarian aid in the camps because people are constantly and generally completely arbitrarily being arrested and forced to return to Laos .
Any claims that these people are returning voluntarily are simply not true .
We Members of Parliament call on the Commission and the Council to give us accurate information about which of the agreements reached with these two countries on human rights and democracy are being observed . Which of the agreements have been consistently blocked ?
For the sake of the citizens of Vietnam and Laos , it must be possible to exert pressure on the governments of these two countries .
( Applause )
Mr President , it is welcome news that the Association of Southeast Asian Nations has established a regional Human Rights Commission .
Against this background , it is shocking to meet Vietnamese monks who have been the victims of a violent attack .
We on the Subcommittee on Human Rights had the honour to meet them recently .
The position of religious communities seems to be becoming more and more difficult in Vietnam .
We really have to condemn the fact that more than 300 monks and nuns from two monasteries had to leave as a result of violence and that religious communities are continually being harassed .
It is important that Vietnam takes notice of the recommendations of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , which propose , for example , that United Nations Special Rapporteurs be invited to the country to monitor the implementation of freedom of opinion and religion , as well as other basic human rights .
In Vietnam , hundreds of people are being held in detention for their political and religious beliefs .
Indeed , I believe that the violent attack against Buddhist monks at the end of September clearly shows that Vietnam is refusing to improve its human rights situation .
In Laos , a country under military dictatorship , the leaders of the students and teachers movement set up a decade ago are still being held in secret detention .
The recent peaceful demonstrations held in support of respect for human rights were suppressed by the secret police , while the Hmong community continues to be subject to persecution .
Both Laos and Vietnam must fully comply with international standards in terms of protecting human rights .
The persecution must stop against members of religious communities , minorities and , in general , against citizens doing no more than defending their political rights
It is the European Union 's duty to monitor closely the development of human rights and to use all its influence to reverse this negative trend .
( Applause )
Mr President , negotiations which are in progress on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Vietnam must also include respect for human rights and civil liberties .
The information reaching us shows that the situation in this regard in Vietnam is extremely disturbing , especially in relation to the repression being used against internet users .
The internet is a medium which is founded on free exchange of information and views on every subject , and that on a world scale .
Meanwhile , Vietnamese legal regulations on use of the internet penalise free speech in areas considered as sensitive , such as human rights and the propagation of democracy .
Rules introduced in 2008 concerning blogs require that their content be limited to personal matters , and ban the dissemination of antigovernment materials and material which undermines national security .
( The President asked the Member to speak more slowly )
Foreign non-governmental organisations report that bloggers who raise political subjects are held in prison .
The institutions of the European Union must not be indifferent to these disturbing facts coming from Vietnam and , in addition to political action , legal action is also necessary .
Therefore , I appeal for inclusion in the new Agreement between the EU and Vietnam of a binding clause on the matter of human rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the ALDE Group is of the opinion that Laos and Vietnam are no democracies .
Human rights are not guaranteed in either country , nor are religious or other rights .
It means that we wholeheartedly support this resolution and ask the Council and the Commission to act likewise .
Mr President , once again , I would like to stress the dramatic situation of Christians in Laos and Vietnam .
In both countries , the entire structure of the state and the apparatus of repression has been directed at the destruction of Christianity - of both the Catholic Church and Protestant groups .
In Laos , this is the result of a programme of the ruling communist party , which treats Christianity as a religion representing Western imperialism .
In Vietnam , what is taking place is being done in contravention of formally existing law .
The repression takes a variety of forms : arrests , torture , deprivation of freedom , intimidation and confinement in psychiatric institutions .
Such practices must not be allowed to pass without a strong reaction from European institutions .
Although quite a number of people in Europe are fighting Christianity by legal means , it is our obligation , the obligation of all of us , to take action against the barbarity we are witnessing in some of the countries of Asia .
( FI ) Mr President , in September , Laos took one important step forward in the improvement of human rights by ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
The Covenant covers such areas as freedom of religion , association and speech and gives individuals the right to express their political opinions .
Theory and practice , however , are sometimes a very long way from one another and the journey from the former to the latter can be a long one .
Once again , a huge amount of political will is required .
The leaders of the student movement arrested in the demonstrations in October 1999 and other prisoners of conscience must be freed immediately , as also must those arrested in the peaceful demonstration held on November 2 this year .
It is especially important that the Laotian authorities show their democratic mindset by drafting and implementing legislative reforms as soon as possible .
National legislation must be made consistent with the international agreements that Laos has committed itself to .
Only legislative reform and multi-party elections can bring democracy and , at the same time , a respect for human rights in the Lao People 's Democratic Republic .
( FR ) Mr President , in July 2007 , I celebrated in this very Chamber the fact that 2006 had been a year of political openness for Vietnam .
I called on Vietnam to accommodate all the religions represented on its territory and to allow its population to choose their form of worship freely .
More than two years on , I note that the situation has not progressed in the right direction .
Freedom of worship is still not a reality in Vietnam , while the number of arrests of Buddhist monks , for instance , just to give one example , is rising .
Just as Vietnam is about to assume the presidency of ASEAN - and I must welcome in this House its efforts in the areas of health , education and the reduction of inequality - we want to use this resolution to remind this country of the importance of human rights and ask it to set an example as a future president of ASEAN .
Furthermore , I welcome that the Laotian Government has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I therefore hope that this pact can be fully complied with , particularly with regard to freedom of expression and assembly .
Finally , we request the Laotian Government to do its utmost to release everyone arrested on 2 November 2009 during the attempted peaceful demonstration , as well as the leaders of the ' Student Movement of 26 October 1999 ' .
( PL ) Mr President , in this Parliament , we spoke of Vietnam , particularly in the context of the religious persecution of Buddhists , in the previous Parliamentary term .
Today , the time has come to talk once again about the violation of religious rights in both of those countries , this time against Christians .
This is , unfortunately , a permanent feature of political reality in these two countries .
The European Parliament , which is so sensitive to violations of human rights and the rights of minorities , must make a statement on this matter .
There is one more thing - I have come here today not only as a politician , but also as a blogger , and a fairly well-known one in Poland .
As a blogger , I would like to protest at the persecution of our fellow internet users and bloggers in Vietnam .
We must vigorously defend them .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , persecution and discrimination on religious grounds are nothing new in Vietnam .
They have been going on not for just one day or one month , but for 50 years .
I shall limit myself to mentioning the most recent episodes , such as the demolition of the cathedral in Vinh Long City , replaced by a public park , or the deployment of riot police and bulldozers to remove the statue of the Virgin Mary from the Catholic cemetery in Hanoi .
What is more , a priest and his parishioners were denounced for bringing someone who had threatened a priest to the police headquarters .
Thus , Christians are going from being victims to being criminals .
The increase in authoritarianism is reaching worrying proportions .
In fact , the Hanoi Government has demanded that 10 internet sites , which regularly disseminate dangerous political material , be blocked for security reasons and to combat those movements that oppose the party .
The situation is also extremely worrying in Laos , where Christians are being persecuted relentlessly by means of arrests and threats , to the point where they are even being expelled from their villages at times .
Mr President , religious freedom is a natural human right for each and every person .
It is not a favour granted by whoever holds power .
Therefore , our intervention and commitment is vital .
( PL ) Mr President , we should note with satisfaction every measure which is intended to stress the importance of human rights and to highlight instances in which they are not observed in some parts of the world , in countries where people 's fundamental rights are violated .
When , however , we turn our attention to the violation of these rights , we must pay particular attention to those situations in particular countries in which there are violations of the rights of people of different religions and of their right to free expression of their faith and attachment in the area of religious liberty , and to demonstrate their convictions in this realm .
Therefore , we should raise the alarm in every instance of drastic violations in this area .
We should also remember that , here in Europe , we should always be an example of a place on the world map which remains a model of great tradition , liberty , freedom and respect for other religions .
This is why it is with a certain unease that I notice something .
It is something which cannot , of course , be compared to the facts referred to here in this Chamber .
I am thinking of a trend which is appearing in the judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights , which seems to encroach on the area of freedom of religion and the traditions of particular countries , in this case , the ruling on Italy and crosses .
I think that rulings of this kind may also create a certain bad atmosphere , where some symbols and emphases are open to misinterpretation .
In summary , every gesture and every action which increases the importance of human rights is significant , and we should talk openly about this , especially in the case of countries where basic human rights are violated .
Mr President , Vietnam and Laos sadly remain the only vestiges , along with Cuba and the People 's Republic of China , of one-party Communist dictatorships , where parliamentary democracy , pluralism of debate - including freedom of the media and internet blogging - and peaceful practice of religion are alien concepts .
In Vietnam , outspoken Buddhist monks and Catholics are not tolerated by the Hanoi Government , and in Laos the Hmong people are persecuted , and many have fled to Thailand .
I agree that - with all the good will in the world , and in spite of endless international and UN commitments , including those made recently to the EU in trade agreements - Communist dictatorships can never be liberal democracies .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission maintains that in recent years , there has been a substantial improvement in the general political situation in Laos , and agrees with Parliament that the ratification by Laos of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ( ICCPR ) is a welcome step towards respect for the freedoms of faith , association , speech and the press .
The Commission also welcomes the ratification of the Convention on Disability Rights and the UN Convention against Corruption .
In April , the Laos Government approved a decree allowing the formation and registration of national civil society organisations .
This marks a significant step towards achieving freedom of association and allowing civil society a role in the development of the country .
However , we share the concerns of Parliament regarding political prisoners .
As to the three individuals mentioned by Parliament , the authorities repeated in October 2009 their earlier statement to our delegation in Vientiane , namely that Mr Keochay had already been released in 2002 .
Two of the other three , Mr Seng-Aloun Phengphanh and Mr Tongpaseuth Keuakaoun , were reported to be in good health .
The authorities claim to have no knowledge of Mr Bouvanh Chanmanivong .

The Commission has consulted resident diplomats and others about the alleged arrests of several hundreds of demonstrators in early December 2009 .
However , we have not been able to confirm the information referred to .
The Commission shares the opinion of Parliament that the detention of 158 people held in Nongkhai requires urgent solution .
The Commission calls upon the Laos and Thai Governments to allow the prisoners to resettle in third countries which have offered asylum .
Regarding other Lao Hmong in camps in Thailand , a proper screening should be undertaken in order to determine the status of the offences .
Let me now turn to Vietnam .
The Commission shares the concerns of Parliament about recent signs of a more hard-line attitude of the Government of Vietnam on human rights .
The recent arrests and trials of peaceful bloggers and human rights defenders , as well as tensions with religious groups such as the peaceful Buddhist community and the Batna monastery , have caused legitimate concern in Europe .
We urge Vietnam , as party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , to honour its international human rights commitments and to release all those prisoners , in particular , human rights lawyer , Le Cong Dinh , democracy advocate and writer , Tran Khai Thanh Thuy , and Catholic priest , Father Nguyen Van Ly , who are currently in detention for having peacefully expressed their views .
We also agree that a more independent media would have a useful role to play to channel social discontent peacefully in times of economic stress .
That is why we encourage Vietnam to adopt a press law that will be in line with Article 19 of the ICCPR on freedom of expression .
Nevertheless , we are confident about our mature human rights dialogue and cooperation with Vietnam .
We believe in constructive engagement .
However , in order for such engagement to remain a sustainable option , dialogue and cooperation need to show tangible results .
There will be no better demonstration that dialogue is the best option than Vietnam 's own performance .
The item is hereby closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
China : Minority rights and application of the death penalty
The next item is the five draft resolutions on China : minority rights and use of the death penalty .
Mr President , my group has withdrawn its signature from the ' China ' resolution .
Why ? Not because we regard human rights as secondary and subordinate to commercial interests - after all , we submitted a resolution from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament without any concession , highlighting our commitment - but because , in order to achieve a change in China 's behaviour , we need to have dialogue , and this erratic resolution devoid of any structure ruins any chance of dialogue .
It certainly has everything in it : Tibet , the Dalai Lama and his succession , the religious crusade and even , in case anything had been missed out , criticism of any present , past and future Communist regime .
Is this the way to open doors ?
No .
The tragedy is that they will close on the very people whom we want to save at this precise moment , in other words , the Uighurs and Tibetans threatened with execution .
I urge China to stop being afraid of freedom of expression so that it can open up to the world , not only through business and culture , but also through sharing essential values .
I call for the issue of abolishing the death penalty to be put on the agenda of the next EU-China Summit on 30 November .
I also ask the Commission and Council to continue to want to include in the new partnership under negotiation the clause about respect for human rights in China .
author . - Mr President , I support calls for the end of the death penalty in China , more especially when the death penalty is used to terrorise minority ethnic groups and nations within the Chinese state .
The European Union , the United States and other world powers , however , in their criticism of human rights violations in China , are very soft .
In the case of violation of workers ' rights , those criticisms are virtually non-existent .
This is because they wish to build business links with Chinese business and the bureaucracy that controls the state so that they may profit from the appalling exploitation of workers in China .
China is a gigantic sweatshop of exploitation of workers .
For example , tens of millions of migrant workers lead lives of shameful misery , with their children suffering the consequences of the horrific conditions under which they live .
The EU-based and the US-based multinationals participate in this exploitation to facilitate their super profits .
The Chinese regime is increasing its repression , and that repression has increased since the Chinese Stalinists decided to go for the capitalist market as a means of developing the economy .
There is massive repression of journalists and campaigners for justice , for communities and for workers .
Recently a Socialist colleague of my own was banned from China .
Laurence Coates , a Socialist who writes under the name of Vincent Kolo , who is the editor of ' chinaworker.info ' , was detained at the border and banned from China .
' Chinaworker.info ' campaigns for workers ' rights and free trade unions .
We should stand with workers in China .
Independent and democratically-run trade unions and the right to strike should be campaigned for , as well as the release of all political prisoners and detained labour activists .
We should call for freedom of expression and assembly and international solidarity with workers in China to fight this horrific bureaucratic regime , many of whose members aspire to be oligarchs , obviously , as they did previously with the same system in Russia .
author . - Mr President , while we are getting closer to China in terms of trade and environmental cooperation and China was host to the wonderful Olympic Games last year , it is clearly backsliding in terms of ensuring human rights to its citizens .
The response of the Chinese authorities to peaceful protests in Tibet last year and Xinjiang this year was completely out of proportion , to say the least .
People everywhere in the world should have the right to protest against government policies they do not like .
Instead of this , we had a violent and brutal reaction from the Chinese authorities against the protesters and hundreds of people killed .
Now we have a further nine people , mostly Uighurs , executed without mercy as a demonstration that any dissenting voices will be met by brutal and lethal force by the Chinese state apparatus .
While we admire the Chinese culture and make progress in exchanging goods and investments , it is our duty to speak loudly and clearly and condemn the killings and executions .
Therefore , we once again reiterate our call to the Chinese officials to impose a moratorium on the death penalty and grant more freedom to its provinces striving for greater autonomy , while respecting the ' one China ' policy .
Mr President , in recent years , China has seen huge economic growth .
Many Chinese people 's quality of life has improved .
Unfortunately , there has been no progress of this kind in safeguarding and respecting human rights in China and this applies to all its citizens , regardless of their religion or ethnic group .
On the contrary , the oppressive measures taken against the Uighurs and the Tibetans have increased .
As far as the death penalty is concerned , it is a positive sign that the highest Chinese court has once again reviewed all the sentences since 2007 and we assume that some death sentences will be revoked .
However , sadly , China is the world leader in executions .
In 2008 alone , at least 1 718 people were executed .
The estimated number of unreported cases is much higher .
Even the minimum figure means that China is responsible for more than 70 % of all executions throughout the world .
In addition , China has increased the number of crimes liable to the death penalty .
This means that Chinese people can be executed for committing more than 68 crimes .
That is why we are calling in this resolution for China to suspend its planned executions and introduce a moratorium on the death penalty immediately .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my position regarding this motion for a resolution is similar to the ideas of a man who belongs to those minorities that are discriminated against , a man who has won the Nobel Peace Prize and who presides over the world 's leading power : Barack Obama .
The principles of this resolution are ones I share .
However , I believe that we absolutely must not repeat the mistakes of left-wing political parties , which want to recite rights , rather than actually earn them .
Minorities should be defended in China as in every other part of the world but , before submitting such a demanding resolution , we must have a strategy , a coordination of all the different sides and of the whole of Parliament , so as to avoid delaying and damaging negotiations with the Chinese Government .
We cannot think that we can solve the problems relating to minorities and to the death penalty in China without giving any thought to the Chinese Government .
That is impossible .
In this respect , President Obama has done well ; he has made no concessions whatsoever , but he still maintains a good relationship with the Chinese Government which , we must admit , is trying to initiate a better dialogue in all negotiations with the Western world .
I wonder : why submit a resolution - albeit a commendable one - just days before the Nanjing meeting without coordinating , as a precautionary measure , everyone involved ?
Why submit a resolution that has already been submitted on many other occasions just when we are fortunately starting to get somewhere with the Chinese Government ?
Why submit a resolution which may potentially damage the beginnings of a new relationship with the Chinese Government ?
For these reasons , although I support the principles of the resolution , which are the same as my own , I shall abstain from the vote , because strategically , I believe it may harm , not help , the new path we are embarking on with the Chinese Government .
( DE ) Mr President , it was said that this was a speech on behalf of our group .
Following thorough consultation over the last week , our group proposed in the Conference of Presidents that this point should be included on the agenda .
We want to discuss this point and we want it to be put to the vote .
The speech expressed the personal opinion of my colleague and not the opinion of the group .
Mr Posselt , I understand that , but we have agreed that we have a specific amount of time and each group has one minute of speaking time .
In China , those who seek to exercise their labour , social , civil and basic political rights continue to be repressed .
This repression is particularly cruel and indiscriminate when it is used against ethnic minorities such as the Uighurs or the Tibetans , but the Han Chinese do not escape either , as in the cases of the Sakharov Prize winner , Hu Jia , and the lawyers and activists who are being persecuted following President Obama 's visit to Beijing .
The administrative detention of hundreds of thousands of people , systematic torture in prisons , religious and political repression , executions - all these methods are incompatible with the People 's Republic of China 's obligations as a member of the United Nations .
Moreover , they are ineffective methods , which will not succeed in silencing or containing those who clamour for freedom and human rights .
This is the case in China , just like the rest of the world , for the Chinese are not Martians ; they are no different to people elsewhere .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we , as Liberals , are against the death penalty in general , but here the death penalty in China is used to oppress minorities , like the Tibetans , the Uighurs and others .
Furthermore , China is not a democracy .
Human rights are not respected .
China has a harsh policy against Taiwan .
China should be put under pressure .
This is difficult , I know .
It is an enormous market , but we should fight for our principles .
Therefore , we support this resolution .
Mr President , someone here asked why this resolution to promote dialogue was put forward .
It was done so precisely because preparations are being made right now for the EU-China Summit , and the Human Rights Dialogue is a precondition for that .
Our duty in the European Parliament and on the Subcommittee on Human Rights is to remind the Council and the Commission that the results of human rights dialogues also play a very prominent role at the summits themselves .
I am sorry that Commissioner de Gucht is not even listening to what I am saying but chooses to talk to his colleague instead .
It is important for the EU and China to engage in dialogue , and I believe that China , too , will realise that the country can only make progress by making its decision-making procedures more transparent and by guaranteeing its citizens the right to express their opinion .
It is , in fact , impossible to imagine that China would act any differently in this respect from any other nation which has had to recognise the fact that , in order to develop its society , it needs all those creative forces that it now oppresses and tyrannises .
If we believe that human rights are universal , we really cannot regard China as the exception , as Mrs Gomes remarked - and I quite agree with her .
So let us apply the same yardstick to China as we do other countries .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I have been a long-standing critic in this House of the lack of human rights in the People 's Republic of China .
I have criticised the bullying of peaceful Taiwan in excluding this country from all international organisations , including the World Health Organisation .
I have criticised the repression of peaceful Tibetan culture , the persecution of Falun Gong , as well as other religious minorities , and the presence of widespread censorship in China , including the media and also the internet and Google .
I condemn as well the brutal and widespread use of the death sentence for lesser crimes - such as economic subversion and pimping , believe it or not .
Nevertheless , my group , the ECR , regards it as a personal conscience matter whether the death sentence is justifiable in the most serious crimes of terrorism and murder .
There can be no doubt that , in the recent riots in Xinjiang province , many innocent Han Chinese were brutally murdered .
Nevertheless , of course , we do now welcome the PRC 's expressed desire for having much better and harmonious relations with its ethnic minorities and , in particular , the Uighurs and other Muslim minorities .
Of course , I , like all members of my group , call for fair trials for all those detained .
( PL ) Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) endorses the draft resolution .
I must confess that I was surprised by the suggestions of some fellow Members , from different groups , that we should not , today , discuss the subject of yet more cases of human rights violations or the widespread use of capital punishment in China .
An argument in favour of this was said to be the forthcoming EU-China Summit .
Fellow Members , we should not succumb to the temptation of applying double standards or a conspiracy of silence just because we are dealing with a country which is an important trade partner of the EU .
I am certain that one of the European Parliament 's fundamental roles is to uphold human rights .
This is so , irrespective of whether we are talking about a world power , or about small countries such as Laos and Vietnam .
The People 's Republic of China is the country which carries out the most executions in the world .
It does not observe a minimum of human rights - those recognised by international legal standards and including the right to a defence and a fair trial .
Several days ago , we celebrated the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall .
If it had not been for the courage to criticise communism , if it had not been for the courage to speak the truth , Europe would look different today .
( LT ) I would hope that in the 21st century , the death penalty will die out and that the instruments of the death penalty will only be found in a museum .
However , until then , there is still a long road to travel , and I hope that China resolutely follows that road .
For several decades , China has led in terms of the rate of economic growth , but sadly also in terms of execution statistics .
Of course , Beijing would say that there is no other way in such a huge country and that not even the USA has abolished the death penalty .
However , despite this , if we are seriously considering a strategic partnership between the European Union and China that would be very important to both parties , then Beijing should undoubtedly change its policy regarding the implementation of the death penalty , as well as its policy on dialogue between ethnic minorities , for the sake of their harmonious coexistence .
( DE ) Mr President , I have already mentioned in this House that the World Uighur Congress , the central organisation for free Uighurs , is based in Munich , for the same reason that thankfully many Czechs and many other people lived in Munich : because Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty were also located there .
The city still retains this spirit of freedom today .
At the same time , Franz-Josef Strauß , who always defended these freedom radio stations against calls for their closure , ensured that we developed a relationship with China very early on .
The two things are not mutually exclusive , but complementary : positive contacts with China , but clear defence of religious freedom and human rights .
Several homes in Munich were searched by the police during a raid this week and Chinese agents who do nothing but terrorise and spy on Uighurs were arrested .
This indicates the sort of methods that China uses .
These methods are unacceptable .
They range from terrorising people in Munich through to death penalties in Ürümqi .
This is why we must make our opinions quite clear in this regard .
( DE ) Mr President , I take it for granted that the European Parliament will speak out when it is possible to save people from execution and , therefore , I support the call for a moratorium on the death penalty .
However , the process of defending human rights must not be misused for the purpose of lecturing China from a position of moral superiority , calling China 's integrity into question or creating an absurd caricature of the reality of life in China .
This does not help those people in China who are working on behalf of human rights , freedom and social harmony .
Our goal must be to help these people and not to encourage European self-righteousness .
I am also opposed to including a positive reference to the Memorandum on Genuine Autonomy for the Tibetan People in an urgent resolution .
That is not relevant and it has nothing directly to do with human rights .
In addition , it is not a generally acceptable position .
I would like there to be a wide-ranging discussion in future before an EU-China Summit on the relationship between China and the EU , covering all the subject areas .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to endorse what Reinhard Bütikofer has said .
My group had proposed that we discuss the imminent executions of the Uighurs in China and the participants in the protest demonstrations against the fraudulent elections in Iran who had been condemned to death , because these are two countries where executions are likely to take place very soon and , therefore , an urgent debate is needed .
It is true that the Chinese hold the world record for executions , as you have said , and that the Chinese regime is unjust , because it disregards human rights .
I would like to state explicitly that this is an intolerable situation .
However , in the Conference of Presidents , we asked for the two things to be kept separate : the urgent issues which we are discussing now , in other words , the imminent executions , and the question of the relationship between the European Union and China on economic , cultural , political and defence issues and in other areas .
We want to discuss this in a debate on the EU-China Summit and to summarise it in a resolution .
This is why the mishmash that has come out of this has nothing to do with urgent issues .
This is also why our group is insisting on a vote on the urgent matter which we proposed and not on the hotchpotch that you have submitted .
( HU ) Mr President , it is a major event that this issue has been urgently included on the agenda now .
The group of Hungarian MEPs from Transylvania also proposed this issue for discussion .
We want to thank some of the groups for their participation and support , but we are surprised that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament withdrew its signature from this proposal for a decision .
I regret that at the meeting the day before yesterday , certain sections were removed from the draft text as a whole , namely , those relating to the criticism of Communist regimes and the protection of minority communities .
The EU should finally face up honestly and openly to Communism 's enduring legacy and to Communist regimes still surviving today , which includes China .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are strongly opposed to the death penalty , wherever in the world it is enforced .
We are also opposed to the oppression of ethnic and religious minorities and both of these things are sadly happening in China .
Many people hoped that China would show more respect for human rights as a result of the Olympic Games and also that , because the Chinese are aware that the eyes of the world are on them , they would commit fewer abuses of human rights .
Unfortunately , that has not been the case .
The executions have continued and , therefore , it is very important for us to discuss this today , following the executions in November of nine Uighurs , which many people in the world are completely unaware of , and before that of two Tibetans .
The summit between the EU and China is not far off and , as several of the previous speakers have mentioned , China is an important trading partner .
This is what makes it so difficult to bring up the breaches of human rights repeatedly , but that is why it is particularly important to talk about this subject today in the run-up to the summit .
We would like the death penalty to be abolished everywhere .
It is good that Parliament introduced a moratorium on the death penalty in 2007 and we must do everything we can to keep this subject in the forefront of people 's minds while the death penalty is still in place .
( PL ) Mr President , as a Pole , I always feel my heart beat faster when there is talk of human rights in China .
On 4 June 1989 , Poles regained their liberty by voting in the first free election , in which we returned a non-communist Prime Minister .
The same day , 4 June 1989 , the Chinese regime crushed protesting students under the caterpillar tracks of its tanks in Tiananmen Square .
The free world had found a recipe for overcoming Soviet communism , but had not found one for overcoming Chinese communism .
The primacy of economics continues to be victorious over values and human rights .
This was clearly evident last year , when the mighty of the world proudly declared they would boycott the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics , and then all of them followed their economic interests and queued up in the first row of the parades , deaf to the cries of the oppressed people of Tibet .
I fear that if we put off making a resolution , we will unduly restrict this matter .
Of course , abuse of the death penalty is a horrible crime , but there are also arrests .
People are killed in labour camps in China , people are beaten with cudgels , they are imprisoned , freedom of speech is stifled , there is censorship .
This should all be found in this resolution .
It is good that the resolution has been tabled , but most important of all is that the primacy of human rights values should be victorious over economics .
That is what I wish for everyone .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first outline the state of play in EU-China relations .
Our policy towards China is one of constructive engagement .
As two major actors on the global stage , our strategic partnership is increasingly focused on addressing global challenges .
A key goal of the 12th EU-China Summit , to be held on 30 November in Nanjing , will precisely be to work together to ensure success for the Copenhagen climate summit and to address EU-China relations , including human rights , the financial and economic crisis and other international issues .
But a strategic partnership is not about thinking alike on each and every matter .
It is true that Europe and China may disagree and have different views on some issues , such as on human rights and democracy .
The strength of our relationship allows us to discuss these matters frankly .
Human rights issues , including the death penalty and respect for the fundamental rights of ethnic minorities , are systematically raised during our regular political contacts and , in particular , during our human rights dialogue with the Chinese authorities .
This was the case during the recent 28th round on 20 November in Beijing , where we had a frank discussion on these issues .
The EU 's principled opposition to the death penalty and the call for its abolition in China are robustly conveyed on all occasions .
The same is also true for the respect of the rights of ethnic minorities .
Let me reassure this House that we will also continue to raise those issues in other fora , including at the highest level .
My colleague , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , had an extensive debate with you on Tibet in March , where she outlined the EU 's position .
I would like to recall some essential elements that the EU position encompasses .
We have always supported the dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
For the EU , human rights are universal , and the situation in Tibet is a legitimate concern of the international community .
Tibet 's situation has invariably been approached as such .
We have consistently passed this message to our Chinese counterparts and listened very carefully to their views .
Commissioner Ashton also had the opportunity to express , here in July , her concern over the unrest in Xinjiang , deplore the loss of life and express her condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims .
The EU supports any effort that will help reconciliation in this region .
The EU respects China 's right to bring those responsible for violent action to justice but reaffirms its long-standing universal opposition to the use of the death penalty , under all circumstances , as well as the importance it attaches to the right to have a fair trial .
The EU has raised these concerns repeatedly with the Chinese authorities and reiterates its concerns in the two declarations published on 29 October and on 13 November , as it always does in such situations .
The statements called on China to commute any other death penalties passed in connection with the disturbances in Tibet and Xinjiang .
Moreover , the EU will continue to press to be allowed to observe any further trials arising from Tibet and the Xinjiang disturbances .
We all share the goal of a more open , transparent China , adhering to international standards on human rights and working together to address global challenges .
We all hoped that the Olympic Games would be the start of more Chinese flexibility with respect to the human rights of individuals .
Up to now , this has not materialised .
We must continue to work on the development of our strategic partnership and the respect of human rights as an integral part of our continued dialogue .
The 12th EU-China Summit in Beijing is a privileged occasion to do so at an important stage of our respective evolution .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
China has recently said goodbye to US President Barack Obama and will soon say hello to European Council President Fredrik Reinfeldt .
We must , however , see more action than just diplomatic gestures .
China has stated to its own people and the world its commitment to human rights , including those of the minorities residing within its borders .
Nevertheless , their record speaks otherwise .
Lately , there have been a number of disturbing incidents involving executions that were conducted with questionable trials and with uncommon haste .
These activities were all conducted in secrecy .
There is also the serious case of the Uighur minorities , where the Chinese Government is implementing birth control policies that are phasing the group out .
As the European Union speaks out for minority rights and abhors the death penalty , we urge the Chinese Government to open up the process by which citizens are tried and sentenced to death , and commute the sentences of those who were not given fair and open trials .
We urge the Chinese authorities to respect the rights of minorities living within their borders with regard to both UN resolutions and their own constitution .
We also urge China to improve its human rights with the support of the international community .
Mr President , I understand the displeasure felt by some Members here that our resolution on China was actually scheduled for a date after the visit by the Chinese delegation and hence might , by chance , give an impression of an unsuccessful journey , although the atmosphere was , in fact , excellent .
It is everyone 's desire that cooperation continues in a positive spirit , without , however , forgetting the facts .
Diplomacy cannot ignore human rights , but we need diplomacy and awareness of the situation to promote them .
Only recently , I was on a visit to Pakistan , where I met the President , the Prime Minister and prominent ministers to discuss human rights and the fight against terrorism .
I would say that sometimes in our resolutions on human rights , we also need to mention the good news .
There is cause for that now .
A year ago , Pakistan 's new democratically elected government appointed the first Minister for Minorities , who himself represents the Christian minority .
The government 's achievements in this area have been significant : the country has approved a 5 % quota of public offices reserved for minorities , religious festivals for minorities have been made official , minorities are to have their own special day of celebration on 11 August , and the Senate is planning the same 5 % quota for that institution .
The most important project relates to the reduction in incidences of violence .
Minorities together with Muslims are forming local ' inter-faith harmony ' committees , whose purpose it will be to soothe tensions and improve dialogue between the various groups .
There will be one in 112 local areas .
Ideally , they will also be able to prevent recruitment by the Taliban very effectively .
Pakistan is the most crucial country in terms of global security .
If the government succeeds in eliminating terrorism by such peaceful means as these , the example will be worth following .
The situation should be interesting to watch .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
1 .
Nicaragua ( vote )
Before the vote :
Mr President , I would like to remind you that my group has decided not to take part in the vote for the reasons I mentioned earlier .
Therefore , no abstentions , but no participation either .
( FI ) Mr President , in my opinion , too many Members in the last debate were allowed to go over their speaking time , by as much as double in some cases .
Could you kindly remind everyone that , if necessary , the microphone can be turned off ?
That might be necessary for us not to lose the speaking time allotted to us .
Yes , some of you were given the floor twice , but not in one item .
As far as disconnections are concerned , I have been generous to everyone and have not switched anyone 's microphone off today , but next time I will .
Mr President , I wish to emphasise that our group is actually present but , for the same reason as the Group of the Progressive A