Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament suspended on Wednesday 26 March 2008 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Murder of the human rights activist Munir Said Thalib ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Subtitling of all public-service television programmes in the EU ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Corrigenda ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
The situation in Tibet ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda for this part-session , as laid down by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting on Thursday 3 April 2008 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been requested to this draft .
Thursday :
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the report by Mrs Jäätteenmäki on the Statute of the European Ombudsman be postponed until the next part-session in Strasbourg and that voting time be brought forward to 11 a.m.
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , that is indeed our wish .
This is not because the report is a bad one - I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on behalf of my group , too , on a very good report - but there are still one or two critical issues unresolved .
We should like to be able to discuss these in peace , which is the reason for our motion ; and , as the President has just said , if the House were to agree to it , we could then vote at 11 a.m. - but this is not the reason .
Mr President , for form 's sake , I should like to notify my fellow Members on this occasion that I shall also be putting forward a motion - not now , but tomorrow - that the vote on the report on FYROM , or Macedonia , likewise be postponed until the Strasbourg sitting .
I shall state the reasons for this tomorrow ; I just wanted to let my fellow Members know now .
Here , too , there is just one small unresolved issue .
This is our group 's wish .
Would anyone like to speak in favour of the motion ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I believe Mr Swoboda 's argument was admittedly brief , but it was concise .
There are indeed one or two aspects , and therefore I , too , am in favour of postponement .
Who speaks against the motion ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the committee agreed the Jäätteenmäki report to strengthen the powers of the Ombudsman by 19 votes in favour to none against .
It is a question we have discussed for some time . It seems to me now to be quite extraordinary and , indeed , deplorable that the PSE and PPE-DE Groups have acquired cold feet upon the important question of the Ombudsman .
The transparency of Parliament depends upon improving the Statute of the European Ombudsman .
The Presidency is requesting that we fast-track the question for conclusion , and I would strongly urge Parliament to press on with the agenda as agreed .
( Parliament approved the proposal by the Socialist Group in the European Parliament )
The order of business is thus adopted .
Welcome
I am now pleased to be able to welcome to the visitors ' gallery a high-level delegation from the Turkish Parliament , which has come to Brussels on a three-day study trip .

It includes Mr Nihat Ergün , Deputy Chairman of the AK Party , Mr Yaşar Yakiş , Chairman of the EU Harmonisation Committee , and Mr Sait Açba , Chairman of the Planning and Budget Committee .
( Applause )
We wish you a pleasant stay and fruitful discussions with representatives of the European Parliament , Commission and Council .
A warm welcome to the European Parliament !
1 .
Approving the appointment of Mrs Androula Vassiliou as a Member of the Commission (
After the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , please excuse me , I may be mistaken but I thought that when votes were about people they had to remain secret , which has not been the case .
However , maybe because this is about members of the Commission , that is not the case .
I do not know . Anyway , this has been public because my fellow Members ' lights have been lit differently according to whether they voted for , against or abstained .

Mr Gollnisch , you are completely right in the second part of your conclusion : it was a roll-call vote , and it is in the nature of roll-call votes that we can identify by name how each Member voted .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Lebanon ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Lebanon .
Ladies and gentlemen , in connection with the situation in Lebanon , diplomatic activities of the European Union and the Member States remain focused on advancing the cause of peace , stability , economic development and respect for human rights in Lebanon .
We are making efforts to preserve and strengthen the sovereignty , political independence , territorial integrity , unity and stability of Lebanon .
The European Union upholds the Lebanese democratic institutions and the legitimate government of the Prime Minister , Fouad Siniora .
However , we are concerned because of the long-term paralysis of the Lebanese institutions .
This has been going on since November 2006 , and when in November 2007 the President 's position became vacant , the paralysis became even more critical .
Apart from being the largest financial donor to Lebanon , the European Union has been making efforts through intensive diplomatic activities also to find a solution for the country 's political paralysis .
Within this framework we support the efforts of the United Nations , Saudi Arabia and the Arab League .
Thus the European Union upheld the three-part plan , which the foreign ministers of the Arab League unanimously adopted .
As is well known , this plan envisages the immediate election of a president , the forming of a government of national unity , and the adoption of a new elections act .
In spite of expressing support for this plan , the Lebanese political parties differ in their interpretation of its execution .
There are two main obstacles for the realisation of the proposal .
The first one is internal , because the parties cannot reach an agreement regarding their representation in the government , the sharing of ministerial posts , and the new law on elections .
The second obstacle is connected with Syria , which refuses to give up its influence in Lebanon .
In spite of everything , the plan of the Arab League is , at this point in time , still the only initiative which can contribute to the resolution of the political impasse in the country .
We expect that the General Secretary of the Arab League , Mr Moussa , will continue with his efforts to resolve the existing situation .
In this respect the European Union will provide him with every support .
The recent summit of the Arab League , held in Damascus at the end of March , regretfully did not bring the desired results required for the resolution of the situation .
Because of Syria 's interference in the presidential election procedure , Lebanon expressed its protest by not sending their representative to the summit .
In connection with this , I should like to emphasise the commitment of the European Union to the viewpoints set out in a number United Nations Security Council resolutions .
Another demonstration of the European Union 's support of the efforts of the United Nations is its participation in the UN mission in Lebanon .
Member States have contributed the largest share of the military force in Lebanon .
Despite numerous attacks , during which six members of the Spanish contingent were killed and three Irish soldiers were wounded , the mission has been successful , and in August 2007 it was extended for another year .
European Union Member States also support the establishment of the special United Nations Court for Lebanon in the Netherlands .
Also worth mentioning is that in 2007 the EU-Lebanon Action Plan came into effect .
This instrument is an upgrading of the existing cooperation within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean Committee for the Barcelona Process , and activities within this framework have already commenced .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Parliament for including Lebanon on today 's agenda .
Many other developments in the Middle East - especially events in Gaza - have recently occupied our attention . This should , however , not make us forget the strategic importance of Lebanon for the region and as a partner of Europe .
The present situation in Lebanon is extremely worrying .
The deep political crisis continues : on 24 March , the parliamentary session to elect a President was postponed for the 17th time since November 2007 .
The Summit of the Arab League in Damascus has not delivered a solution either .
While the security situation has remained relatively calm with no major incidents , public tension and anxiety have increased .
Violence could break out at any moment as the political crisis goes on , with unforeseeable consequences for the country and its people .
Indications that Hizbollah has replenished its military capacity since 2006 are worrying , especially in the light of the recent threats against Israel , following the death of Imad Mugniyeh .
Moreover , the protracted crisis is having a very negative impact on the socio-economic situation in Lebanon .
As you are aware , Europe is active at many different levels to help Lebanon : we remain the biggest contributor to UNIFIL , and the European Union has also been the most important donor at the Paris III Conference .
We have been firmly supporting the Arab League 's Initiative since it was launched in January 2008 and our Community instruments have allowed us to provide a targeted response to some of the major challenges .
The European Neighbourhood Policy has developed into a major instrument to support Lebanon 's reform process and to contribute to economic and social stabilisation , even though reform efforts are severely hampered by the current political stalemate .
What are our priorities for the immediate future ?
Continued support for the implementation of the Arab League Initiative remains our key priority .
Despite all difficulties , this initiative enjoys broad support and it represents for the moment the only option to find a solution .
An important date in the process will be 22 April , when the next presidential election session in the Parliament is scheduled .
The idea of a special Lebanon Summit within the Arab League framework has recently been floated .
If it materialises , we should see how we can best provide support for this initiative .
We should note , however , that it is Syria that currently holds the Presidency of the Arab League .
A clear and continued commitment to the full implementation of the Security Council resolutions relevant to Lebanon also remains essential , indeed crucial .
The publication of the next implementation reports on UN Security Council Resolutions 1559 and 1701 - in May and July 2007 respectively - will therefore be essential milestones .
We should also continue efforts to maintain momentum in the Middle East peace process , which has an impact on Lebanon .
I remain in close contact with my Quartet partners and am looking forward to the Middle East conference planned by the European Parliament later this year .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , as the representatives of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council and the Commission have told us , and yesterday the High Representative , Mr Solana , when he appeared before the Committee on External Affairs , the recent Arab League Summit in Damascus did not produce any results , to put it diplomatically .
This is now the 17th time that the Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament , Nabih Berri , has postponed the planned vote to elect the President .
This decision has not been taken because of a lack of consensus on the figure of the candidate for the presidency , who , as everyone knows , is a Maronite Christian , nor because of a lack of consensus on the person - the head of the armed forces , Michel Suleiman .
This was clear to us as a delegation of MEPs who were in Damascus with the Deputy Prime Minister , the Minister of Foreign Affairs and representatives of Lebanese opposition parties , such as Hezbollah and Amal .
The problem , Mr President , comes down purely and simply to the distribution of power ; it is about establishing blocking minorities in the Lebanese Council of Ministers and about allocating the positions of head of the secret service and head of the armed forces .
This whole situation , as the Commissioner rightly said , seriously affects the credibility , functioning and international image of the country .
We therefore want the European Parliament to call for the current opposition forces to find a solution , in order to put the higher interests of the country before these internal issues , so that we can continue working , as we did in the EU electoral observation mission promoted by the Commission , towards a sovereign , democratic , free , viable Lebanon that can be constructed in peace .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is renewed talk of war in Lebanon .
The political impasse , which has already involved 27 postponements of the convening of Parliament to elect the President of the Republic , could deteriorate , making Lebanon fertile ground once again for inter-Arab conflict and a for now latent source of tension between Iran and Hezbollah and Israel .
The Arab League Summit in Damascus failed , as has been mentioned .
However , there is feverish external activity on the part of the Prime Minister , Fouad Siniora , and the Speaker of the Lebanese parliament , Nabih Berri .
These two strands of diplomacy that I would say are running in parallel , but until now have not been communicating , represent the dialogue of the deaf that has been dragging on for months between the majority and the opposition .
In my opinion , any attempt to contribute to solving the crisis in Lebanon must necessarily take account of both the internal and the international situation .
In fact , all the Lebanese forces have strong links outside the country , some of which are tighter than others .
Against this background it will be important to assess the results of the summit taking place today in Sharm el-Sheikh between Egypt and Saudi Arabia .
It would be useful if an extraordinary meeting of Arab League Ministers could be called as soon as possible , as requested by Prime Minister Siniora , to try to bring Damascus to a position where it respects Lebanon independence .
Within this framework , however , I would not leave out an analysis of the truly unique socio-economic situation in that , despite the crisis that followed the war , Lebanon saw its GDP grow by 4 % in 2007 .
However , the social situation is very difficult .
A general strike has been called by the trade unions for 7 May , in a bid to raise minimum wages , and according to UN data , one million Lebanese out of a population of four million are living below the poverty line on less than two dollars a day .
If we want to help with finding a solution , let us ensure that 22 April is not wasted , not least because 21 August looks like it will be an impossible date to get through .
This is the date the candidate for the Presidency has given for his resignation as head of the armed forces because he has reached the age limit .
If a solution has not been found by that date , the crisis will spread to the army , as well as bringing an end to the candidacy of General Suleiman for good .
I would like to finish with the words of Prime Minister Siniora : ' Lebanon cannot be governed from Damascus , but it cannot be governed against Damascus either . '
This seems to me a balanced position , and a benchmark for any initiative by the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in almost full agreement with what Mrs Napoletano has just said .
I say ' almost ' because I think that ultimately we need to bear in mind certainly Damascus , certainly other capitals , but in particular the fact that in Lebanon what they are facing , in apparently new forms now , is a policy of systematic assassination of one 's opponents .
The more popular they were , the more likely the former communist leader , and all of them , were to be killed in this series of assassinations .
We therefore can - and must - certainly pay attention to the diplomatic dimension , but unless we remember that in today 's Middle East , as in Europe in 1937 , 1938 and 1939 , what is being faced is on the one hand an assassination policy and on the other the political reality of victims in the name of freedom , even of enemies , I do not believe we can find the right direction , a direction that can only be given by Europe if it remembers that it was itself delivered from having to renounce national sovereignties , for which reason we have not had wars in Europe in recent years , except in Yugoslavia and elsewhere .
That was the imperative , and should also be so in the Middle East : to have something based on freedom and human rights as opposed to the ostracism and blackmail of the dictatorships of the 1930s , and those today in the Middle East and Far East .

Mr President , obviously we have limited influence on the situation in Lebanon . It does seem , though , that we have not done all we can to hinder the destabilisation of Lebanon by Hezbollah .
This organisation is responsible for terrorist attacks in Lebanon , including the January 2008 attacks , which were aimed at areas under the jurisdiction of UNIFIL .
Hezbollah is a private army which , with support from Iran and Syria , is destroying that once flourishing country .
For this reason Hezbollah should be added to the European list of terrorist organisations as a matter of urgency .
This is the only way we can effectively block its activities among the Islamic public in Europe .
This is the only way we can block off the European part of the money that flows to this organisation .
It is worth taking this opportunity also to recall the scandalous energy contract signed by Switzerland and Iran .
Swiss politicians should be left in no doubt that terrorists acting in Lebanon are also benefiting from this money .
Thank you , Mr President .
President Pöttering , I would like to put a specific proposal to you , to propose that various Lebanese parliamentary leaders be invited here to the European Parliament in order to discuss the Arab League 's proposals and to encourage an exercise in parliamentary diplomacy , so that we do not remain impassive in the face of the situation in which the Lebanese people have become pawns in a geopolitical game that is extremely dangerous , both for them and for peace in the Middle East .
This proposal could be carried out in the next few weeks as , given the deterioration of the situation in Lebanon , we cannot remain impassive , and Lebanese democracy is one of the weakest links in the Middle East .
We cannot allow the crisis between Iran and the United States and Iran and Israel to turn Lebanon into a battlefield in which every side loses .
We need to support the Arab League initiative for a commitment to the election of a new President .
We cannot let up in our support for the International Court regarding the murder of Rafik Hariri .
We are quite concerned about the delay in the investigation , which makes it difficult to protect key witnesses in the case , such as the Syrian Mohammed al-Siddiq , who recently disappeared .
The European Union needs to exert as much pressure as possible so that Syria and Iran cease to hinder the resolution of the political conflict in Lebanon and support the Arab League 's proposal on the election of a new President .
We are also concerned about the constant smuggling of weapons into the country to arm an illegal militia .
The Lebanese army should have the monopoly on military activity and control its territory .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lebanese people and democratic civil society in that country are the victims of a political crisis decided elsewhere .
On one side there is the United States , quick to play the Lebanese card against Syria and Hezbollah as part of its pro-Israeli stance to try to stabilise an area devastated by its illegal war against Iraq and to consolidate the military might of the State of Israel .
It cannot allow itself to lose Lebanon .
On the other side are Iran and Syria and their allied regimes that are playing out their contest for political , military , nuclear and regional supremacy in Lebanon .
It does not matter if this means massacre , even the physical massacre , of the Lebanese .
They do not want to lose Lebanon either .
The European Union 's role is not to align itself with one or the other in this international chess match .
As Europeans we need to do what we can to try to keep Lebanon politically united , by protecting its sovereignty and encouraging dialogue between the government coalition , Hezbollah and General Aoun , starting with the presidential elections .
The person elected must be a candidate both parties are happy with .
That is Lebanon .
The secular , multi-faith nature of the country is a valuable asset for the whole of the international community , and particularly for Europe .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , where to start when it comes to breaking the continuing political impasse in Lebanon ?
The answer is actually too simple for words , and I am convinced that the Council and the Commission are also well aware of this .
In any case , my clear answer is : start with the disarmament of Hezbollah .
A highly efficient , heavily armed organisation outside the legal authorities ' official means of exercising power is obstructing the normal functioning of the Lebanese state institutions and has so far also blocked a national political compromise .
Simple answers to international crises are often difficult to put into practice .
This certainly also applies to the urgent disarmament of Hezbollah ; after all , the spectre of renewed civil war is looming .
On the other hand , Hezbollah 's continuing position of military power is guaranteeing the continuing influence in domestic affairs of its two great sponsors , Syria and the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The consequence of this is obvious : the real threat of a further violent confrontation with neighbouring Israel .
Besides , the connection with Tehran 's present hardline nuclear course is evident .
Council and Commission , what solution will Europe supply to this Lebanese dilemma ?
Mr President , I have one further brief question .
According to reports in today 's US press , a Member State , Bulgaria , is channelling profits from the drugs trade to Hezbollah .
I should like the Council to tell me what the situation is .
An EU Member State earning money for Hezbollah from the drugs trade - that strikes me as particularly serious .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate gives me great satisfaction .
Despite all attempts and initiatives on the part of European bodies , I believe we are acting as though we have abandoned to its fate a people ensnared in successive political crises .
Our treatment of the situation is awkward .
We seem not to realise that the situation in Lebanon is connected with the challenges in the Middle East and that these challenges are crucial for international security and peace as well as for the EU 's strategic plans in the Mediterranean and the Middle East .
I believe that the European Parliament should be made to understand clearly that we in the EU must adhere to the commitments made in our partnership with Lebanon .
This obliges us to support the legally elected government , which was formed after the last elections in accordance with constitutional requirements , and which today is the target of attacks and threats .
We must demonstrate our support through deeds .
As Mrs Napoletano has also said , we are not giving enough money , because we are keen on an outcome that resolves the crisis and ends insecurity .
Such an outcome requires institutions to function .
Parliament has to work as a forum for democratic dialogue and state control ; it has to voice the diversity that is an essential part of Lebanon 's identity .
A certain parliament is still closed , not just for the election of the President of the Republic , but for all business .
If any way is to be found out of the crisis , the President of the Republic needs to be elected immediately and a new government must be formed in accordance with the Constitution .
Regional forces competing with each other ought not call the tune , as currently seems to be the case in the presidential election .
We must also demonstrate our support for the Lebanese seeking the truth behind political murders .
Hundreds of thousands of people are demonstrating in the streets , waving ' We Want The Truth ' banners .
We in the EU must act more effectively and strategically in the region .
We must promote responsibilities and genuine interests .
We must also find possible resolutions and peace in the states in the area and in the Arab states .
There must be understanding and national dialogue .
Let me end on an optimistic note .
I believe that the political powers have acted responsibly : events could have led to civil war and a coup , but this did not happen .
Let us therefore make the most of these positive elements .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as chairwoman of the delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries , I am pleased we have a debate on Lebanon on the agenda for this afternoon .
The crisis that this country has been experiencing for several months obviously goes beyond the challenges of a simple presidential election or the formation of a government .
We know that it is the very foundations of the political system that are in question , based as they are on the subtle balance between the different religious faiths in the Lebanese patchwork .
What is also in question is the place Lebanon hopes to take in the regional arena .
Does it want to be an aircraft carrier of the United States and their allies in the region , or the advanced post of a so-called Shi 'ite crescent ?
I do not believe that Lebanon really has to choose between the American camp and the Syrian / Iranian camp .
The only viable camp for Lebanon is the camp of Lebanon itself .
It is certainly not for the European Union to interfere in Lebanese internal affairs .
Europe does not have to support one coalition over another .
What the European Union can do is offer itself as a mediator , help the Lebanese parties to find a minimum of trust in each other - which is essential before any agreement can be reached - and put forward its good offices to launch a process of understanding and compromise .
We are right to support the Arab League 's plan based on a triple consensus : one president , one government of national union and the reform of the electoral law guaranteeing fair representation of all the components of Lebanese society .
That is the condition sine qua non for the political secularisation that is provided for in the Taif Agreements and that a growing majority of the Lebanese people want to happen .
We must support every initiative to achieve this .
In this regard , the proposal by Nabih Berri , speaker of the Lebanese parliament , which proposes to revive national dialogue , is a positive signal .
Just as we have done for many years , we must continue to support a Lebanon that wants to be sovereign , united and at peace with itself at last .
- ( ES ) Mr President , I have the impression that one of the few times that Lebanese members of parliament elected in 2005 have been able to act freely was recently , at the plenary sitting of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly in Athens , because being a Lebanese member of parliament is certainly very dangerous , as events have tragically demonstrated .
I think that there are some who want us to believe that there is no solution for Lebanon , and therefore that Lebanon is not viable as an independent , sovereign and democratic State .
We need to fight against this by supporting the Lebanese institutions , supporting the Arab League 's plan and demanding the removal of any obstacles that are being placed in the way of peace and understanding coming to that country .
Europe has not washed its hands of Lebanon ; I would like to remind everyone here of the European military presence in UNIFIL 2 , which is an impressive number , and there have been many casualties and deaths , as the Council has reminded us .
Our political presence is equal to this military presence .
We have limitations , but within those limitations on our capacity , we need to ask the powers outside the region and the Lebanese to reach an agreement , as without them it will be impossible for there to be socio-economic development for the good of the people or peace in the Middle East .
Mr President , the recent Arab summit was more soap than substance .
It failed to resolve the important questions due to the absence of key players .
Lebanon 's political crisis and ever-worsening security situation means that the EU must improve the political dialogue and assist a return to the rule of law and democracy .
Despite the EU-Lebanon Action Plan having identified effective implementation of Lebanon 's international commitments with respect to human rights and fundamental freedoms as a priority , almost no progress has been made .
Dysfunctional state institutions and the worsening economy have caused civil disquiet and protests .
Even the recent teachers ' strike is toothless without responsive state institutions .
The current political situation undermines the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) reform agenda , but the ENP can be a catalyst for political debate by moving it from power-based discussions towards issue-based discussions .
ENP partnership rewards progress .
Lebanon is not the best student at learning and cooperating with the ENP , but we cannot allow its adoption as if it were a strategy choice .
( SK ) As a member of the Euromed / Barcelona Process delegation , I monitor the issue of Lebanon and I regret to say that although Lebanon has a majority parliament , a legitimate majority , this majority is being intimidated and the parliament does not meet at all .
Since the murder of Rafik Hariri , who was well-known and respected , there has not yet been a presidential election and the country as a whole is incapable of finding a political solution to this complicated situation .
Members of the Lebanese Parliament whom I met recently , both at the latest Euromed meeting in Athens and here in Brussels , told us how terrible conditions for them are .
The feeling in Lebanon is that in practical terms Syria has political power over the country , specifically over southern Lebanon where Hezbollah puts the area in danger on a daily basis by firing rockets into northern Israel .
Iran supports the situation and I do not think that this axis is willing to accept democratic changes .
I would like to appeal to my colleagues and to all those present , in both the Council and this Parliament , to adopt measures to provide immediate assistance to Lebanon .
Mr President , I am also a member of the Delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries , and , indeed , Lebanon is in a tragic situation .
But I must say to the Council and the Commission that , listening to you this afternoon , I am less than impressed by the sort of impotence of your presentations .
You are passing off your responsibilities to an equally impotent Arab League .
We seem to be making no progress , and I think Europe could play a much more significant part , not only in Lebanon but in the whole Middle East issue .
It sits on a fence and does not come off that fence .
Please , Council and Commission , can we take a much stronger line on the whole Middle East issue from a European point of view and not just indulge ourselves in pious platitudes ?
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to concur with those voices that say that Europe should come up with an initiative now , and ahead of the suggestion from Mrs Patrie , Chair of the delegation , that we should proffer an opportunity for the main Lebanese forces to speak in our Parliamentary forum and tell us what is really blocking the summoning of their Parliament and commencement of the process of electing a President .
I believe that a definite policy on Syria is also required .
The key to the entire policy on Lebanon lies in Damascus .
We cannot separate our policy on Syria from our position on Lebanon .
If there is currently talk about negotiations between Israel and Syria concerning Israel abandoning the Golan Heights , then one condition must surely be met , which is that Lebanon has the right to be a democratic country , and Syria has to accept that .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have listened very carefully to the views of members during the today 's debate , and I should first say that there is a considerable consensus , both in the Parliament and in the Council , that it is high time that the stalemate situation in Lebanon is overcome .
The Council has been making efforts in several ways .
Some of you , amongst others Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou and Mrs Napoletano , have emphasised that sending money and financial funds to Lebanon is not enough , and that just electing a president will not be enough either .
This is true . However , in Lebanon and in connection with Lebanon the European Union is doing much more .
Here I should like to express gratitude to Carlos Carnero González , who , like myself , in his introductory contribution emphasised the considerable commitment of the European Union in the area of security through its military forces , a commitment which has already cost lives .
However , that is not nearly enough .
The Presidency of the European Council agrees that it is necessary for the European Union also to play a political role .
At this stage we must not forget that the Arab League initiative , which the European Union supports , is on the table and that the ongoing efforts of the Secretary General , Mr Moussa , deserve to be supported ; and the European Union does support them and will continue to support them .
We shall be adapting our actions in connection with Lebanon to suit events as they unfold .
I have already mentioned that the presidential election alone will not resolve all the difficulties .
A new government will also need to be formed , an electoral reform will be necessary , and , of course , we shall continue to strive for all of this .
The fact is that a resolution of the political crisis would also have an effect on the economic situation in the country .
And in making these efforts , the Council and the European Union remain committed to providing support for Lebanon .
This is a country with a huge potential ; and that is why we wish to help it and are determined to provide all the assistance that is within our scope , so that Lebanon can achieve political stability and full economic prosperity as soon as possible .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Members for a very important and responsible debate .
I shall report its contents to my colleague , Benita Ferrero-Waldner .
It seems to me that we - that is , Parliament , Council and Commission - share the basic view that we will certainly continue to support our long-standing partner , Lebanon , in this very critical phase .
Given the complexity of the challenges Lebanon currently faces , it is indeed essential that , as European institutions , we coordinate our efforts as much as possible and take full advantage of our capabilities .
The European Parliament has already made valuable contributions to our cooperation with Lebanon in the past .
A good example is the European election observation mission at the 2005 parliamentary elections .
Indeed one of the key tasks ahead is to help Lebanese democracy to become more robust to face challenges like the present crisis .
Electoral reform is a crucial element in every initiative that is expected to make a lasting impact on Lebanon 's political system .
In this context , the European Parliament , with its particular expertise and know-how , can - and , I trust , will - play a key role .
It is also true that the conflicts in the region are interlinked , as was underlined by several speakers .
As you know , Lebanon and Israel have never reached a peace agreement .
Lebanon hosts 400 000 Palestinian refugees partly because Israel and the Palestinians have not yet reached a peace deal .
Part of the Hizbollah 's raison d 'être is the ongoing occupation by Israel of the Shebaa farms .
Therefore , from the point of view of the European Union , a sustained and lasting solution can only be achieved through a comprehensive approach to the peace process .
Solving one track of the peace process will help in other areas , but no one track can be secure without progress on others .
Certainly , reaching an agreement between Israel and Syria could help to diffuse tensions in Lebanon , and therefore we have thrown our full support behind the current political process .
We are hopeful that progress can be extended to other tracks in due course .
( FR ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the next part-session in Strasbourg .
Croatia : 2007 progress report - Progress Report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( debate )
( FR ) The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Hannes Swoboda , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on Croatia 's 2007 progress report , and
the report by Erik Meijer , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the 2007 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , and the other fellow Members in particular , who have helped in producing a good , very balanced report .
My philosophy on this report is as follows .
I might perhaps mention a visit I made a few weeks ago to Vukovar - which , as a reminder , is the town where the war was particularly brutal , where hundreds of people were dragged out of the hospital and killed .
It is a particularly painful wound for the Croatian population .
I have also seen the memorial there and I have talked to the people .
The wound goes deep , but no hatred , no rejection of neighbouring Serbia has emerged , but instead an attempt to cooperate anew with the Serbian population there .
The mayoress has sat down at the table with the Serbian representative and colleagues from other ethnic groups and together they have represented the interests of the people there .
This shows clearly - perhaps more clearly even than the fact that the country 's Deputy Prime Minister comes from Serbia , which is also to be welcomed - how this country has tried passionately to overcome the schisms , conflicts and wars of the past and to create a modern Croatia .
All these things , of course , do not resolve the problems that Croatia still has to solve .
They do not resolve the issue of the reform of the judiciary or of the public administration , nor do they resolve the issue of the shipping industry - Croatia still has much to do there .
Therefore , it is simply not the case that we are ready to conclude the treaties and negotiations - absolutely not .
We are , however , on the right track , and that is something that is important for Croatia , but also for the entire region , as the region is also being sent a positive , an important signal with Croatia 's accession : if you fulfil your duties and responsibilities , if you do your homework , then you can become a Member of the European Union .
The European Union has to stand by this obligation , and that is something we also make clear in this report .
In addition to the internal reforms , there are , of course , needs and a few problems , including in relations with the country 's neighbours .
I was sad when it was unilaterally decided to introduce the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone .
It was not that there were no good , substantial or objective reasons for ecological administration of the fisheries , but it did not make sound sense to take this step unilaterally at the same time as promising Italy and Slovenia that no unilateral steps would be taken before finding a common solution .
Now , Croatia has taken that not-so-easy step and the fishing zone has been abolished for the Member States of the European Union .
We in the European Parliament now believe that the preconditions exist to overcome many of the impasses there have been - I do not want to put up for discussion here whether or not these were justified .
Hence my request to Slovenia - Minister Lenarčič is here as a Council representative rather than as a Slovenian minister ; he has to wear two hats - as well as to our Slovenian fellow Members in this House , is to help us overcome the bilateral problems .
Croatia must , of course , play its own part in this , as we have always said , but if we want to convey the European spirit to the regions or to bilateral relations , we need this help .
Hence , also , the proposal in the report - I am saying this now very informally - that a third person or a third institution help to solve this problem .
Whether we call it mediation or arbitration or whatever is not the crucial issue .
What is crucial is that both countries , Croatia and Slovenia , come together to decide the conditions , and that they accept the judgment to be given by the third institution , by mediation .
Things will then be on the right track .
The problems in the border area cannot be insoluble .
I perfectly appreciate Slovenia 's interest in having access to the sea .
This is a perfectly justified concern .
I believe that this concern of Slovenia 's is perfectly reconcilable with Croatian interests .
This is not insurmountable if we are not deeply and directly involved .
In conclusion , I wish to state clearly that I should have liked to have been able to conclude negotiations on the part of Croatia in 2008 .
Unfortunately , this is no longer possible or realistic .
I would therefore ask my fellow Members to take a realistic date , 2009 , as the date for the completion of negotiations , so that the newly elected Parliament will then be able to give its assent and ratification to take effect .
If we all apply ourselves , Croatia can become a Member of the European Union in 2011 .
This is a fine aim , a good aim .
Let us give it our support .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , if the seven states of the former Yugoslavia all come to form part of the European Union in future , this will have happened on seven different dates as the result of seven different ' road maps ' .
Accession en bloc , before the federation broke up , would probably have been easier for all concerned .
Slovenia is now a member , Croatia will follow within the next few years , and the third former Yugoslav republic concerned is Macedonia , which has been awaiting the opening of accession negotiations since back in 2005 .
I hope that my subsequent annual report , at the start of 2009 , can be all about normal domestic developments in Macedonia , including care for the environment , independence of the media , improvement of the judiciary and the fight against corruption , modernisation of the railways , equality of the various religious denominations , and freedom of negotiation for the trade unions .
This will be possible if the two problems leading to discord that are attracting the most attention are solved definitively .
We have not yet reached that point .
Relations between the two major language communities have improved greatly since the major conflict of 2001 .
The Ohrid Framework Agreement that followed , and in particular the agreement on qualified parliamentary majorities and administrative decentralisation , has made an important contribution to improving mutual relations - which are not yet free of conflict , however - resulting in a temporary parliamentary boycott and a short-lived governmental crisis .
It is in everyone 's interests that the problems underlying this be solved as quickly as possible .
In a multiethnic state , the complete equality of status of regional languages , including in administrative communication at national level , is an essential symbol of the complete equality of all inhabitants .
Macedonia can learn from more than a century of linguistic conflict in another bilingual state , Belgium , that delaying this inevitable outcome just leads to unnecessary tension .
The desire for everyone to be able to use the Albanian language everywhere must be taken seriously .
Unfortunately , the issue that , at the preparatory stage , not only the rapporteur but also all the shadow rapporteurs believed had to be resolved quickly , is still receiving the most attention .
We all refuse to side with either of the conflicting viewpoints of the two neighbouring countries regarding the significance of the name ' Macedonia ' .
To the candidate country , looking back over more than a century , Macedonia has been , successively , the name of a resistance movement against the Ottoman Empire , of a Yugoslavian federal state , and of an independent country .
To its southern neighbour , Greece , Macedonia is an important part of its own long history and the name of the region around the Greek city of Thessaloniki .
Greece has invested a large amount of capital in its northern neighbour and is the most emphatic supporter of the country 's accession to the European Union .
It is an important step forward that Greece has abandoned its attempts to replace the name ' Macedonia ' for its northern neighbour with ' FYROM ' , a term completely incomprehensible to everyone , in favour of emphasising that this state does not cover the whole of historical Macedonia , but only the Slav and Albanian northern part .
I have always opposed the view that a state - particularly one formerly under Communist rule - must become a member of NATO before it can be admitted to the European Union .
In Macedonia 's case , the refusal on 2 April to admit this country to NATO does affect its chances of joining the EU in the near future .
Each Member State has the opportunity to block any newcomer , even if it would like to admit this newcomer if there were not a difference of opinion on one sensitive detail .
Therefore , section 37 is central to this debate .
In this connection , and in agreement with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I tabled a compromise amendment this morning .
I await the reactions to this before my second turn .


To begin with , I should like to congratulate Mr Swoboda and Mr Meijer for preparing the two reports on the progress achieved by Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We are glad that the European Parliament has placed the discussion on the progress achieved by both the candidate states on the agenda of this session .
This is because the Slovenian Presidency attaches exceptional importance to integrating the states of the Western Balkans into the European Union .
In this connection , I should like to remind you that at their informal meeting at the end of March the foreign ministers communicated to the region of the Western Balkans a positive message concerning its European prospects .
At this difficult time for the region , in my opinion , such a message is welcome and appropriate .
Firstly , as regards Croatia : the accession negotiations with Croatia are proceeding according to plan and at this point I would like to express my agreement with Mr Swoboda 's view that , over the last two years , Croatia has made substantial progress in meeting the accession benchmarks .
Sixteen out of 35 negotiation chapters have been opened so far , and two have already been provisionally closed .
Two accession conferences with Croatia are scheduled , one in April and another in June ; and provided that all the benchmarks are met , several other new chapters will also be opened at the two accession conferences .
I should like to emphasise that the Slovenian Presidency is committed to continuing the process of expansion of the European Union and achieving further progress in negotiations .
The dynamics of negotiations depend primarily on the candidate state itself , and on its progress as regards the meeting of the benchmarks .
These have been determined within the negotiations framework , in the revised accession partnership which the Council of the European Union adopted in February this year , as well as in other legal acts .
I repeat , Croatia has achieved considerable progress ; however , the fact is that a lot of work remains to be done .
As was stated by Mr Swoboda , in the future much more attention should be paid to further transfers and effective implementation of the acquis communautaire .
Croatia must continue its efforts to meet the benchmarks and achieve faster progress .
In particular , I would like to mention the following : the reform of the judiciary and administration , the fight against corruption , economic reforms , minority rights , the refugees ' return , and full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
The documents I have mentioned also consider it essential for Croatia to continue making efforts to achieve good relations with neighbouring countries .
Of course this includes finding solutions for the unresolved issues .
I should like to move on to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : as Mr Meijer stated in his report , this is the only country with candidate status since 2005 which has not yet commenced the accession negotiations .
In our opinion , once the benchmarks are met , this situation should be finally resolved this year .
That is why the message conveyed in the European Commission 's latest document was that the autumn report on progress made by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia could be positive , provided the key priority tasks are fulfilled .
And a similar message was also communicated at the foreign ministers ' informal meeting in Slovenia at the end of March .
At the same time , we must not forget that the country has already proved its importance for stability in the region .
The country 's role must be recognised , and it must be encouraged with positive signals to continue its constructive role in the region , and to continue with its reforms .
One such signal is the dialogue on visa liberalisation .
We concur with Mr Meijer 's opinion that the government in Skopje has been implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement , especially in the sphere of decentralisation and the level of ethnic minorities ' representation in the public administration .
Our wish is that progress be made as soon as possible in finding solutions for the remaining issues , which are crucial for the Albanian community .
As the country presiding over the EU Council , Slovenia has been encouraging all the political parties to step up their political dialogue and systematic cooperation , so that the next stage in the process of joining the European Union can be achieved this year .
In this context , I should like to emphasise how sorry we are that , because of the open issue of the name , the latest negotiations have failed to bring the desired results .
Also , I regret that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has not been invited to become a NATO member .
Considering that the country has made considerable efforts to secure this invitation , we hope that it will soon follow in the footsteps of the other two candidates , who have each received such an invitation .
In its statement , following the NATO summit , the Slovenian Presidency has called for the negotiations on the name issue to be continued , and to be concluded as soon as possible .
The Slovenian Presidency also called for all the politicians in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to preserve the achieved level of unanimity as regards their country 's European and Euro-Atlantic future .
The Slovenian Presidency has also recommended that the country should take full advantage of the time that is still available before the Commission produces its regular autumn progress report .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome Mr Swoboda 's report on Croatia and Mr Meijer 's report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
On Croatia , I find that the Swoboda report addresses the main issues where Croatia will face challenges on its path to the European Union , focusing particularly on the political sphere .
It is a solid report that will reflect realities even better if Amendments 15 and 16 by the rapporteur are adopted , for instance concerning the timetable of the process .
Croatia 's accession negotiations have generally been going well , although they have been affected by the application of the ecological and fisheries protection zone - the famous , or infamous , ZERP issue .
I welcome the recent decision of the Sabor , the Croatian Parliament , to suspend the application of all aspects of the ZERP for EU vessels , in line with Croatia 's earlier commitments .
I commend Prime Minister Sanader for his leadership and I also thank Commission President Barroso for his personal involvement in settling the issue .
I visited Zagreb in early March and found that Croatia 's European vocation was strong enough to settle this problem if it was hampering the accession negotiations .
The removal of this obstacle by Croatia should allow chapters that have been blocked to be unblocked as of now and negotiations to resume again at normal pace , allowing for substantial progress in the remaining months of the Slovenian Presidency .
I do agree with the rapporteur and with Mr Lenarčič that Croatia has much work ahead .
Concrete progress is needed in judicial , administrative and economic reforms , in the fight against corruption and on refugee return and minority rights .
Croatia will also need to continue to make progress on various open bilateral issues with its neighbours .
This year could be a decisive one in the accession negotiations , provided that a number of conditions are met by Croatia .
The Commission is ready to present in this autumn 's enlargement package an indicative timetable , or a conditional road map , for the technical conclusion of the accession negotiations in the course of 2009 , preferably even during the mandate of the present Commission .
To achieve this , Croatia needs to deliver on all opening benchmarks by June .
There is not much time to waste .
It will also need to comply with all obligations under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and ensure urgent and significant improvements in the management of the EU 's financial assistance .
The Commission is ready to process negotiating positions in the various chapters once benchmarks are met .
Essentially , the ball is now in Croatia 's court .
The sooner concrete results are achieved , the sooner Croatia will join the European Union .
I fully agree with Mr Swoboda that Croatia can become a leading benchmark for the Western Balkan countries showing how they can realise their European perspective .
Concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I can by and large share the assessment of the Meijer report regarding the reform process .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his cooperation with the Commission services on the report .
Following the granting of candidate status in 2005 , there was a slowdown .
However , the Commission 's rather critical progress report of November 2007 has been followed by corrective actions .
Important reforms have been adopted since then , especially to strengthen the judiciary , reform the police and improve inter-ethnic relations .
I note the recommendation that the Commission should develop a set of benchmarks for the opening of accession negotiations this year .
I would like to inform you that we have established eight benchmarks , derived from the key priorities of the new Accession Partnership .
A recommendation to start accession negotiations will depend upon the progress which the country has made in meeting these benchmarks .
We shall make our assessment in the coming autumn in the enlargement package , which will most likely be presented in early November .
Evidently , political stability will be essential for success .
I met President Crvenkovski and Prime Minister Gruevski in Skopje some weeks ago , in March .
I called upon all political forces in the country to concentrate their energies on the reform agenda in order to take advantage of the opportunities which this year holds for the country .
I repeat this call today , as it is no less important now , in the aftermath of the NATO summit in Bucharest .
The name issue has consumed much political energy lately .
While I congratulate Croatia and Albania on their success in Euro-Atlantic integration with NATO membership , I can understand the disappointment felt in Bucharest last week by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I encourage the political leadership to continue on the road towards NATO and EU integration with full determination .
Let me conclude by noting that we are discussing developments in the two countries at a very appropriate point in time .
Both countries are in a position to make this year a very special and even decisive one in terms of getting more and more integrated with the European Union .
Support and encouragement from the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission will be highly important for these countries .
Therefore , I very much appreciate your invaluable contribution to our European policy of stability and progress in the Western Balkans .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we are talking today about the only two clearly European candidate countries we have , namely Croatia and Macedonia .
We hope to be able to conclude the negotiations with Croatia by the end of this year , or by next year at the latest .
We hope to be able to begin negotiations with Macedonia by the end of this year , or by next year at the latest .
We want to prevent both countries becoming hostages to bilateral problems , and I appeal in particular to our Greek fellow Members to show movement on this issue , as the erroneous decision taken in Bucharest is already starting to destabilise Macedonia .
As regards Croatia , the Sanader government has been actively pressing ahead with reforms and negotiations .
I appeal to the Council and Commission to keep up with the pace of work .
I appeal to the Commission actively to strengthen its capacities and to process the relevant documents quickly .
I appeal to the Council to open all the negotiating chapters as quickly as possible .
When they are closed naturally depends on the negotiations and on Croatia 's efforts .
Croatia has done a massive amount of preliminary political work .
It has settled and resolved the issue of fishing zones with great courage , it has endorsed arbitration with Slovenia , and it has above all sent a signal of great significance to the entire region by appointing a Serbian Deputy Prime Minister to the Sanader government , and this in the light of the situation Mr Swoboda has rightly described in Vukovar , for example .
Protection of the rights of minorities that goes way beyond what most Member States guarantee in terms of minority rights is taking place there .
I should therefore like to say that we should acknowledge Croatia 's political achievements and decisively support the country on its way into the European Union .
We are abiding by the ambitious aim to take a decision in the current period .
Should this not be possible , it will be the autumn .
We would support your motion , Mr Swoboda , if it contained ' latest ' and ' should ' , but ' could ' is only a status report , and we shall therefore keep up the pressure on the Council and Commission .
We know that this is ambitious , but Croatia deserves to see justice at long last .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to make a couple of comments on both reports on behalf of my group and myself .
To begin with , compliments to my colleague Mr Swoboda , who has succeeded this year , too , in presenting us with another balanced report .
When we talk about Croatia , we are talking about the final steps that the country has to take to enable the conclusion of negotiations .
Hopefully these final steps will take the form of a final sprint .
The gaps ascertained by the Commission must be filled .
We hope that this can be done apace , even though , as is always the case at the end of negotiations , the dossiers concerned are difficult ones , for example the dossier on shipbuilding .
I would appeal to everyone , including the Government of Croatia , to reach the necessary political consensus within the country , too , so that even the difficult decisions can be taken quickly .
I also concur with Mr Swoboda 's words about the dates by which all of this , particularly the conclusion of negotiations , can take place .
Regarding FYROM - Macedonia - it is important , as the Commissioner has already said , that the country endeavour to reach the Commission 's benchmarks this year , so that a decision can be taken on the start of negotiations .
I believe this to be fundamental .
It is true of Macedonia , too , that a consensus must be reached in the country itself ; I am very concerned in this regard about recent problems with the Albanian minority and the vote being held in Skopje tomorrow or the day after , which may lead to the fall of the government .
If this were to happen , the country would be at sea , as there could be no negotiations with Greece over the name or any work on the benchmarks to which the Commissioner referred .
I think that it is important to appeal to everyone in that country to ensure that the consensus holds and to prevent us being faced with a situation of new elections in the next few weeks ; it is important to invest in this consensus .
Finally , we , too , think it a shame that no consensus could be reached in Bucharest on Macedonia 's accession to NATO .
In our opinion , another attempt must be made , based on mediation by the UN and Mr Nimitz , and I hope that both sides invest in a somewhat more productive atmosphere , so that a solution can be found quickly .
on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , earlier this year the accession negotiations with Croatia slowed down and the process seemed to have come to a standstill .
Let us hope that this is now over , and the negotiations will pick up momentum once more .
The Croatian Parliament 's decision to suspend the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone that had been applied to European Union Member States has certainly helped in this regard .
In recent years Croatia has achieved a great deal that warrants recognition : there can be no denying that it is a functioning democracy ; it has a functioning market economy and is implementing the provisions set out in the Stability and Association Agreement .
At the same time , however , there are undeniably serious problems that also need to be resolved .
The first of these I would like to mention is procrastination over the reform of the judicial system - this cannot be delayed any longer .
I believe it is important to strengthen the fight against corruption , and ensure that it extends not only to more minor cases , but also to the ' big players ' , as Croatia has not made much progress so far in this regard .
Improvements need to be made as regards efficient use of Community resources , and major structural reforms must be initiated .
In this context I would like to highlight the situation and role of the shipbuilding industry , which is in need of restructuring .
If Croatia manages to do all this , then it really ought to be able to conclude the negotiations in time , within the deadline set in the report , and must be given every possible support to do so .
Croatia 's accession process has a regional significance reaching far beyond the process itself .
If Croatia 's accession is successful , it represents a model and an incentive for the other Western Balkan countries too .
Prompt and successful conclusion of the negotiations is therefore not only the joint responsibility of Croatia and the European Union , but also in their common interests .
I hope that Croatia will assume this responsibility .
Last , I would like to congratulate Hannes Swoboda on the outstanding job he has done in carrying out his duties as rapporteur . Thank you , Mr President .
Naturally I too would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur .
This is a very good report .
It is a very good thing that Croatia and Macedonia may obtain membership of the Union before the 2009 European elections .
In respect of the latter we must clearly avoid adding political conditions for accession , especially in spheres that , like property rights or indemnity claims , belong to the sphere of bilateral relations .
The process of enlargement cannot be allowed to be hostage to such tensions .
There is also a broader context to this process .
Enlargement of the Union into the Western Balkans is a European contribution to stabilisation of this region - a region in which we failed in the 1990s .
For this process to be completed , we must also send a positive signal to Belgrade .
By recognising Kosovo , we have placed the pro-European section of public opinion in Serbia in a very awkward position .
We are left with little time to go even part of the way towards balancing out that impression .
A road map for a visa agreement with Serbia is needed .
We should sign a stabilisation and association agreement as a matter of great urgency .
Today this agreement has become hostage to the internal policy of two Member States , but the whole Union may have to pay the price of stopping it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) I am delighted with this very good , balanced report by Mr Swoboda , which is a positive sign for Croatia and for the region as a whole .
Despite all the tangible efforts , however , we must not forget certain problem areas that still require comprehensive reforms before Croatia is able to join the EU .
Ultimately , the facts are the only reliable benchmark for a country 's readiness for accession .
Examples are the clarification of unresolved border issues , the fight against corruption , administrative reform and respect for human rights .
Cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is another benchmark for the country 's readiness .
The political parties , civil society and the media must make longer-term efforts to gain the support of the population .
The same applies to the integration of national and sexual minorities into social and political life .
I very much welcome the decision to appoint a representative of the Serb minority as Deputy Prime Minister .
A great deal still has to be done in the environmental protection sector , however , in order to ensure ecologically sustainable development in line with EU targets .
Supporting Croatia in this is a task I shall be glad to promote .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , we , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , will not vote for the enlargement of the EU to take in FYROM and Croatia .
We oppose the strengthening of a capitalist and war mongering EU .
Following the dismemberment of Yugoslavia by ΝΑΤΟ and the EU , imperialist plans are being hatched to shift borders in the Balkans and create protectorates buttressing imperialists and dividing peoples .
The largest US base in Europe is being formed and expanded on arbitrarily marked-out territories between FYROM and the Serbian province of Kosovo , where EU forces are expected to arrive .
This typifies the intensification of rivalries in the region .
At the recent NATO summit , Albania and Croatia were allowed to join , but FYROM was not invited to do so .
This demonstrates the unpleasant blackmail being applied to the Balkan states , as well as Greece , to subjugate them to imperialist interests .
With regard to the name , we support a geographically defined solution acceptable to all and far removed from divisive nationalism and enslavement , for peace , stable borders and the protection of the sovereignty of states .
What we need is a common struggle by the people against the imperialist organisations that divide and exploit it .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the reverberations from the NATO summit in Bucharest have reached this Parliament .
It is comforting that Europe has at last taken a position on an issue concerning it , as there is usually little enthusiasm to take a position when others are making decisions .
I therefore , think that all parties have learnt a useful lesson especially the FYROM .
This new republic has not yet learnt European diplomatic practice , having placed its hopes on accession to ΝΑΤΟ simply because of US promises and infantile , misguided hopes of liberation from bondage .
In negotiations between European states provocation and fanaticism should never be an option .
Choices should not be made on the imaginary basis of ancestry , neighbouring cultures and history ; instead , we should act in a spirit of consensus , comprehension and , above all , probity in order to find a solution rather than worsen problems .
A positive approach will benefit FYROM , which we hope will be helped to join both ΝΑΤΟ and the EU .
If FYROM refuses to accept the name chosen for it and persists in this refusal , it will find that there are obstacles to its accession , because it has undermined its own efforts .
If its efforts are undermined now , perhaps its future will also be undermined .
( SV ) Thank you , Mr President .
The report is good throughout .
It is well balanced and gives an objective description of developments in Macedonia ; commending what has been achieved and appealing for a little more time to be devoted to what remains to be done .
But , as so often before , the debate is reduced to discussing our various views of the dispute over the country 's name rather than working out how we can get Macedonia into the EU as soon as possible .
We all know what happened at the summit in Bucharest .
I will not go into who was right or wrong or who had greater national interests to defend , but I have to say that foreign policy is not just a matter of who is right and who is wrong .
Foreign policy is about getting solutions which best serve peace and security in one 's own country or region and , in our case , Europe .
This is achieved by a mixture of goodwill , compromise , good diplomacy and clear leadership .
To prevent a country in southern Europe from becoming a member of NATO when the possibility arose is , to my mind , not a particularly wise move , given the complexity of the situation in the Balkans right now and all the challenges we face : independence in Kosovo , which is a fait accompli , the departure of the government and new elections in Serbia and still-ongoing police reforms in Bosnia .
But to block the EU membership of a Balkan country , or even just to think of doing so , is not just unwise but downright dangerous !
Only three hours ago I spoke with a colleague here in the European Parliament who said : ' If they don 't do as we want , we can block them , not just in NATO , but in the EU .
The law entitles us to do so ' .
My reaction is to say : then we must change the law !
Surely laws are not there for us to block , disrupt or blackmail one another ?
Surely they are there so that we can all get along together as best we can in a peaceful and secure Europe ?
It is my firm opinion that , the sooner all the Balkan countries are in the EU , the sooner we shall have a secure Europe .
There is absolutely no doubt that Macedonia belongs to Europe and that Macedonia should be brought into the EU as quickly as possible .
I urge you to support the report .
( SL ) In respect of the report on Croatia : both this House and the European Commission have almost enthusiastically received the news that the Croatian Parliament has suspended its decision to declare an Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone .
And it seems that owing to this decision Croatia may be rewarded with fast-track negotiations .
Although my wish is that Croatia should , in any event , join the European Union as soon as possible , I would like to warn this House , and especially the rapporteur , my friend Hannes Swoboda , that the unilateral actions of the Republic of Croatia in respect of its borders with neighbouring countries are not an exception but a rule .
What is exceptional in this matter is only that , for once , Croatia has had to withdraw its unilateral action due to being faced with a choice : either the European Union , or a nationalistic isolation .
And it is here that this pressure has proven to be useful , and I hope that Mr Swoboda and also the European Commission and the Presidency will continue to insist on the policy that unilateral actions of the Republic of Croatia regarding the determination of frontiers with neighbouring countries shall not be rewarded .
( SL ) The best way of stabilising this part of the Balkans is for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to make progress and move closer to the European Union .
Its successful negotiations will help all other neighbouring countries to make additional efforts to gain candidate status .
In order to overcome the dispute over the name , external initiatives are required .
Symbolic gestures are necessary both in Skopje and Athens , as well as perseverance .
Now is the right time to look for a less provocative name for Skopje Airport , and to condemn the disrespectful treatment of the Greek flag .
However , any further difficulties and the discrimination which holders of Macedonian passports are subjected to in connection with Greek visas are also unacceptable .
In the European Union , we are building a community of modern post-national states .
Mutual respect of differences and national identities is also an issue of respect for fundamental human rights .
Only in this way can we prevent , or at least limit any negative consequences of the feeling that one 's nationality is threatened .
We need to abolish the visa regime for all the countries in this region .
However , also required is a rapid and permanent solution for the country 's name and a comprehensive alliance between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Greece .
Peace and stability , and fast and successful Euro-Atlantic integrations are in the interest of both the states and all the nations .
Nevertheless , Commissioner , and Mr Lenarčič , the Slovenian Presidency ought to table the Macedonian question for the next summit .
There is no need whatsoever to wait until autumn .
And one more thing about Croatia : by implementing the Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone , Croatian politics was hoisted by its own petard .
In the future such surprises will not be possible .
If this adventure has taught us something so be it , but if they have not learnt anything , then all the words and vows about finalising negotiations in 2009 is just dust in the eyes .
No one needs dust in their eyes : not the citizens , nor the economy , nor the neighbouring countries , nor the European Union .
What we now need is a success story .
However , for any success the principle of pacta sunt servanda ( agreements must be kept ) is a necessity .
( PL ) Mr President , in making a constructive assessment of Croatia 's progress , the European Union should not only set conditions , but also offer all possible assistance , bearing in mind the experience of other European states , the specifics of the region and the fresh memories of war that remain with the people of this country .
Integration of the Balkan Peninsula without Croatia is not feasible .
It should also be stressed that the last two years of cooperation have brought unexpectedly good results , and this undoubtedly bodes well for the process of integration with the European Union .
Obviously there are certain areas where more resolute action is needed .
In my view , however , the efforts made by this state should be given their due , and the whole of the EU should support such action .
Over the last two years Croatia has made laudable progress in most of the areas covered by Community law .
I would consequently express the conviction and the hope that with mutual engagement and suitable support from other Member States , negotiations will be successfully completed in time for the accession treaty to be finalised before the European Parliament elections in June 2009 .
( DE ) Mr President , a warm welcome to our counterparts from Macedonia who are following this debate .
Commissioner Rehn has said that we are encouraging Macedonia to move forward in the reform process .
' Yes , ' we all say in unison , ' we want negotiations to be opened this year . '
However , we still need to name names .
The party who has put paid to Macedonia 's ability to enter into alliance commitments is Greece , with its veto against the country 's membership of NATO .
There is admittedly a naming dispute , but we cannot ignore the fact that , in 1995 , Greece made a binding statement , valid under international law , agreeing that the naming dispute would never be an obstacle to Macedonia joining the international community , the EU or NATO .
Greece has broken this internationally binding agreement , and if we want to impose reforms in this regard , I say that Greece is in breach of European criteria and not Macedonia .
This is a step backwards , it is a slap in the face of a small state that is really making every effort to go along with us and open negotiations .
I would also say , therefore , Mr Swoboda , that the sleight of hand to stop , or postpone , tomorrow 's vote again further risks destabilising the government in Macedonia , encouraging as it does the nationalistic forces .
The actual problem is that with Greece we have an allied country that refuses point blank to recognise any kind of minority in its own country .
This is contrary to the Copenhagen criteria , which is embarrassing to the European Union and to the alliance .
I wish Macedonia every strength as it takes the next few steps in spite of Greece .
( DE ) Mr President , not only is Croatia culturally and historically anchored in Central Europe , but also it already meets all the accession criteria .
Therefore , we should not be putting any unnecessary obstacles in its way .
With the settlement of the fisheries dispute , Croatia has once more affirmed its readiness for EU membership , and the Croatian Government is also strengthening its efforts to combat corruption .
Nevertheless , Croatia 's rapid admission , which has now come within its grasp , should not in my view lead to automatic entry for any other states .
As is generally known , Macedonia is having to battle with not only corruption , but also economic problems and the rule of law .
Particularly with regard to Kosovo 's declaration of independence , it remains to be seen whether the ethnic peace with the Albanian minority can continue in the long term .
We must not repeat the mistakes of past enlargement rounds .
The EU must in my view finally wake up to the fact that unresolved conflicts , cultural differences and socioeconomic problems do not vanish into thin air with accession .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As chairman of the Croatia-EU Joint Parliamentary Committee , I feel that recent months have brought a favourable turn of events in Croatia 's Euro-Atlantic integration process .
A few weeks ago , Mr Barroso outlined the road map for concluding accession negotiations by autumn 2009 , and last week Croatia received an invitation to join NATO .
Both of these developments are an acknowledgement that Croatia is on the right track , and the international community is rewarding the efforts of the Croatian government .
It is no coincidence that the Eurobarometer result in Croatia has risen above 60 % again for the first time in a long time .
I also think it was a remarkable and wise attitude that led to our Croatian friends ' decision not to enforce the fishing protection zone in the case of European Union Member States in the interests of Croatia 's membership of the European Union .
On the issue of Kosovo 's independence , the government of Mr Sanader has likewise pursued a moderate course by aligning itself with the majority of EU Member States and recognising Kosovo 's independence .
Mr President , the fact that the Croatian Serb minority has been given the post of deputy prime minister in the current cabinet has contributed greatly - as others have already said - to stability in the region and peace among the different ethnic groups .
I believe it is unfair on the part of the Slovenian Prime Minister to announce that he would not rule out vetoing Croatia 's accession to the EU because of the border issue between the two countries .
EU enlargement and the fate of a nation must not be tied to resolving a bilateral dispute over borders .
The report carries a positive message in that it recognises the progress made by Croatia as regards stability in the Western Balkan region , as regards ensuring the country 's economy is ready to compete in the European Union context , and as regards institutional reforms and adoption of European Union legislation .
Alongside the positive points , however , the report does not shrink from mentioning the challenges that face us : reforming the judicial system , combating organised crime and corruption , bringing refugee returns to a conclusion , and resolving or alleviating bilateral tensions .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Hannes Swoboda and Erik Meijer on their 2007 progress reports on Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia respectively .
Both reports are excellent .
As a Socialist Group shadow for the report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I would like to thank Mr Meijer for his serious and honest cooperation during the making of this report .
The report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia hails the achievements in the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement , which deals with the political aspect of inter-ethnic relations .
The report comments on economic performance , the adoption of several crucial laws on prosecutors , and progress in the fight against corruption .
On the negative side , we regret the signing of the Bilateral Immunity Agreement by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with the United States , which grants exemption from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in contradiction of EU standards and policies .
The report calls on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece to increase efforts to overcome the dispute on the name of the country .
That should in no circumstances become an obstacle to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 's membership of international organisations .
On the name issue , the report does not criticise either of the two sides .
It only encourages both sides to carry on negotiations , despite what happened at the NATO Summit in Bucharest last week .
Fortunately Javier Solana said yesterday in the European Parliament Foreign Affairs Committee that negotiations on the name will continue .
If the two sides agree , NATO can take a decision to invite the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia immediately , even at ambassador level , so a new summit will be needed .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia could get a date for the start of accession negotiations this year .
The European Parliament should give a clear lead for the country towards European integration .
( DA ) Mr President , when we talk about the Balkans , we have to look at the region as a unified whole .
The EU 's long-term objective is the accession of all Balkan countries .
For this objective to be achieved , results are also expected on the part of the countries themselves .
A common European future is the joint task of the Member States and all the Balkan countries .
We Nordic countries are no stranger to historical conflicts , but are now working together .
The Balkans , like the Nordic region , are bound together by a common history , common languages and a common culture throughout their length and breadth .
It should be possible , therefore , to launch a process of cooperation to ensure peace and stability .
At present , there are a number of cooperation agreements between countries in the region .
Why not go one step further ?
Taking inspiration from Nordic cooperation , the Balkan countries could establish a cooperation forum along the lines of the Nordic Council or the Baltic Council .
Intensifying the existing regional political cooperation in the form of a Balkan Council will enable these countries to enter into practical , forward-looking cooperation , which will offer an opportunity to stabilise the region and make those countries that are not yet Member States or official candidate countries more prepared for accession .
( PL ) Mr President , Croatia , that old European nation with a long history and an interesting culture , should be brought into the European family of nations known as the European Union as soon as possible .
Croatia , a country applying to join the Union , paradoxically has a longer history than some of the founding states of the European Community , such as Belgium and Luxembourg .
Zagreb and Split are very European places , while Dubrovnik is a jewel in Europe 's cultural crown .
During this debate , most of the speakers , including myself , have spoken wearing ties .
It is worth remembering that ties were invented by the Croats and it should also be emphasised here in the European Parliament , which so values liberty and freedom , that the Croatian port of Dubrovnik was the first in Europe to prohibit trading in slaves at the beginning of the 15th century .
Given this situation , we do not even have a moral right to hold back Croatia 's access to the Union .
( FR ) The fact that I am acting as President but not wearing a tie quite clearly has nothing to do with the item on the agenda .
( EL ) Mr President , the Meijer report and the unanimous resolutions of the EU-Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Joint Parliamentary Committee both emphasise the three vital steps FYROM has taken towards Europe .
The first step , of course involves meeting accession requirements and complying with the acquis communautaire .
Although FYROM has made progress , it must continue its journey of reform as stressed both in the Meijer report and in various other reports by the European Commission .
The second step concerns internal policies and social cohesion .
It must continue to abide by the Ohrid Agreement , especially as far as the Albanians and also other minorities in this multi-ethnic country are concerned .
The third step is resolving the differences between FYROM and its neighbours in accordance with the Salzburg Declaration .
Let me stress here that Greece was - and continues to be - at the forefront of endeavours to achieve the accession of all the Balkan states to Euro-Atlantic structures , since it firmly believes that the development of the countries in the region will benefit all .
For Greece , however , the name issue is not simply a historical , psychological or emotional problem .
It is a genuine political issue for all Greek citizens , as it concerns the European values of good neighbourliness and regional cooperation .
May I remind you that Greece agreed to FYROM being awarded the status of accession candidate subject , of course , to the proviso in COM ( 2007 ) 663 that a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue be found through negotiations .
Finally , I should point out that even after the postponement in Bucharest of an invitation to FYROM to join NATO pending the resolution of the name issue , Greece is in favour of continued negotiations .
In fact , it has taken the generous compromise step of suggesting an acceptable composite name , so all that remains for the other side to do is to meet Greece halfway .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to believe that compromises will be reached regarding the few points still to be clarified , enabling us to go ahead with the vote in Strasbourg .
Madam President , Croatia has a European vocation : the recent invitation to join NATO and the current negotiations to join the EU are a testimony to that .
This is quite an achievement for a country which only a decade ago was practically at war .
Equally , however , that is not enough to eliminate the challenges still facing both Croatia and the EU on the way to completing those negotiations .
The timetable is extremely tight ; practically each day counts , irrespective of the different dates advanced for the finalisation of the process .
However , when I visited Zagreb some time ago at the head of the delegation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I took note of the determination of the Croatian authorities to do away with those problems and achieve membership of the Union .
In this respect , the recent decision of the Croatian Parliament to exempt the EU states from the application of the Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone ( ZERP ) following Commissioner Rehn 's visit , is both a testimony to that determination and is an important step in the right direction .
I am convinced that , with the right administrative capacity to implement the required legislation , Croatia , in both the EU and NATO , will be a solid factor of stability and progress in an area that still needs our full attention .
I congratulate Mr Swoboda on all his work reflected in this report .
( SV ) Thank you , Madam President .
Croatia plays a key role in the democratic development of the Western Balkans , and it is immensely important that the process should continue .
We saw that , for understandable reasons , it slowed down somewhat during the Croatian election campaign and the formation of a new government , but now I really hope that the process will put on some speed .
As previous speakers have noted , the timetable is extremely tight .
I welcome the temporary lifting of the restrictions in the Ecological Zone in the Adriatic .
It is a positive signal for relations between Slovenia , Italy and Croatia , but environmental considerations must continue to weigh heavily in our treatment of this unique marine environment .
Croatia still has a great deal to do as regards the reform of the legal system and the judicial process .
Far too many people still have to wait far too long for a verdict on their cases .
This must be prioritised , and the country 's administrative capacity must be developed and expanded .
Finally , I welcome the work done by the EU Committee of the Croatian Parliament , which is headed by my good friend Vesna Pusić .
We now hope that the negotiations will be excellent and that they can be concluded rapidly .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Swoboda 's report is encouraging , realistic and balanced .
I congratulate him on it .
It shows the progress Croatia has made , such as its exemplary legislation on minorities , its constructive cooperation with the Hague Tribunal , its increased commitment to fighting corruption , and above all the agreement of Parliament and government regarding the fishing zone , which has been particularly difficult to achieve .
Croatia and the European Commission now have to bring all their resources to bear to negotiate the forthcoming chapters quickly and satisfactorily .
An international arbitrator should have the opportunity at long last to resolve the border issues between Slovenia and Croatia .
Croatia has a key role to play in the region and should be admitted to the European Union soon .
Bilateral issues must not be an obstacle .
With regard to Macedonia , I can tell you that I was at a conference there at the weekend and the mood is really very agitated following the rejection by NATO .
People feel they have been unfairly treated .
Mr Meijer 's report shows the stony path the country has already successfully trodden .
There is certainly a great deal still to do , but when the naming issue continually hangs over everything like the Sword of Damocles it is difficult to move on in other areas of policy .
I have been monitoring the situation there since 1992 and would like Macedonia and Greece to find a solution at long last to the dispute regarding the name , particularly for the young generation .
Both sides have made concessions in recent weeks and both must take another step closer to each other .
I would find it incompatible with our European values and actually irresponsible if a veto were once again to provide the opportunity to bar the country from joining the European Union .
This must not happen !
Madam President , I am very disappointed at the current relations between the West and Macedonia .
Frankly speaking , the people of Macedonia deserve far better treatment from us .
With the independence of Kosovo and the recent failure of NATO accession , the situation is even more complicated .
In Macedonia there are separatist elements on one side and nationalists on the other who try to challenge the stability of the country , and the Bucharest decision does not help the situation at all .
But perhaps our Macedonian friends can learn at least one lesson from Bucharest .
It is not enough to get the support of the US .
Many decisions depend on the common accord of the Member States , not only in the European Union but also in NATO , and any Member State may use its veto .
In the light of the latest events Macedonia should reconsider its standpoint on exempting the US from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court .
Many mistakes were committed on both sides - by us and the Macedonian politicians - but we cannot punish ordinary people for our mistakes .
That is why at least in the field of visa liberalisation we should act quickly , assisting the Macedonian people to travel , learn and have closer contacts with everyday European life .
Three and a half years ago when I was elected Vice-Chairman of the EU-Macedonia Joint Parliamentary Committee , I had many optimistic plans on how to improve our relationships .
Very few of these ideas were realised .
I hope at least in the field of visa liberalisation we can make a step forward .
( EL ) Madam President , Greece has consistently supported the European prospects of FYROM , to whose economic development has it contributed .
We have worked systematically to find a mutually acceptable solution to the name problem under the auspices of the UN .
Greece has made significant steps and now supports a composite name with a universally binding erga omnes geographical indication .
Unfortunately , the other side has not been so willing .
Following the outcome of the NATO summit in Bucharest , it is in the interests of all sides that talks should continue and agreement be reached as swiftly as possible .
NATO 's decision not to issue an invitation does not mean the rejection of membership but points to the need for a resolution .
I believe that the original text of my fellow Member Mr Meijer 's report was balanced on this issue .
Unfortunately , owing to the amendments adopted , the report on the name issue has been overthrown .
We call upon the Members of the European Parliament not to accept formulations that interfere with the continuing negotiation process , which is entering its most crucial phase .
( SK ) Without the accession of the countries of south-eastern Europe to the EU we cannot talk about the success of European integration .
During the Cold War , the former Yugoslavia was the bastion of freedom and many emigrants , including those who had lived in the former totalitarian Czechoslovakia , fled to the West precisely through the country that was a warning to the former Soviet Union and its satellite countries .
In reply to a question I asked the Council regarding border disputes between Slovenia and Croatia , the Council informed me that it had adopted a revised accession partnership with Croatia , the implementation of which is the main precondition for progress in the negotiation process .
I welcome the report by the rapporteur , Mr Hannes Swoboda .
It makes me optimistic .
Like the rapporteur , I am also convinced that if it continues with the progress it has already made in the integration process , Croatia will satisfy all the conditions for accession to the European Union and will become an important catalyst for all the other countries in the Western Balkans .

( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate my colleague Mr Swoboda for the work he has done and the quality of his just and balanced report highlighting the progress made particularly with the Constitutional Law on National Minorities , and the work still to be done such as the necessary strengthening of the judicial system .
We are delighted that the Croatian Republic has abandoned the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone in the Adriatic , which was a source of tensions within the European Union .
This is a highly symbolic act , if there can be such a thing , demonstrating how keen Croatia is to join the European Union .
' There is no love , there is only proof of love , ' Jean Cocteau told us .
With this act , Croatia has applied this maxim to our own situation .
We in turn must stay on target for the signature of the accession treaty in June 2009 , a symbolic date and an ambitious goal .
There is no politics without symbolism .
Let us affirm this , let us send out this strong message , and show the Croatian people , show Croatia how much we are looking forward to welcoming them into the European family because it is not just for Croatia , it is a strong symbol for the stability of the Balkans and for peace .
Let us therefore work twice as hard to achieve this objective .
Let us help the Commission and Croatia along this path .
( PL ) Madam President , I asked to be allowed to speak on the subject of Croatia and Macedonia in order to emphasise the complexity of the situation in the Balkans and the need to conduct a calm and balanced policy .
The drama of Serbia and Kosovo should caution us against taking hasty decisions .
The same kind of drama could also arise in Macedonia , which is home to many Albanians .
This hazard has been averted thanks to the wisdom of the leaders of the interested parties .
This positive experience must be acted on and supported , without stirring up others - against their will , by force , without explaining why actions are taken .

( EL ) Madam President , first of all , let me say that I totally agree with Mr Swoboda 's views about Croatia 's accession prospects .
Secondly , in connection with Mr Meijer 's report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I thank the rapporteur for his willingness to engage in talks .
However , I call upon the government and political forces of FYROM to look to the future and make the necessary effort to find a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue .
Such progress will mean meeting the criterion of good neighbourly relations and will open the way for further progress by FYROM towards the EU .
Finally , let me endorse Mr Swoboda 's proposal to postpone the vote on the Meijer report for approximately one week in order to give us the time to examine more closely the compromise amendments that have been tabled .
( SK ) I will be very brief .

The report by my colleague Mr Swoboda quite unambiguously identifies all the issues that needed to be identified and , in my opinion , the report also clearly reflects Mr Swoboda 's political experience and professionalism .
I would just like to say as a vice-chairwoman of a regional parliament that the individual Croatian regions are well prepared to become an asset to the European Union .
This issue is being discussed by the existing Member States not only at national level with the Croatian Government but also with the Croatian regions .
In my view , this augurs well for active participation by the Croatian regions in the EU 's future policies .

( CS ) Not so long ago we were reassured by Mr Rupel that the Slovenian Presidency was acting properly in relation to Kosovo .
What we had expected came to pass : the crisis has expanded .
In Macedonia Mr Thaçi recently caused a collapse of the coalition government and demanded federalisation , bilingualism and recognition of the Skanderbeg flag .
Albanian separatists behave in a similar way in the Preševo Valley in the south of Serbia , where they threaten to boycott elections .
This crisis can be expected to reach Montenegro .
In my opinion , we need to help Macedonia , to offer it all the help it needs to be a stable country , but we must refuse to give any help to Albanian separatists because we can see clearly that the 10-year attempt to transform terrorists into democrats has failed completely .
Madam President , Greece , a long-standing Member of the EU , and its 11 million citizens , do consider that they have a serious and legitimate problem with the name of their neighbour , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and we have to respect that concern .
It is very disappointing that , despite the fact that Greece is holding negotiations at this very moment with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia about this issue , some fellow MEPs and some governments of the EU have already taken sides and are also trying to push the European Parliament into taking sides : the side , of course , of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
This is not very wise , it is not fair and it is not helping either the cohesion policy of the EU or the situation , because it will not only make the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia more intransigent in its claims about the name in the negotiations and it will also mean that there will not be a proper solution for a long time to come .
( SL ) I too am glad that our neighbouring country Croatia has suspended the implementation of the Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone , which has been the main obstacle to the negotiations being able to continue .
In spite of this , Croatia should be seriously warned that in the European Union , we respect agreements , and do not resort to unilateral actions .
However , I do not agree with excessive lauding of Croatia because it has suspended the Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone .
Croatia concocted this problem in the first place , and now we excessively laud it because it has suspended it .
This can only encourage it to try and resort to resolving other issues in a similar fashion .
In Croatia they believe they can get away with a lot , because they are aware they enjoy considerable support to join the European Union .
Slovenia has always supported Croatia 's joining the European Union ; however , we cannot agree with their actions concerning unresolved issues with borders , whilst they are selling land which belongs to Slovenia .
Madam President , I think this report is too optimistic by half .
Last year , I spent a very intensive week in Croatia in meetings with diplomats , academics , lawyers , businessmen , chambers of commerce and the media .
I got a very clear picture of a country that does not have a proper market economy and a country that has far too much government engagement in the judiciary , in the media and in business .
It is what we describe as crony capitalism .
The Government expends more than 50 % of Croatia 's GDP .
It is simply not a free market in the sense we understand .
They need to implement transparency in government contracts , which are subject to graft .
They need to implement full disclosure of interest in planning decisions , which , at the moment , just provide income for officials .
We have a short window of opportunity to urge reform on Croatia before accession .
I am not convinced that we are using it adequately .
It is very significant that the debate on this issue should have aroused so much interest , but unfortunately only five minutes were scheduled , and they have already passed .

Madam President , on a point of order , I fully respect your ruling that this debate is subject to a time schedule , but perhaps the interest shown by Members under the catch-the-eye procedure might encourage you and , indeed , your colleagues to consider extending the time available for Members to discuss matters that are of general European concern and not simply to those who serve on a particular committee .
There are many things I would like to say about Macedonia and Croatia , but I am not permitted to do so .
I shall commit them to my memoirs and I shall send you a personal copy .
Because of the great interest shown in this issue , we doubled the speaking time .
Normally it is five minutes , but on this occasion 10 minutes were given .
Your comment , however , is really very interesting .
When we re-examine our working methods , we can make provision for other , similar facilities with regard to interventions by Members .
First of all , I should like , in the name of the Council , to express my agreement with the statement made by Commissioner Rehn , that this is a crucial year for Croatia on its path to European Union membership .
Once again I should like to thank the rapporteur , Hannes Swoboda , for the report he prepared , providing a very clear picture of the current situation , the level of development reached , and the future challenges .
We hope that Croatia will seize the opportunity and make fast progress .
The fact is that its progress will primarily depend on Croatia itself , and on the pace and the quality of reforms they must complete .
I should like to point out , Mr Schmidt , that the Slovenian Presidency will conduct this agenda with the utmost responsibility .
The Slovenian Presidency supports Croatia 's progress primarily because its fastest possible progress towards the European Union membership is important for Croatia , but also because it is important for the European Union , and because it is important for the region as a whole .
However , the responsible conduct of this agenda is to be based on the negotiations framework , which has been agreed with Croatia , based on the revised accession partnership recently adopted by the EU Council , and on other legal acts of the European Union .
And it is on this basis that we hope that Croatia will progress as quickly as possible , and the Slovenian Presidency will work towards this end .
As regards the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia : Mr Wiersma , Mrs Berès and others have mentioned the danger of political instability in this country .
The Slovenian Presidency has sincere hopes that this will not happen .
Any political crisis , or possibly early parliamentary elections would slow down the necessary process of reforms for a couple of months .
We would like to see the unity of the citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia preserved and strengthened , irrespective of their political and ethnic allegiances , their unity of views on their joint future in the European Union and the Euro-Atlantic structures .
Also important is that , with the Albanian party DPA rejoining the government coalition , the internal political situation has been consolidated .
Now is the time , but the time is limited .
We have time only until the next European Commission autumn report , their regular report on the progress that has been achieved .
It is important that work completed during this period , which at the end of the year gained additional acceleration , is continued , especially as the political dialogue has been rekindled , and as concrete results have been achieved in the sphere of reforms .
A National Council for EU Integration has been established , and an ambitious plan for the fulfilment of the Accession Partnership tasks was adopted .
This course should be continued .
The Slovenian Presidency will continue to provide the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with decisive support on this path .
I would like to conclude with the following thought : the issue of Western Balkans stability and the region 's faster integration into the European framework must remain one of the Union 's top priorities .
The Slovenian Presidency has set out this issue as one of its priority tasks .
We hope this will continue to be so in the future as well .
The fact is that any investment in the future of the Western Balkans in Europe is also an investment in the future of the European Union .
I would like to express my gratitude to the Member States and the Members of the European Parliament for their very extensive support for the European prospects for the Western Balkans , as well as for your contributions to today 's debate .
Thank you .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first , let me thank Members for a very substantive debate , which , in my view , underlines the importance of the European perspective for the Western Balkans .
A number of important issues were raised and I can only comment on some of them in this short response .
I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the Slovenian Presidency for making the Western Balkans a key priority of its term of office .
I found the Foreign Ministers ' informal meeting in Brdo , Slovenia , some weeks ago , to be very important , and it certainly gave a new stimulus and dynamism to our policy in the Western Balkans , like this debate .
In my view , we are now on the right track .
The region has made steady progress over the past couple of years and once the major risks of instability , like the aftermath of the Kosovo status process or the fragility of democracy in Serbia , can be handled well , then I am sure that the region will have a very bright future and that this future is , indeed , in the European Union .
The Presidency has already responded to the points made as regards the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I can only second those views and say that the country is well placed to take an historic step forward this year if it acts with determination and sustained efforts to meet the benchmarks .
It is encouraging that the Macedonian Government has established an action plan to meet benchmarks and a new national plan for the adoption of the acquis .
Now I want to encourage the country to implement its own plans and thus pave the way for a positive recommendation from the Commission in the coming autumn .
Several of you referred to visa liberalisation .
I can inform you that the Commission is currently working on a road map for visa liberalisation for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We will present a draft to the country shortly and , as the country is quite advanced in many respects , for instance on biometric passports , I hope that it will be able to meet the conditions of the road map rather swiftly and thus achieve the goal of visa-free travel for citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia § .
I would also like to inform you that we shall shortly - before the end of April - present a road map of this kind for visa-free travel for Serbia where , likewise , ordinary citizens value this extremely highly .
We want to facilitate , on our part , this important objective .
On Croatia , I can conclude that a clear majority of the European Parliament has a realistic view of what needs to be done by Croatia for the country to be able to succeed in concluding accession negotiations in the course of 2009 .
This is good , because the real friends of Croatia should not sweep the problems under the carpet but be honest about what needs to be done and encourage Croatia to implement the necessary reforms on the ground and without delay .
Sustained efforts are needed .
Mr Posselt asked the Commission to step up its efforts and I can assure him that the Commission will have no problems whatsoever in processing negotiating positions in the various chapters once the benchmarks are met by Croatia itself .
Ms Ek referred to the environmental aspects of overfishing in the Adriatic and I would like to respond to her and inform you all that Prime Minister Sanader told President Barroso and myself of his concern for a special area in the middle of the Adriatic , the ' Jabuka Pomo Pit ' , which is an important spawning ground .
The Commission is strongly in favour of the sustainable management of fish stocks and Commissioner Borg has been very active in this matter .
The Commission is ready to work on a proposal to establish a fisheries protection area in the Adriatic , as foreseen under the new Mediterranean Regulation .
This will need further discussions with Slovenia , Italy and Croatia and , of course , the Commission .
Finally , Mr Lebech mentioned the Nordic model as a source of inspiration for the Western Balkans in terms of regional cooperation .
I believe that the Nordic Council has already played such a role : it has been used as the model for the Regional Cooperation Council for South-Eastern Europe , based in Sarajevo , which is now the forum for regional political cooperation in the Western Balkans .
I find it encouraging that regional cooperation has substantially improved over the last couple of years and both Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia have actively contributed to this success .
We have clearly moved from a situation where , only a few years ago , regional cooperation was considered with significant suspicion that it was an attempt to recreate Yugoslavia .
There is now a new understanding of its importance , both because of the concrete benefits on the ground - economic benefits , communications , transport , people-to-people contacts - and because regional cooperation moves the countries closer to the European Union .
After all , cooperation across borders is what the European Union is all about .
I want to thank you once again for a very responsible and substantive debate and congratulate the rapporteurs on their important contributions to this debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to welcome to this House the new Commissioner , Mrs Androulla Vassiliou .
Let me congratulate you on taking up your duties , Commissioner .
I believe that we can look forward to fruitful cooperation in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - Madam President , our group congratulates you on your election .
We supported that very much and we wish you all the best .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this debate , which has been highly productive and constructive .
I should like to take up on what Mr Schmitt said regarding 2009 .
I believe we shall find a common solution tomorrow , as it is important to have a common broad base .
Why has Croatia been successful ?
This is because a broad consensus has been achieved in the country and , despite a slight disagreement with regard to the composition of the Joint EU Committee , this will hopefully be the case in future as well .
It is also because - even if the country has sometimes had to force itself to do so - it has achieved a real consensus with its neighbours , as was the case with the fishing zone , for instance .
Therefore - if I can now establish a link to Macedonia - I should like to make a very clear appeal to our counterparts in Macedonia to learn from this example , to try to reach a consensus at domestic level and also with its neighbours .
It is easy , of course , to add fuel to the fire here and , like Mrs Beer , to act as a great advocate .
As Mrs Pack and many others have said , however , both countries - Greece and Macedonia - have to make a move : and this within the next few days .
Making a Macedonian domestic political crisis out of it at this point in time does not help Macedonia .
It blocks the path to the EU ; it prevents a solution being found with Greece .
Hence the link with Croatia I mentioned .
Croatia has succeeded thanks to three really very good governments - including the Račan and Sanader governments - which have really taken substantial steps forward and also changed their spots when ' national interests ' were involved .
Hence my appeal once again to continue to establish this common ground in Croatia , my appeal to attempt something similar in Macedonia as well , and my appeal to the Presidency to continue what it has been doing in recent weeks , namely making progress for the region as a whole .
I am convinced , Commissioner , that the Commission will do everything it can to bring the negotiations to a close in 2009 .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Madam President , I have heard a great deal of agreement here on Macedonia .
Negotiations must come into view , and the difference of opinion with Greece over the name must be resolved .
Apart from Mr Stoyanov , who is probably harking back to Macedonia 's original association with Bulgaria under the Treaty of San Stefano in 1878 , everyone , Greece included , wants to see Macedonia take its place as an equal in the European Union .
Up to now , both parties have been expert in explaining the other party 's long-standing commitment .
Greece expects Macedonia to change its constitutional name , and until 2 April Macedonia expected Greece not to block its accession to the EU .
Both parties fail to realise that all of this is completely incomprehensible to other Europeans .
Both parties want this enlargement of the European Union to succeed , but at the same time are helping to delay it further .
It now seems to be a game of who makes the first move .
If no one does , the enlargement everyone desires will come to a temporary halt .

I agree with Mr Kacin and Mr Pinior that we should not wait for any subsequent reports , but rather seize the first suitable opportunity to start negotiations with Macedonia .
Madam President , I should like to conclude my speech in this joint debate on two candidate countries with one remark about Croatia for which my group has not requested separate speaking time .
Croatia wanted to join the EU at the start of 2009 , but it will be 2010 or 2011 .
The main problem still outstanding is shipbuilding on the Adriatic coast .
It is not without reason that the EP delegation to Croatia is visiting the Rijeka shipyards on 29 April .
In my group 's opinion , we should not make any requirements of Croatia that the population could perceive as an insoluble problem and that could make the country 's accession to the European Union unnecessarily controversial .
In short , let us try to promote both countries ' progress towards the European Union , so that , in a number of years ' time , we are able to welcome both Croatia and Macedonia into our midst .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe the debate on the 2007 Report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia should point out two key conclusions : the need for this country 's continuous and firm progress toward integration into the European and transatlantic structures , as well as the importance of promoting the young generation in this republic .
The European and transatlantic perspective of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is unanimously acknowledged and the 2007 Report welcomes the efforts made in this direction .
Nevertheless , I would like to reiterate the importance of continuing these reforms .
I also hope that the respect for the rights of ethnic and national minorities will continue to be a priority of the Macedonian Government in order to ensure a solid system of protecting all communities , including the Romanian-speaking people .
In the end , I emphasize the need to promote the young generation in this republic .
It is essential to provide them with all necessary conditions for high-performance education in the spirit of inter-cultural dialogue and mutual tolerance .
The mobility and free movement of young Macedonians should be considered a key priority of relations between this country and the EU .
in writing . - ( IT ) Today we approved the report by Mr Swoboda on Croatia , with a view to its accession .
On behalf of fishermen throughout the Adriatic , I am delighted at the decision by this accession country not to apply the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone in the Adriatic to EU Member States .
If the situation had remained unchanged , we would have been facing unequal and utterly discriminatory treatment between Croatian and EU Member State fishermen .
This is therefore a victory for the pacta sunt servanda principle , for diplomacy and for common sense .
This is a victory once again for the abandonment of posturing to protect nationalistic interests in favour of commitment to the shared principles of the European Union .
in writing . - Without any doubt , since the accession negotiations started , Croatia has made decisive efforts to comply with the requirements of the acquis communautaire .
We are indeed glad to notice that a number of new negotiation chapters have been opened .
The accession of Croatia should become a driving example for all other candidate and potential candidate countries in the Western Balkans .
Despite the substantial efforts made by Croatia to meet EU standards , there are still areas where attention should given such as : the fight against corruption and organised crime , cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal , the fight against all forms of discrimination ( especially with regard to the Roma and national minorities ) , the sound use of Community funds , environmental protection measures and public administration reform .
These points are essential , as further developments in the above areas would indeed bring greater stability to the country and to the region as a whole .
It is clear that the stabilisation of the Western Balkans through the Europeanisation process should remain a top priority objective , for which the finalisation of the accession of Croatia will definitely be a major step forward .
in writing . - It is an encouraging report about Macedonia 's progress .
The key to this progress is the renewed political consensus that has been achieved between different parties .
Such a consensus greatly helped my country , Estonia , to succeed in the EU accession .
Stabilising inter-ethnic relations , financial reforms and a successful fight against organised crime and corruption are just some landmarks of this progress .
While guaranteeing minorities their rights we expect that the enlarged autonomy will be used in a responsible way to consolidate the Macedonian state as a whole .
Macedonia should also be commended for keeping good-neighbourly relations both with Kosovo and Serbia .
Macedonian citizens ' entry into the EU countries has become an urgent problem .
We need to apply as quickly as possible the same visa facilitation rules as those applying for Croatia .
Against the background of the impressive progress Macedonia has achieved I strongly suggest that the Commission could start accession negotiations already in 2008 .
Finally , I appeal to our Greek friends to demonstrate good will and flexibility to reach a reasonable compromise that would enable Macedonia to free itself from the stigmatisation of Tito 's communist federal state .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to make a remark on the NATO Summit , which recently took place in Romania , and on the implications of the decisions adopted on some Union issues .
In addition to other important decisions , it was decided that Bosnia-Herzegovina and Montenegro , as well as Serbia , would benefit from increased cooperation with NATO .
It was also decided that Ukraine and Georgia would receive the Action Plan for accession by a simplified procedure , when they are prepared .
These decisions are salutary for the European Union : the intensified dialogue and the Action Plan mean more democracy , among other things , and more democracy at the Eastern borders will reduce the dimension of challenges in the field of internal affairs .
More democracy and reforming the institutions in the neighbouring countries , such as Ukraine , means more protection at the external borders , more control over organized crime and a new step in spreading the values on which the European Union relies .
in writing . - ( PL ) Croatia has made successful efforts to overcome existing divisions and to achieve unity between peoples , which is one of the aims of European Union membership .
The accession of Croatia to the European Union would have enormous regional consequences and would help to test the scope of the obligations taken on by the EU for the Western Balkans .
Croatia 's considerable engagement in the accession negotiations is a positive sign , the evidence being provided by the large number of open chapters in the negotiations .
It is also worth stressing that Croatia has made considerable progress in most of the areas covered by Community law .
Immense and continuing engagement is , however , needed to overcome the problems that exist in individual sectors if reforms are to be pushed through .
To facilitate integration , a list of the funds required for facilitation purposes needs to be drawn up .
It is particularly important to accelerate the process of increasing the powers of the administration for the purpose of introducing new regulations .
Acceleration is also required in the process of public sector reform , at local and regional authority level .
The administration of justice is another sector requiring fundamental reform .
One major achievement of the Croatian authorities is their unremitting efforts to have war crimes judged by national courts .
The improvements noted in the Croatian economy and the reforms in the environmental protection sector are further achievements of the Croatian Government that facilitate the accession process .
The report on the progress made by Croatia in 2007 supports the belief that this country , by implementing the goals facing it , is taking an active approach to the accession process .
in writing . - Mr President , I welcome the progress that Croatia has made towards concluding the accession negotiations in 2009 .
Gradual integration of the former Yugoslav republics is crucial for stability in the Western Balkan region .
Although there is still a lot of work to be done , especially in the areas of minority rights , border-related issues and judicial reform , Croatia should continue vigorously with its efforts to obtain membership of the EU as soon as possible in accordance with the accession criteria .
Croatia 's future membership is a logical next step , following the accession of Slovenia in 2004 , to increase EU involvement in the region and encourage neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as all the other Western Balkan countries to continue with the consolidation of democracy .
For the better administration of this process the Western Balkan region should follow the example of the Nordic Council .
The Slovenian Presidency and the upcoming French Presidency should provide Croatia with all the necessary support to overcome the final obstacles on its way to becoming a member of the European Union .
in writing . - ( HU ) Enlargement and integration of new Member States has been the European Union 's most successful foreign policy .
The next phase of this policy must involve the accession of Croatia to the European Union in the near future .
Ethnic Hungarians in Romania of course pay close attention to ethnic conflicts taking place around the world , and we have been following events in former Yugoslavia 's recent history too .
The biggest lesson from its recent history is that intolerance on the part of the majority , ethnic impatience and nationalist extremism can easily lead a region into conflagration .
Croatia has set an example in the region , in terms of both its political and its economic development since the end of the Yugoslav wars .
Croatia 's accession to the European Union must not be delayed ; Member States ' support for enlargement must not wane .
We must provide the prospect of European Union membership to the whole of the Balkan region , including Serbia and Kosovo .
Prompt accession of Croatia to the European Union will foster peaceful coexistence among the peoples of south-eastern Europe and contribute to stability and development in the region .
With its exemplary recent past , Croatia has demonstrated that it is an integral part of the European family .
in writing . - According to Eurostat data , Croatian GDP per capita stands at 53 per cent of the EU average .
Croatia 's GDP growth is at 6 percent .
Clearly its GDP per capita is higher than Romania and Bulgaria and in all honesty , it is a shame that Croatia was not given the opportunity to join the European Union with Romania and Bulgaria .
Over the centuries , Croatia has contributed many things to the cultural landscape of our continent .
Let us make sure that we do not hinder its development and ensure that it does not have to wait longer than 2009 to become a Member State .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( MT ) I would like to start by saying that I , too , congratulate the new Commissioner , Mrs Vassiliou .
Madam President , the decision that we are going to take tomorrow to approve the granting of almost EUR 700 000 from the Globalisation Fund to 675 Maltese workers who lost their jobs with the companies VF and Bortex in Malta is a display of solidarity , and solidarity is a main pillar of the European Union .
If the European Union means anything , it is this ; that yes , the Member States should open up their economies and markets to competition , but at the same time they are not alone , and the European Union is there to facilitate challenges , to help us exploit them and to reduce the negative impact that may result from them .
Madam President , today the workers of VF and Bortex have a better idea of what solidarity means and a better idea of what the European Union means , and I , from here , salute them .
( RO ) The recent demonstrations in Ljubljana have brought to the forefront the subject of salary differences between women and men , as a negative factor in the achievement of the social cohesion desideratum .
Although we have made important progress at the European Union level , there is still a 15 % difference and , in Romania , a 13 % difference .
I would like to call attention to a problem that persists in the public sector , namely in the fields where mainly women work - healthcare , social assistance , education , light industry and public administration - which are some of the most poorly remunerated .
I welcome the support Commissioner Špidla has shown in the issue of eliminating salary differences and I believe it is necessary to accelerate the measures contained in the related action plan , especially Item 2 - salary differences as the main component of employment policies .
Madam President , I would like to say a few words on the implementation of the Habitats Directive in Ireland , with particular reference to turf-cutting on raised bogs .
Irish turf-cutters and bog owners are now being asked to cease cutting turf for personal use .
This situation has arisen because of the unrestricted industrial and commercial turf-cutting right across the EU , which has resulted in virtually all of Europe 's raised bogs being destroyed .
It is vitally important to understand that for many Irish people , both rural and urban , turf-cutting has been practised for generations .
These people should not be made to pay the price for the destruction of bogs by others .
Also , given that oil is now fetching approximately EUR 110 per barrel , we can see that turf is now a very valuable economic resource for the individuals concerned .
In this context , at national level there must be full compensation for the loss of turf-cutting rights , and flexible arrangements will have to be put in place so that we can balance the rights of owners against the need to conserve the raised bogs .
( ES ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
I would like to ask the European Commission to act quickly regarding the problem that the accredited Spanish press is experiencing in the Kingdom of Morocco : the Moroccan Government is coercing and threatening to expel the Spanish accredited press for covering the conflict in the Sahara .
Since January of this year , Televisión Española , TV3 and Canal Sur have not been allowed permission to broadcast due to the coverage that they have been giving to the conflict , and recently the correspondent for Cadena COPE has been threatened with expulsion , along with Cadena SER and the newspaper La Vanguardia .
I think that it is unacceptable , with our neighbourhood policy , for a government - the Government of Morocco - to create a serious problem of freedom of expression and to threaten the whole of the Spanish accredited press in the Kingdom of Morocco , unlike the rest of the European press .
I therefore call for a rapid , forceful response from the European Commission in order to put an end to this situation .
( SK ) Right at the start of my speech I want to say that I am not happy to see two neighbouring countries that are both part of today 's common Europe washing their dirty linen here in the European Parliament .
What is the case of the Hungarian village of Mlynky about ?
According to the latest statistics , 54 % of the village 's inhabitants are Slovaks .
The mayor of Mlynky has evicted five Slovak associations from the two rooms in which they carried out their activities .
Let me say that when it comes to treatment of the Slovak minority , this act is only the tip of the iceberg .
In a Slovak school in the Hungarian village , Slovak is taught as a foreign language for 3 hours a week and a priest says mass in Hungarian .
The bilingual village paper is not published any more .
I want to thank the Hungarian President , Mr Sólyom , who visited the village right at the beginning and listened to both parties .
I also want to thank the Hungarian Ombudsman , who in this case favours the Slovak minority .
The local authorities , however , seem to be standing their ground .
The friendship bridge near the town of Ostrihom , paid for with EU funds , is only 30 kilometres away from this village .
I hope that friendship prevails in this area , the friendship symbolised by this bridge .
( PL ) Madam President , in Bucharest the Germans stood against an official invitation to Ukraine and Georgia to join NATO .
The reason they gave was their concern and anxiety that relations with Russia should not deteriorate .
The Germans know , however , that Russia 's fears are entirely groundless , as NATO is a defensive pact and has done much to maintain peace in Europe and many regions of the world .
The questions therefore arise as to what , whom and against whom the Germans wish to arm and represent in the progressively unifying Europe of the 21st century .
Surely not against states in south-eastern Europe , including Ukraine and Georgia , with their experience of Soviet occupation ?
In this progressively unifying Europe , do the Germans wish to resurrect the phantoms and demons of 20th century politics , i.e. unions and pacts that led to wars , crimes , the Holocaust and the division of Europe ?
Is the position taken by Germany in Bucharest a warning signal that a common European foreign policy may be realised at the bidding of the Germans , looking after their own interests , but forgetting the bitter truth of history ?
( PL ) Madam President , the Council of Europe was set up to protect human rights - which includes the right of every person to life - and to promote common fundamental values while at the same time strengthening security for the citizens of Europe , and this constitutes a denial of the right to kill .
Meanwhile , at its plenary session on 16 April 2008 the Parliamentary Assembly will be examining a report entitled ' Access to safe and legal abortion in Europe ' , in which it is recommended that women are guaranteed access to abortion , that obstacles to the performance of abortions are removed , and that contraceptives are made available at low cost , including early-abortion methods , which is not only harmful from a medical aspect , but also highly unethical .
I would like to express my opposition to the report , which , in denying the aims for which the Council of Europe was set up , amounts to the promotion of murder of the most defenceless and of contraception .
( FR ) Madam President , the energy and climate package marks the arrival of a new kind of blackmail : blackmail using carbon emissions .
Having announced 575 job losses at Gandrange in Moselle on 4 April 2008 , Arcelor-Mittal is agreeing to keep 124 jobs on the site provided that it can have CO2 emissions certificates .
And to sweeten the pill of the job losses in Lorraine , Arcelor-Mittal is allowing rumours to circulate of a possible pilot CO2 capture project , although this process has not yet been validated in terms of its energy neutrality .
Gandrange in Moselle is becoming the Trojan horse of the energy-intensive industries , with their great defender in the European Council , the French President , Mr Sarkozy .
I am delighted that the Commissioner is with us because I would really like us to reject this new kind of blackmail using carbon emissions .
To be effective , the energy and climate package must follow the beat of European legislation .
The European Parliament must demand that the Council comply with the rules we are set and not give in to the sirens of industry seeking free quotas .
We as co-legislator must ensure fair access to quotas for European SMEs against the large industrial companies .
( HU ) Hungarian citizens who emigrated from Romania to Hungary and became pensioners after 2007 following Romania 's accession to the European Union have not yet received the pension they are entitled to for their years of pensionable service in Romania .
On the basis of the agreement in force between Romania and the other members of the European Union , from 1 January 2007 the Romanian authorities were supposed to make pension payments directly to those affected .
For some months now , the Romanians have failed to do this , and Hungarian citizens drawing their pension from the time of Romania 's accession in 2007 are only receiving the portion of their pension due to them in Hungary .
The Romanian authorities tend to procrastinate when it comes to settling such matters , despite the fact that the relevant EU directives are supposed to be in force in Romania too .
Since it is the job of the European Commission to oversee compliance with EU directives , I ask the Commission to investigate what is happening in Romania as regards assessment and payment of pensions , and to call the attention of the Romanian authorities to the need to resolve this problem as soon as possible .
It is small consolation that these pensioners would win their case in Luxembourg . Thank you very much .
( SK ) The local government in the Hungarian village of Mlynky , where 55 % of the inhabitants are Slovak , approved the mayor 's proposal to evict two Slovak minority organisations from the traditional ' Slovak House ' .
The organisations protested to the local authorities in writing , drawing attention in their letter to the fact that it was a violation of the existing status and damaged the national interests of the Slovak minority in Mlynky .
In any case , the decision to evict them is not a random act .
It follows a decision made by the local authorities to stop publishing a bilingual magazine , change TV broadcasting to the detriment of minority broadcasting and reduce the wages paid to Slovak teachers .
This is a general negative trend and I must protest against such actions .
These actions and decisions are dangerous primarily because they interfere , in a fundamental and perhaps premeditated way , with the minority status in the area in question and lower the existing standards on minority rights .
The Hungarian Ombudsman for national and ethnic minorities , Mr Kállai , denounced these decisions as incomprehensible .
The actions of the local government in Mlynky , which repeatedly attacks the Slovak minority , are a very bad signal , particularly at a time when senior officials of the Slovak and Hungarian Governments are planning the meeting of their respective prime ministers , from which an improvement in relations between our countries is clearly expected .
( SK ) Some Members of the European Parliament have voiced their concerns about the construction of a coal-fired power plant in the town of Trebišov in eastern Slovakia .
I should point out that the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic has rejected this idea and does not expect construction of the power plant to go ahead , within the framework of energy security in the Slovak Republic , before 2030 .
I want to give my support to the efforts of the citizens of Trebišov , who bravely oppose the construction of this power plant , too .
I also want to stress that the former Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic , Mr Mikuláš Dzurinda , and other politicians who are worried about the negative impact the power plant would have on the environment and on the quality of life in Trebišov , and about its negative impact on the unique Tokay winegrowing region bordering Ukraine and Hungary , have lent their support to the actions of the citizens of Trebišov .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to give the Commission and the Presidency of our Parliament and of the Council some information , if I may .
If we obtain recognition from Beijing , even if incidental , that in all his public appearances and declarations in the last few years the Dalai Lama has never asked for independence but has always asked for autonomy , and if it is also acknowledged that in all his public appearances he has urged non-violence , this declaration from Beijing could immediately be interpreted as a gesture of openness and goodwill by the government in exile and the Dalai Lama himself .
I hope this is the direction we want to move in .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Finance Ministers have decided not to agree on a Europe-wide increase in wages to counter the rising cost of living .
We all know of the demonstrations that took place in Ljubljana .
My fellow Member who spoke just now has already referred to them .
We all know too about the increase in the cost of living that has ruined middle- and low-income groups .
What has the EU done about this ?
Nothing whatsoever !
Instead , the wages of large company executives continue to go up , while ordinary workers find surviving until the end of the month increasingly difficult .
Let me point out in conclusion that Mr Almunia indicated the impact of a possible increase in wages on productivity .
Such statements are a slap in the face for the hundreds of thousands of workers in financial difficulty .
The huge profits of multinationals are , of course , no secret .

( SK ) The recent actions of the Hungarian Guard against the Roma represent a serious threat to the basic principles on which today 's Europe has been built , as does the fact that is openly advocating extremism and revisionism and looking for an external enemy in neighbouring countries and among other countries ' nationals ; this alongside the continuous activity , on the increase with new members of this organisation sworn in less than two weeks ago , and the support it receives from political parties and groups of similar stripes both inside and outside Hungary .
This is not only a growing threat but also a challenge , which fundamentally affects not just all people with democratic views in Hungary and neighbouring countries , but Europe as a whole .
Displays of aggressive nationalism , racism , xenophobia , anti-Semitism or neo-fascism do not have , and must not have , a place in democratic Europe .
These phenomena cannot be seen as relative and marginal events , nor can they be justified in any way .
This is why I am calling on the European institutions to start dealing with this matter in earnest .
( PL ) The Erasmus Mundus programme , which is intended to spread intercultural understanding and promote the European Union through its very good results in education , is not accessible to young people in Belarus .
Belarus is a country with no respect for human rights , a country where national minorities and trade unions are discriminated against and displaying a civic attitude results in persecution .
Young people in particular are punished for their convictions by being deprived of opportunities for education .
We must find a way to enable young people in Belarus who are suffering discrimination in terms of access to knowledge in their own country to gain access to the benefits of the Erasmus Mundus programme .
Warsaw University and other educational institutions have admitted students who have been expelled from educational institutions in Belarus for taking part in demonstrations .
I hope that the European Union will find a suitable formula to resolve this problem .
Mr President , this coming weekend the second phase of the largest commercial seal hunt in the world is about to begin off the coast of Atlantic Canada .
The Canadian Government has given its assurance that this hunt will be conducted humanely and , as a condition of their licences , sealers are now required to stun seals and check they are unconscious and then bleed them out before they are skinned .
Yet , according to independent observers , there is little evidence of this happening . That is , of course , when they have actually been permitted to observe sealing activities .
The Department of Fisheries ' systematic attempts to block the observation of this year 's hunt have been almost as alarming as the blatant violations of the sealing regulations that have thus far been recorded .
If the Canadian authorities are so very confident that these regulations are being adhered to , then why are they doing their utmost to prevent animal welfare specialists and journalists from witnessing it ?
Moreover , we should not forget that no such animal welfare guarantees have ever been made for the commercial seal hunts elsewhere in the world , such as Russia and Namibia .
With the current legislature coming to an end , it is vital that the Commission take swift action , in response to Written Declaration 38 , by publishing a proposal to ban the import and export of and trade in seal products .
Such a ban would not affect subsistence farming , but it would demonstrate a commitment to protect animal welfare .
( PT ) Mr President , in Portugal at the moment more multinationals are threatening to relocate a part of their production , as is the case with Yasaki Saltano and Delphi .
In both cases these multinationals , producers of car parts , received millions of euros of Community funding for setting up their factories and for vocational training of their workers .
Now , claiming that the car industry is experiencing problems , Yasaki Saltano wants to make more than 400 workers redundant in Vila Nova de Gaia .
Approximately 70 % are women , many of them with health problems such as tendinitis caused by their work for the company .
Two questions arise in this connection : what is the position with regard to the social responsibility of those companies and when will measures be taken to prevent such relocation in defence of workers ' rights and production in our countries ?
( HU ) First Kosovo , now Tibet .
In both cases , violent colonialist policy pursued by nationalist-communist police states has resulted in bloodshed .
In both cases , the refusal to honour a people 's right to self-determination has triggered a crisis that threatens world peace as a whole .
The Nobel peace laureate , the Dalai Lama has exposed the cultural genocide and demographic aggression inflicted on the people of Tibet .
In formerly Communist Romania too , these were familiar methods .
Ceauşescu too considered oppression of minorities to be a Romanian domestic issue , just as China has asserted in the case of Tibet .
May the European Parliament stand alongside Pope Benedict XVI in taking action against injustice , hatred and violence ; may it , too , take up the fight to secure territorial autonomy for Tibet .
Let us look forward to the Dalai Lama and the Roman Catholic Pope telling the world here in Europe 's Parliament that there is no peace without justice .
( SK ) The hottest topic at the 10th meeting of the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee held in the European Parliament in February was improving visa processing .
Following the enlargement of the Schengen area in the end of last year , the conditions under which Ukrainian citizens are granted visas for EU countries have become stricter ; the fees and waiting time have increased .
A new Berlin Wall must not be erected at the EU 's external borders just at a time when Ukraine is deciding on its future .
That is why I welcome the agreement between Slovakia and Ukraine on local border traffic .
It will make it easier to make frequent crossings of the Slovak-Ukrainian state border in border regions for social , cultural , economic or family reasons .
A speedy solution to the visa regime issues would help to convince Ukrainian citizens of the benefits of EU membership .
( PL ) Mr President , one positive outcome of the latest enlargement of the Schengen area has been the elimination of controls at internal EU borders .
Poland has of course removed all control points and consequently in my province alone we have shut down as many as 55 border crossings .
Their closure has , however , presented the local authorities with a need to manage the remaining infrastructure .
This comprises a number of buildings , towers , hangars , warehouses and parking areas along with adjacent land , excellently positioned , often beside important international communication routes .
The local government districts in which these facilities are located are interested in managing them , but they do not have the funds to do so .
There is consequently a high degree of likelihood that all these facilities will be used for commercial purposes .
I am therefore appealing to the European Commission to set up a special fund that will help districts in border areas to manage this infrastructure for public utility purposes , including trans-border purposes , thus promoting cultural integration .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to express my respect for the brave mountain people of Tibet who are fighting for national independence .
What I have to say is not a demonstration against the Chinese .
On the contrary . I have respect for the Chinese people , who also fought for national freedom against the Japanese occupation , and for freedom and civil liberties inside China itself - an example of this being the Boxer Rebellion in the 19th century .
This is all the more reason why the Chinese , with this tradition in mind , should not refuse the people of Tibet the right to self-determination .
As Members of the European Parliament we must make our solidarity with Tibet evident , not only in words , but also through deeds .
European politicians should not lend credibility to the Beijing Games by attending them .
We should stay away from Beijing at this time . I say this as a keen fan and observer of the Athens Olympics .
For our part this is the least we can do .
Mr President , tomorrow is the 10th anniversary of the Belfast Agreement .
Some find much to celebrate ; I do not .
Why ?
Because it is the Belfast Agreement which rewarded 30 years of terrorism in Northern Ireland by undermining both justice and democracy : justice , by granting an early-release amnesty to all duly convicted terrorist prisoners ; and democracy , by prescribing that unrepentant terrorists must be included in the government of the region they ravaged for decades .
That is to be achieved by the iniquity of mandatory coalition .
The region which I represent is the only region in all of the European Union where citizens are denied the fundamental , democratic right to vote a party out of office .
Why ?
Because the Belfast Agreement by law stipulates that all parties must be in government if there is to be a government .
That is the Belfast Agreement and that is wrong .
It is something to be denounced , not celebrated .
( BG ) Mr. President , distinguished colleagues , one of the greatest challenges faced by my country , Bulgaria , during the first years of its membership in the Community has been to ensure transparency and prevent any misuse of resources absorbed from the European funds .
In support of anticorruption efforts , I have initiated the establishment of a Public Council for citizens ' monitoring of the absorption of EU funds in Bulgarian agriculture .
This will not be a formal institution but a civil society formation to pool the efforts of all who want to make sure that this opportunity to boost Bulgaria 's development would not be squandered away due to corruption , misuse and mismanagement .
The great goal is to set up mechanisms for public control and general access to information on how funds are spent in agriculture , information on project implementation and dissemination of best practices in the sector .
Let us remember that promoting active citizen involvement in socio-political processes is a key priority on the Community 's agenda .
( RO ) More than one year after Romania and Bulgaria joined the EU and almost nine years after the beginning of the Bologna process , eight European countries do not acknowledge the university degrees and other qualifications obtained in these two Member States .
Many times , Romanian citizens are discriminated when they wish to become employed or continue their education abroad .
The non-recognition of diplomas also contributes to low participation in European student mobility programmes , especially as regards postgraduate diplomas .
For instance , a Romanian student could not participate in a master degree programme financed by Erasmus-Mundus in a university centre from any of the eight Member States that will not acknowledge the student 's basic university degree .
This is discrimination against the citizens of a Member State and its result is the limitation of their chances to obtain European funds for academic mobility .
The European Commission has recently condemned this conduct .
I believe the European Parliament should have the same firm attitude in this respect .
( RO ) On the background of climate change and in the context of primary natural resources , especially energy resources , becoming ever fewer and more expensive , a common agricultural policy could represent an efficient instrument for achieving the European Union objectives .
On the other hand , non-compliance with the Community rules in the field of agricultural expenses currently leads to the recovery of no less than 83 million euros by the European Commission from eleven Member States .
It is not a very large amount ; but since the common agricultural policy is financed from public funds , I believe a more sustained involvement from the European Commission in assisting the Member States is necessary , especially in assisting the newly-integrated states , so that such irregularities would be considerably diminished and food security and safety would truly be an achievable objective in the European Union .
( RO ) The Commission will soon propose a new amendment to the Directive on charging heavy vehicles for access to the transport infrastructure .
By 2008 , the Commission has to present , after examining all options , including the costs related to environmental protection , noise , traffic congestion and health , a generally applicable , transparent and comprehensive model for the assessment of all external costs , which would define and serve as a basis for the subsequent calculation of the charges for using infrastructures .
Any revenue collected in this manner should be reinvested in the related infrastructures .
Road carriers need specially equipped parking areas where drivers can rest under conditions of complete safety , as well as their vehicles and carried goods .
I believe the Member States should be financially supported and , at the same time , forced to invest more in building safe parking areas , improving and developing the transport infrastructure .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , European Union Member States from Estonia to Poland lost millions and millions of their most talented and enterprising citizens to Nazi aggression and the decades-long Soviet terror .
The European Parliament report ' Citizens for Europe ' established the action entitled ' Active European Remembrance ' .
It was aimed equally at preventing Nazism and Stalinism and at commemorating the victims of the Nazi and Stalinist regimes .
Now , 70 years on from Stalin and Hitler 's secret pact , there is still a lack of awareness in Europe of the outrages of Stalin 's apparatus of coercion .
The Member States should establish a standing inter-governmental working group with the task of carrying out an impartial examination of the crimes of the Bolsheviks and the KGB and assessing them using European values .
Today , however , the date 23 August should be designated European Day of Remembrance for the victims of Stalinism and Nazism .
On 23 August 1939 the Nazis and the Bolsheviks carved Europe into two spheres of influence .
In so doing they inflicted a terrible wound on Europe which has not totally healed to this day .
( RO ) I would like to use this opportunity to speak in the European Parliament plenum about the history of the NATO Summit hosted by Bucharest , the capital of Romania , on 2 - 4 April .
We all know the importance of NATO , both for the security of the Euro-Atlantic area and for the democratization and welfare of the newly-integrated countries .
This happened to Romania in 2004 and we hope the same will happen to Croatia and Albania , the countries invited to join NATO in Bucharest .
I am convinced that the crisis regarding the name of Macedonia will also be solved by the dialogue with Greece , so that another reliable partner of the European Union , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , would be invited to join NATO .
We also know that accession to NATO is an important step for integration into the European Union .
As a member of the ALDE Group in the European Parliament , I welcome NATO 's openness to Ukraine and Georgia , as a decisive signal for including these countries on the European path .
I am confident that we , the European Union , in general , and the European Parliament in particular , will also have the openness to encourage Ukraine and Georgia to undertake the correct path , the European path .
( PL ) Mr President , the process of ratification of the EU Reform Treaty is continuing .
Following in the footsteps of the French , Romanian , Slovenian and Hungarian parliaments , among others , the Polish Parliament has also taken decisions on ratification .
There would perhaps not be anything untoward about this , but for the fact that MPs ratified the Treaty in a great hurry and often failed to get to grips with its content .
In view of this situation , the numerous initiatives to ratify the Treaty through national referendums are entirely justified .
In a democracy , after all , the citizen is sovereign , not the MP , and the most important form of expression is a referendum , not votes that compromise MPs and parliaments .
Citizens have a right not to recognise ratification of the Treaty without it having been read .
These facts already constitute a basis for future political and national conflicts , and everything was in fact supposed to take place in accordance with human rights and the will of free states and peoples in the name of the common good .
( PL ) Mr President , in my speech I would like to raise the issue of respect for rights of ownership , the rights of peoples and the rights of religious minorities in Ukraine , which has declared a wish to accede to the European Union .
In 1962 the Soviet authorities closed the Catholic church of St Magdalena in Lwów and turned it into an organ recital hall , destroying many valuable relics in the process .
Since 1991 the inhabitants of Lwów have been struggling to reclaim their church dedicated to St Magdalena , so far without success .
Bearing in mind the reconciliation between the Polish and Ukrainian peoples , I would like to appeal , through the forum of the European Parliament , to the authorities of the city of Lwów for the return of the church to the church authorities , in order to deepen the friendship between our peoples , Polish and Ukrainian , and also in order for this church to become a symbol of reconciliation , which is so important in view of the approaching Euro 2012 Championship .
( RO ) I would like to raise the issue of the people suffering from leukaemia , who die every day in Romania or in other Member States , without being able to do anything because certain countries are not included in the international register of non-family donors .
This register exists in Europe but , unfortunately , not all the Member States have access to this register .
In Romania , this register does not function .
This shortcoming has led to a much higher mortality rate in Romania than in the other Member States .
Hundreds of young people die every day for the simple reason that they don 't have access to this register .
Nevertheless , this problem is not a priority for the current government in Romania .
I would like the Member States to have equal access to this register .
This would lead to the decrease in illicit trade in organs and would offer people suffering from leukaemia a chance for life , no matter what their financial situation .
I also believe that ill people should benefit from bone marrow transplants according to the seriousness of their condition and not their nationality .
Taking into consideration that today we have voted in favour of investing Commissioner Vassiliou , I request Madame Commissioner to find a solution to this problem .
All European institutions , including the Parliament , should support an information campaign .
( RO ) Last week , Romania had the honor to host the Bucharest NATO Summit .
As Rapporteur on regional cooperation in the Black Sea area , I would like to welcome the organization of this crucial event in the Black Sea region but , in particular , the explicit acknowledgement of the strategic importance of this area .
I hope this acknowledgement will mean consolidated and concrete efforts at the level of the European Union and NATO in order to transform the Black Sea into an area of stability and prosperity and ensure the security of the entire European continent .
No less important is the acknowledgement of Georgia 's and Ukraine 's transatlantic aspirations .
These two countries ' path to joining NATO should be irreversible , and the years 2008-2009 should become significant in recording progress in this direction , both from the two countries and from NATO .
In conclusion , I welcome the fact that the member states of the Alliance have proved flexibility and long-term vision , thus transforming the Bucharest Summit into an important benchmark for NATO enlargement and for the subsequent development of the security system .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again in the last few days , in Saint-Nazaire in France , some workers - this time Greek - employed by a German subcontractor to another subcontractor in the shipbuilding industry , have gone unpaid .
European Court of Justice jurisprudence has reaffirmed the employment rights of workers seconded within the EU , but how effective are these rights if Europe is not equipped with the necessary legislation to compensate for the failings of subcontractors ?
We are no longer talking about isolated cases .
Throughout the European Union , order-givers are increasingly using tiers of subcontractors from other Member States , and cases of seconded workers not being paid are becoming more common .
Three men , three Greek employees , finally obtained payment of their wages , but only after three weeks of hunger strike .
We cannot make grandiloquent speeches about Europe and do nothing .
It is essential that , as soon as possible , we come up with the necessary legal arsenal for order-givers to be held responsible for the failings of subcontractors .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the parallel between the Olympic Games in Beijing and in Moscow 28 years ago .
Granting the right to hold the Olympic Games in Moscow in 1980 was probably an artful plan designed by Jimmy Carter 's administration and his national security adviser , Zbigniew Brzezinski , to open the Soviet Union , at least for a short period , to the West and its democratic influence .
Our goal is to trigger democratisation in China and therefore we should appreciate the chance for such an international presence in a country that is otherwise rather isolated .
Also , in boycotting the Beijing Olympics , we deprive the Chinese authorities of their triumph .
We also lose the opportunity to introduce democratic values to the Chinese people at grassroots level .
Our presence at the Olympic Games in Beijing should not be viewed as an acceptance of the Chinese authorities but as an effort to make the Chinese people see the need for the transition to a new regime .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the 25 fellow Members who signed a letter to the Cambodian Prime Minister and dictator Hun Sen , bringing up the case of Saumura Tioulong , one of the leaders of the Sam Rainsy Party .
I would also like to bring this case to the attention of the Commission .
We have information that there is a real risk that Saumura Tioulong , who is also a member of the non-violent radical party , will be arrested in Cambodia .
So far it has not happened , and I hope this is partly due to the intervention of my fellow Members , but it is a situation that needs to be monitored very closely .
I would also like to use this time to let the President and all my fellow Members know that the Chinese embassy sent us all a letter which speaks of the separatist nature of the Dalai Lama 's ' gang ' which , according to this letter , would by nature be violent .
It seems to me that this is one of the statements and ideas we need to help the Chinese regime to overcome in order to bring democracy to China , Tibet and elsewhere .
( BG ) In the past 48 hours , there have been three contract killings in Sofia , Bulgaria .
Since Roumen Petkov , the current Minister of Interior , took office , a total of 22 contract killings of business people , mafia bosses and politicians have been carried out in Bulgaria .
Not a single one has been solved , not a single person has been convicted .
On Monday , in the bright of day , writer Georgi Stoev was murdered .
He authored several books of investigations into organised crime .
In the meantime it has emerged that Minister Petkov had been in communication with criminal elements on a regular basis and even met with such individuals .
These facts are a clear indication of the complete merging of government and mafia .
What I am saying is that Bulgaria 's Interior Minister is a mafia guy .
During the pre-accession period , the Bulgarian people were told that the Union would be a safeguard to ensure success against banditism and killings , a guardian of stability and security , for a life free of crime .
Today , when anyone of us could become the next victim , the Union needs to act in order to clear away this shameful sore .
Not only off Bulgaria but off itself .
( BG ) Mister President , colleagues , the occasion that makes me take the floor is yet another tragic incident in Bulgaria a few days ago which forces us to break our silence .
On Monday , in the centre of Bulgaria 's capital , Sofia , writer Georgi Stoev was shot dead in a demonstrative assassination .
In a series of ten or so books he dared shed light on the whole truth about organised crime in our country and its close ties with the political elite and the judiciary .
This contract killing , one of many , has shown with ruthless clarity that the prosecution office , the judicial system and the Ministry of Interior in our country either do not have the might to deal with crime or , which even more scary , lack the will to do so .
Through their inaction , they are turning into accomplices in crimes and are being used solely for political racketeering of nonconformists .
It is not by chance that Mr. Barroso , the President of the European Commission himself said so directly during his recent visit to Bulgaria .
The bitter truth is that in Bulgaria no one feels safe for their lives anymore and we have to admit that without help from Europe , statehood in our country is at stake .
Mr President , the European Court of Human Rights has passed 24 rulings on appeals originating from inhabitants of Chechnya - 200 more are pending .
The Court has found Russia responsible for shocking human rights abuses in Chechnya that include murder , torture and illegal detention .
These abuses are continuing .
In addition , up to 5 000 people have ' disappeared ' - mostly murdered - at the hands of the state security services .
Incredibly , not a single official has been held responsible for these acts .
I call on the EU , the Commission and the Council to make it clear to President Medvedev that Russia 's full compliance with the rulings of the Strasbourg Court will be a high-priority EU expectation with a view to resuming further partnership .
Mr President , I undertook a week-long mission to Chad in an effort to raise public awareness about the humanitarian crisis , particularly in the east of the country .
I also wanted to assess what possible positive impact the EU peacekeeping mission led by Ireland could have in this present stage of its ongoing deployment in Chad .
Approximately 250 000 Sudanese refugees have crossed over the border since 2003 , almost all of whom are located in 12 camps in the east of the country .
There are also about 180 000 IDPs in eastern Chad who have moved and continue to move , fleeing inter-ethnic violence .
The World Food Programme in eastern Chad is now faced with the daunting challenge of pre-positioning six months of food supplies before the rainy season for these refugees and IDPs .
Donor contributions are urgently required to ensure that purchases are completed in the coming months and that the food reaches Chad on time .
Regarding EUFOR , which is to provide protection for refugees , some of the members of the French military mission are now forming part of EUFOR .
It is important that EUFOR is not seen as an extension of the French operations in Chad .
Mr President , in the six weeks since the election of Mr Christofias as the new President of Cyprus , more progress has been made towards trying to find a lasting solution on the island than in the previous four years .
The atmosphere in Cyprus is full of renewed hope , but one thing is threatening to destroy the euphoric climate . This is the continued interference of the Turkish Army .
A week ago the Chief of Staff of the Turkish Army paid a sudden visit to Cyprus and made a number of inflammatory statements that almost stopped the peace process in its tracks .
Today , the commander of the Turkish land forces was due to go to Cyprus and his presence is expected to create more problems for the peace negotiations .
I urge the President of this House and all my colleagues to use any diplomatic means at their disposal to strongly point out to the Turkish generals in Ankara that they should stop trying to destroy the peace dialogue in Cyprus and leave the Cypriots free to get on with the job of finding a solution to their island 's intercommunal problems .
Thank you , and may I also say , Mr President , how grateful we all are for your generosity in allowing so many people to speak this afternoon .
Mr President , the European Union is the largest exporter in the world today .
This position is also due to the economic diversity of its Member States , some of which rely mostly on services and others on manufacturing .
In order to sustain the leading position of European exporters , we have to make sure that they compete in a fair global trade environment .
The Community trade defence instruments that are meant to provide assurances for European economic operators in international trade need to be reformed .
The use of the trade defence instruments has to be more accessible , more efficient and more transparent .
The reformed Community trade defence instruments need to be equally accessible and efficient for stakeholders from both service-based economies and economies that have strong manufacturing sectors .
They need to be equally accessible to the new and old Member States .
The temptation of protectionism has to be strongly discouraged .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , on 5 April , the Christian orthodox priest Youssef Adel was assassinated by unknown assailants in the centre of Baghdad .
The Chaldean archbishop of Mosul , Monsignor Rahho , was kidnapped at the end of February .
Parliament did not react and his body was found in mid-March .
If the international community turns a blind eye , peace will never come to this region .
The financial resources provided by the European Union will be wasted if the European Union does not protect the local population .
I am asking the Commission to look into the possibility of managing the European funds committed to Iraq for as long as Iraqi Christians remain targets of violence , kidnapping , murder and bomb attacks .
I ask our President to make a joint declaration with the Council on our behalf stating that it strongly condemns the persecution of civilian , humanitarian , health and religious personnel in Iraq .
( PL ) We are approaching the fourth anniversary of the most important enlargement of the Union - an enlargement which incorporated 10 new Member States .
For the most part these are countries that require considerable expenditure and considerable support funds for modernising and transforming the economy .
Then Bulgaria and Romania joined too .
These enlargements were very cheap for the European Union 's budget .
The benefits from enlargement were felt by both the old and the new Member States .
We are in the process of ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is a major success , but at the same time , during discussion of the future of the Union , there is talk of a diminution of the budget for the years 2014-2020 .
How do we think we are going to respond to these new challenges , new challenges for an enlarged Europe , if we are going to devote less money to matters of such importance for Europe , for the world , and for the European Union ?
That concludes the one-minute speeches .
Combating cancer in the enlarged EU ( debate )
( PT ) The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on combating cancer in the enlarged European Union , by Miroslav Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety - B6-0015 / 2008 ) .
Commissioner Vassiliou is with us for the first time to take part in this debate .
Welcome , Commissioner ; I hope you will feel at home among us .
Your speech , when the moment comes , will mark the beginning of your cooperation and collaboration with the European Parliament .
author . - ( CS ) First of all , I would like to take this opportunity , as the Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to congratulate the Commissioner , who was nominated and appointed to the Commission today .
Although serious reasons prevented me from listening to her presentation in person , I must say that she made an excellent impression on the members of my committee and was unanimously welcomed in her new capacity .
Regarding the oral question , I would like to begin by explaining what made us tackle this issue and ask individual states to pay more attention to this serious diagnosis .
You probably know , from the emphasis in the report and in the question , that cancer cases in Europe are on the increase .
There are a number of reasons for this : as we know , the population is ageing and more and more people are exposed to carcinogens .
According to the trade unions , at least 8 % of annual cancer deaths are directly caused by exposure to carcinogens in the workplace .
We have to bear in mind that one in three Europeans is diagnosed with cancer during their lifetime and one in four Europeans dies from the disease .
Another important matter is the significant differences in cancer treatment success rates between the old and new Member States .
This imbalance is surely also food for thought .
What can we do in this area and what can we recommend to the European Community ?
A structure such as the EU undoubtedly has the capacity and power to coordinate individual national policies .
By adopting national cancer control programmes we can reduce cancer mortality by as much as 30 % .
We know that only 3 % of the total budget in developed countries is spent on cancer prevention , compared with 97 % on treatment .
I would also like to take this opportunity to make an appeal on behalf of patients , who become the focus of our treatment and should become the focus of our care : they should have better access to new scientific knowledge and new information .
The European Union should push ahead with a single register and , as far as possible , common education .
Paradoxically , the European Union has not yet introduced in all its Member States as undeniably important a topic as oncology .
Although oncology is an interdisciplinary subject , its recognition as a subject in its own right is a necessary condition if we want to successfully fight this disease .
Since I would like to allow my colleague from the PPE-DE Group , Professor Trakatellis , to use some of my speaking time , I will now conclude my introduction .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is my first official appearance before Parliament , so let me firstly express my thanks to its Members for placing their trust in me through their vote .
I repeat what I said at my hearing : I aim to cooperate with MEPs fruitfully and to the best of my ability .
Now , Mr President , to the subject of cancer :
In addition to the priority given to cancer by you and by the Slovenian Presidency , this issue has been a particular concern of mine for many years , so I am pleased that it is the first topic for me to address in front of the plenary .
Every year 3.2 million Europeans are diagnosed with cancer , but this burden is not spread equally across the Union .
For example , the most recent data shows that cervical cancer is over four times higher in Bulgaria than in Finland , and the risk of dying from cervical cancer is almost five times higher in Lithuania than in Italy .
These variations show that there is scope to do better across the Union .
Clearly , the primary responsibility for comprehensive cancer services lies with the Member States , but European action can make a difference .
The Commission is currently preparing a report on the implementation of the Council recommendation on cancer screening of 2003 .
I expect that this will show that progress has been made , but that more still needs to be done .
We will work with the Member States to pursue this .
But even though screening is important , I think that Community action against cancer must cover a wider range of topics . For example : health information and data on the cancer burden that will highlight inequalities and best practices across Europe ; preventative measures and health promotion on topics such as tobacco , nutrition and alcohol ; best practices on treatment and integrated cancer care , such as palliative care ; bringing together expertise through European reference networks ; providing investment in infrastructure through the Structural Funds ; and support for cancer research at Community level .
I plan to bring forward proposals for an action plan on cancer next year .
This will aim to provide focus and coherence for all these actions .
We will also consider whether the scientific evidence justifies updating the existing recommendation on cancer screening .
Some actions are already under way .
We plan to include provisions for European reference networks as part of the forthcoming proposals on the application of patient rights in cross-border health care .
The proposals later this year on rare diseases will also help to improve , inter alia , the situation regarding rare types of cancer .
Moreover , when a person has cancer , it affects them most , but it also affects their family , their employer and society as a whole .
My proposals will be accompanied by an impact assessment that will make clear not just the human cost of cancer but also the wider social and economic costs .
I look forward to hearing your suggestions on issues we need to address as we develop those proposals .
You may be sure that your proposals will be taken into account as we develop this action plan , and I count on your support for all our future actions .
Mr President , firstly let me congratulate the Commissioner on taking up her duties .
I welcome the views she has already expressed on cancer .
Commissioner , I think it is time for us to adopt an effective strategy on cancer in line with current scientific and technological progress , so that the disease can stop being the main cause of death in Europe .
Today , one third of all cancers are preventable .
We must therefore review the existing preventive programmes and measures and create new ones to cover every eventuality .
If we expand our scientific knowledge , we must review the Council 's recommendation on early diagnosis and improve diagnostic methods for more types of cancers .
In addition to breast , cervical and colorectal cancer , we must add skin cancer , and possibly lung and prostate cancer .
Strengthening prevention and early diagnosis could cover nearly 70 % of cases .
For cases where prevention or early diagnosis is not possible , as you said , we need to improve therapeutic strategies and practice by being more effective and innovative .
We must ensure that full use is made of the treatments provided by ever more successful innovation and research .
It is necessary simply to incentivise research into innovative cancer treatments and to increase research funding .
Naturally , bureaucratic formalities should not hinder research .
Moreover , authorisation procedures should be reviewed in such a way that it becomes possible both to accelerate procedures for new drugs and to adhere to high standards of safety .
Commissioner , this is all feasible today .
The means made available by the EU may allow us in the immediate future to control cancer , thus almost freeing European citizens of this scourge .
With steady focus on this goal , we are thus called upon today to move forward .
We must do so , as you said , by drawing up the various composite elements of this strategy .
We hope that both the European Commission and the Council will support Parliament 's resolution and will take appropriate measures to achieve our targets .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , cancer affects one in three of us across the European Union and results in over one million deaths .
Therefore this disease has a twofold cost : firstly , the human cost in terms of its impact on sufferers and their families and , secondly , as a major health burden to society as a whole .
Further , due to the demographic changes we are experiencing , and with an ageing population , this is a problem that will only increase .
We need to ensure that all our citizens have access to high-quality screening programmes , diagnosis and treatment , including palliative care .
A cancer task force would ensure a cohesive and coordinated approach to all aspects of the disease , ensuring exchange of information and promotion of best practice .
We must ensure that more is done to secure research and innovation , giving as many people as possible access to the best in cancer prevention and treatment .
We also need to highlight the link between cancer and obesity - the most avoidable cause of cancer after tobacco .
It is also vital to ensure that workers are protected from cancer-causing substances - around 8 % of all cancers are caused by exposure to carcinogens at work - and we need binding limits on crystalline silica , which can cause disabling illness and fatal lung disease .
On that point , I would urge Members to support paragraph 33 and recital K of the original text agreed by the committee - remember the construction industry is not party to the social partners ' agreement on crystalline silica .
There are massive disparities in cancer treatment and screening across Europe .
Many of the deaths from cancer could be avoided by prevention measures , such as access to information and to comprehensive screening programmes .
Tackling these disparities must be a priority .
It is our moral duty and it is possible .
What we need is the political will to achieve it .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to use this opportunity to thank the Slovenian Presidency for putting cancer so high on its political agenda .
I want to highlight one initiative in particular : the European Cancer Patient Summit , which was held this week here in Brussels under the patronage of the Slovenian Presidency , with the participation of more than 150 patient groups from all over Europe .
This very successful summit , where I also had the honour of addressing the audience , was the first event our new Commissioner for Health attended in this capacity .
I must admit I was impressed by the Commissioner 's speech and the commitment she expressed for the fight against cancer as a whole and the concerns of cancer patients in particular .
I was also very happy to learn that the Commissioner intends to put forward a new cancer action plan , starting next year , to ensure that cancer remains high on the Commission 's agenda .
These initiatives from the Presidency and the Commission must encourage all of us to focus on what should be done , rethink what we have achieved and discover where the current deficits are .
And now we are very much looking forward with high expectations to the upcoming Council conclusions on this topic .
I am confident that these conclusions will provide a very good and solid basis for the following presidencies to continue along the lines set out therein .
Therefore , I would like to strongly encourage the upcoming French Presidency to follow up on established initiatives and to keep cancer high on its agenda .
Finally , I would like to thank all those colleagues who contributed very much in drafting the motion for a resolution on combating cancer in the enlarged European Union , on which we will vote tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , may I , too , add my congratulations .
You are a cancer expert , since you were the director of an oncological centre before you came here as a Commissioner , so you must be used to what you are hearing now .
I will not take issue with the statistical data that my fellow Members are giving you .
Mr Trakatellis said that 30 % of people can be saved by prevention .
As an oncologist myself , I can assure you that a further 30 % can be saved by reliable screening programmes .
Yet how many of the 27 Member States have such programmes ?
You must do something about this ; coordination and hence assistance need to be assured .
Perhaps you will also have to use funds from the Structural Funds and the 7th Framework Programme so that all these methods can contribute .
You must help to raise the profile of oncology , since , as you have said , this is very important .
The Slovenian Presidency is to be congratulated , but just as important is the creation of a task force wholly dedicated to the issue of cancer .
( SK ) Commissioner , I , too , would like to congratulate you on your nomination .
It makes me very happy to see that the issue of cancer is being dealt with not only by experts but also by politicians , which is very important in this case .
The experts are drawing our attention to alarming statistics and the trends in cancer occurrence are extremely unfavourable .
Yesterday I was talking with patient organisations until lunchtime , and I can tell you that what they want is adequate treatment , which can be very demanding , especially in the case of rare types of cancer .
There is still a huge gap between the 15 old and the 12 new Member States regarding the occurrence of this disease , its late diagnosis and the approach to its treatment at all stages of the disease .
Insufficient prevention and late diagnosis or treatment aggravate the patients ' state of health and their chances of getting better .
Commissioner , please ensure that the fight against cancer is not just a priority during the six-month presidency , or for professional medical organisations such as ESMO or patient organisations .
We , the Members of this Parliament , will also give you our support in the search for a solution .
( SL ) Commissioner , I did not expect to have the chance to talk to you about cancer three times in one week .
I see that we have a Commissioner who knows how things are with cancer , and who will , together with us , put up a fight .
Because knowing that health is the responsibility of member states , the European citizens wish certain tasks to be performed at European level , since it is only at this level that they can be performed properly .
I am pleased that you have announced the action plan to fight cancer .
We need it urgently , and if cancer has the exponential dynamics of epidemics , we too must have our own political dynamics , otherwise the gap and the consequences of cancer will become even more serious .
I am pleased the Slovene Presidency has strengthened expectations that , in the future , activities will be more coordinated , there will be more continuity , and the initiatives will be more vigorous , and , as you yourself put it on another occasion earlier this week , that this will coincide with multi-partnerships .
Moreover , I believe that it would be better if countries holding the EU presidency did not prioritise only single aspects , but continuously considered the entire frontline against cancer , as has already been mentioned today .
In this spirit , I hope that with your help , a task group could be formed - or we could call it something else - to bring together the main institutions and key actors in the fight against cancer , not with the intention of creating a new bureaucracy , but in order to achieve better combined results owing to good methods of cooperation .
Commissioner , I wish you much success in your work .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the media in my country are noting Germany 's successful record on mammography screenings .
Once again the EU guidelines on quality assurance have proved their worth .
However , demands are already being made to offer this to younger women as well .
This shows how important European guidelines are .
Therefore , in its motion for a resolution , too , this House will tomorrow be calling for the further development of evidence-based EU guidelines on early detection , diagnosis and treatment of all widespread cancers and the formulation of an urgently needed accreditation and certification procedure for relevant facilities .
Criteria on their own are not enough here .
Only in this way will we manage to put quality above populism and above class and market interests when it comes to the early detection and treatment of cancer .
I would ask all my fellow Members - and the Commissioner , too - to continue to persuade and bring on board the Member States still doubting the need for an accreditation procedure .
Madam President , cancer is already the second biggest killer in Europe , but the reality is that many cancers are preventable and many cancer deaths unnecessary .
Screening , diagnosis and treatment have improved but not enough .
We must set up mechanisms at EU level to ensure that best practice is shared more effectively .
Take colorectal cancer , for instance .
It is estimated that over 27 000 lives could be saved in the EU each year if modern screening programmes were in place across Europe .
We also need to make sure that those diagnosed with cancer are not discriminated against in the workplace .
That should be covered by the Employment Directive 2000 on combating discrimination in the workplace , but many Member States do not class chronic illness and cancer as a disability .
That is why we need a definition of disability at EU level that could include people with cancer .
( GA ) Madam President , I support the establishment of an interinstitutional taskforce on cancer that would allow representatives from the European Parliament , Commission and Council to meet on a regular basis .
Research on cancer detection and prevention should also be funded under the seventh framework programme .
I welcome the contribution made today to this debate by the Commission .
Strategies which include women and , particularly , inexpensive and regular cervical screening and inexpensive and rapid breast screening must be implemented .
We must also look at the effect of chemicals , which must be regulated through the REACH regulation .
Finally , poverty is a key factor in ill health .
Poor people are more likely to become ill and die at an earlier age than those who are more affluent .
This is especially true in respect of cancer prevention and cure .
( SK ) I , too , want to welcome the fact that Mrs Vassiliou was today appointed the new Health Commissioner .
I expect a lot from this new cooperation and , personally speaking , her presentation in the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety convinced me of her qualifications and her appetite for solving certain problems , for example those related to smoking , which is a subject dear to my heart .
In this context , I would now like to concentrate on a similar topic .
We know that one in three Europeans is diagnosed with cancer during their lifetime and that the most common diagnoses are lung cancer , bowel cancer ( which some people have mentioned ) and breast cancer .
It is well known that lung cancer occurs up to five times more often than all other types of cancer combined .
There is absolutely no doubt that passive smoking causes cancer just as active smoking does , and we also know that up to 95 % of people who are diagnosed with lung cancer are smokers or passive smokers .
Putting warnings on cigarette packets is not enough .
It is time for adequate legislation to protect non-smokers to be introduced in the old and new Member States that are still putting if off , for reasons that are difficult to comprehend .
In countries where good and sufficiently restrictive laws are in place , the health situation has improved significantly and billions have been saved instead of spent on cancer patient treatment .
Ladies and gentlemen , articles recently published in professional medical literature point to a direct link between hormonal contraception and breast cancer .
I want to ask the Commission and our programmes to allocate funds to research in this area , too , in order to reverse these trends and improve women 's health .
Madam President , cancer , as many know , is not necessarily an incurable disease .
Modern treatment methodologies , along with early and more accurate diagnosis , mean that many forms of cancer are today eminently treatable with success .
Of course , much remains to be done and this is why the EU must take it upon itself to declare an all-out war on cancer .
We must fight this disease on all fronts , with strong aggression and endless determination .
Our efforts must , for example , be directed at making sure that efficient screening programmes are in operation and implemented among those sections of the population that most need them .
They must also be directed at ensuring that sufficient funding is always available to the research institutions that provide our hope for the future .
Our citizens must be reassured that cancer can be defeated and we , in the European Parliament , are determined to continue to support this fight until , and unless , this is accomplished .
In conclusion , let me take this opportunity to add my congratulations to the new Health Commissioner , Mrs Vassiliou .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President , and greetings to the new Commissioner .
Cancer is the second most common cause of death .
In both 1993 and 2003 , Hungary came first in the world in terms of cancer deaths , with the most common being lung , bowel and breast cancers .
We know the causes : unhealthy diet , too little exercise , contraceptives , alcohol , smoking , and harmful environmental factors .
We know that the most cost-effective way to combat cancer is prevention , and yet there are Member States , including Hungary for example , where this year money is only being put into screening programmes for mouth , breast and cervical cancers , but not other types of cancer .
Patients have to wait six to eight weeks for CT and MRI scans and to commence treatment .
I hope that this report will open the eyes of the Member States - including those of Hungarian politicians - and provide a boost to the current legislative debate on combating smoking . Thank you very much , and best wishes again to the Commissioner .
( PL ) Madam President , it is good that the Slovenian Presidency has taken up the fight against cancer as one of its priorities ; but this cannot be a one-off action .
The fight against cancer must be among the priorities of each successive presidency , if only because the incidence of this terrible disease in Europe is rising and will continue to rise as our society ages .
I would like to draw attention to the inequalities emphasised by the Commissioner in the detection and treatment of cancer , which are so apparent when we compare the old and the new Union .
Statistics point to a higher survival rate and lower mortality in the old EU , and I therefore appeal to the European Commission to apply special monitoring to the implementation of the EU programme ' Europe Against Cancer ' in Central and Eastern Europe in particular .
Citizens of the new Member States should enjoy the same conditions as citizens of the old Union as regards avoidance of this disease and , if they are already affected by it , fighting it .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to comment that prevention is the best way of combating cancer and that consequently our strict position regarding the marketing of carcinogenic substances and endocrine disruptors cannot be relaxed .
I appeal to all my fellow Members who did not adopt the correct position in the first vote on pesticides .
They could set things right in the second vote on the marketing of pesticides .
As regards keeping national registries , I would like to point out to the Commissioner that this was suggested at the time of the vote on the Seventh Framework Programme two years ago , but was not retained .
You will therefore have your work cut out , Commissioner , to encourage the Member States to accept this principle .
Meanwhile , I congratulate you on your appointment and wish you luck .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
I too would like to say a few words about the importance of prevention .
This debate has touched on the issue of smoking .
Smoking is perhaps a good example of how social opposition can be generated ; in many places nowadays smoking is not - if I can put it this way - a cool or trendy thing to be doing .
At the same time , cancer has other causes that have not so far aroused healthy social opposition .
Chemical contamination and air pollution are major causes of cancer .
In the area of environmental protection , however , the kind of social awareness has not yet developed that would make us realise that certain chemicals must be taken out of our system , that excessive urban traffic is bad for city dwellers ' health , or that reducing the amount of toxicants and pollution we are exposed to involves changing our whole lives .
I would therefore like us all to realise just how closely interlinked the ideas of combating cancer , healthy lifestyle and protection of the environment are . Thank you .
( PL ) Madam President , thanks are due to the Slovenian Presidency for recognising the fight against cancer as one of its priorities for 2008 .
Sadly , in the European Union cancer reaps a harvest of one million lives each year .
The numbers are shocking .
During our lifetime , a tumour will be diagnosed in around 33 % of people living in Europe , and for 25 % it is the cause of death .
The highest percentage of people dying of lung , prostate or breast cancer is recorded in the new Member States , i.e. in the poorest countries .
Action needs to be taken at EU level to enable the disparities in oncological services to be ironed out , and especially where monitoring and screening are concerned .
Let us not forget that early detection of cancer offers the best chance of curing it .
It is estimated that one third of cases could be avoided by adopting a healthy lifestyle , not smoking tobacco or abusing alcohol , and participating in sport and keeping to a diet .
( RO ) I would also like to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency for introducing this theme and , obviously , Madame Commissioner for the opportunity to debate on this subject in her presence .
I would like to emphasize the fact that it is important to have quality services for scanning , detecting and treating this disease .
I also believe it is important to certify institutions with responsibilities in the field of oncological treatment and the Member States ' governments should finance these institutions adequately .
Last but not least , I emphasize the importance of the social integration of the ill ; they should not consider themselves disabled and , for this reason , I believe the psychological condition of these patients could help them fight this disease .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I have followed with interest the discussion on cancer and I must say once again that cancer is not something which is temporarily on our agenda : it is something which is so serious for the whole of the European Union - and not only - that we cannot be complacent and it will always be among our priorities .
I have been described as an expert on cancer .
I must say that I am not an expert on cancer .
There are people here who are really experts on cancer , but I am a person who has worked for many years in the fight against cancer and I will remain as such .
I have heard very interesting comments .
I will try to answer some of them , but rest assured that I have taken note of all the comments that were made , and we shall include them in our deliberations when we formulate our action plan .
Concerning Structural Funds , the Commission has now included health as one of the priority areas for funding , so the funds can be used for health infrastructure , including cancer .
Mention was made of carcinogens in the workplace .
We already have strong European standards , as you know , on health and safety .
The Commission will , of course , work to keep those standards updated as science updates our knowledge of risks .
I will work on this with Commissioner Špidla , who is responsible for this area of legislation .
The suggestion was made repeatedly concerning the setting-up of an interinstitutional task force to fight cancer .
I would examine this during the deliberations of the forthcoming Health Council in Slovenia , and I would also make another addition to this suggestion : that I would like to see representatives of patients and of professionals included in this task force .
Recognition of oncology as a specialisation is something that is , indeed , very necessary , but I would point out that this is something for the Member States to do .
But , as far as I am concerned , I will exert all my influence in encouraging Member States to do so .
Many speakers spoke about anti-smoking campaigns .
We all know that smoking is one of the most serious detriments to health , and my intention is not only to continue the campaign against smoking but also to try to involve youth in this campaign , not only to make it less trendy for them but also to make them understand that it is to their benefit not to start smoking , and make them involved actively in the campaign so that the word is spread among young people , because that is the first stage to prevent smoking - to start with the young people .
As I said , many other interesting proposals have been made .
I will take all of them into consideration , and I will continue to work closely with Members of Parliament in reaching a very good action plan for next year .
( Applause )
( FR ) In accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received a motion for a resolution on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to conclude this debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I support the main points of the report in question .
On one aspect , however , I believe we need to be clearer and more decisive : greater resources must be invested in research , in fact and not just in words , and researchers must be guaranteed better conditions .
Important results have been achieved in the last few years , giving greater hope to those with cancer and their families , but there is still a long way to go .
However , I think a more secular approach to the ethical issues would be desirable in each of the 27 Member States , because these often constitute a hindrance and constraint on research freedom .
The priority objective , while complying with current laws , should be to stamp out this disease that in its varied and terrible forms continues to claim too many victims throughout Europe . < 0 The task and duty of setting out on this path falls to us .
in writing . - ( SK ) Although calling the number of cancer cases in the European Union an ' epidemic ' is alarming , it is an appropriate term because cancer claims over 1 million lives a year .
However , epidemics spread in those countries where the hygiene and epidemiology standards are not met and people live in poor conditions or do not have access to effective health care .
I do not know which of these conditions the EU fulfils .
We are talking about a cancer epidemic in the EU at the same time as we are talking about improving the economy and competitiveness , about massive investment in prevention , in new effective treatment methods and in the pharmaceutical industry .
My country , the Slovak Republic , has for more than 30 years been running a national oncology programme to prevent cancer .
In spite of that , cancer incidence rates continue to rise .
Is this the doctors ' fault or the patients ' fault ?
How are the EU funds for cancer prevention used ?
In 2003 the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality prepared an own-initiative report on breast cancer .
Although it accurately identified the causes and possible solutions , only a little of what was included in the report has been implemented .
Sometimes I feel that the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing and that our society , and the EU as a whole , deliberately keep quiet about the real reasons for this disease , perhaps in order to project a better image and for fear of telling the truth .
Fighting cancer cannot be a priority for just one EU presidency .
Its implementation as a systematic EU policy should already have been the norm for several years .
Mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme ( debate )
( FR ) The next item is the report by Riitta Myller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner Dimas , the targets under the Sixth Environment Action Programme are not going to be achieved as a result of the sort of environmental policy being implemented in the EU .
The thematic strategies planned as the cornerstone of the Environment Action Programme and the legislation passed and largely now adopted based on them are insufficient to achieve the environmental targets .
The decline in biodiversity is unlikely to be halted and legislation on the protection of the seas will not have any effect until 2012 .
Soil protection , as we know , has run into problems , not just in the Council but also here in Parliament .
Legislation on waste is now on the home run , and it does not look good .
We need to achieve satisfactory targets in the reduction in the volume of waste .
Nor are the targets agreed in the air quality directive at the level agreed in the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
The targets in the Environment Programme are , however , being achieved in one area , and that is climate policy .
That is the case especially when the measures which have now been agreed are actually implemented .
We have to remember that the implementation of climate policy also helps when it comes to air quality and partly also waste , so in that respect it is very important .
What then can we still do to get back on the road to achieving the targets in the Sixth Environment Action Programme ?
First of all , Member States have to step up national implementation of EU legislation .
The Commission must be given the necessary resources for it to be able to ensure that all Member States are attending to their obligations .
Another big issue , and one which is perhaps the most important of them all , is how we manage to integrate the environment within all European Union legislation .
We have spoken about this for years , but as yet nothing has been done in practice .
We still have areas where we subsidise activity which is environmentally harmful .
We must now do away with environmentally damaging subsidies , and Parliament should propose a timetable for this .
Any policy that is environmentally favourable is to be recommended , including taxation measures .
Unless legislation at European level can be used to develop eco-taxation , we will have to employ the means available to us , for example , flexible cooperation , using that to take tax matters forward .
If the state of the environment is to be improved , binding legislation still needs to be a priority .
I would like to thank all the groups who took part in this work , and I wish to say that I have tabled a few amendments solely with the purpose of clarifying the text and make its tone more balanced .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a Europe of results is a priority for the Commission .
Our environmental policy has been - and is - a very successful EU policy , since it has offered its citizens clear and tangible benefits .
Around 80 % of the Member States ' environmental legislation is based on corresponding EU legislation .
The latter has made a vital contribution to major improvements in air and water quality , as well as to the protection and maintenance of Europe 's natural resources .
The EU is thus able to play a leading international role in issues such as climate change , biodiversity and legislation on chemical products .
Nearly a year has passed since the Commission published its Communication on the Mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme .
Last year was particularly important , since environmental issues were constantly to at the top of the EU 's list of political priorities .
Over this period we have wholly fulfilled our political commitments .
Let me give you three examples of this .
At the Bali Summit last December , a procedure was launched to achieve a new agreement on global climate until the end of 2009 .
The EU 's ' green diplomacy ' was largely instrumental in achieving this positive result .
The package of proposals on climate and energy produced by the Commission in January was ambitious and demonstrated the EU 's continuing commitment to setting a global example .
The proposed new directive on industrial emissions strengthens the provisions already in force and simplifies existing legislation merging seven different directives , on integrated pollution prevention and control .
Thus our legislation has become easier to implement and we are contributing towards making it more environmentally effective .
In the past year important progress was made .
One of the main messages of the mid-term review - that the long-term viability of the European economy needs to be based on sound environmental principles - was largely accepted by industry .
The high standards set by EU environmental legislation encourage ecological innovation , which in turn boosts industrial productivity and creates new employment .
In other words , the ambitious environmental goals are both improving European citizens ' quality of life and central to achieving our goals in economic development and employment .
These positive developments contradict scientific evidence that Europe has not yet entered a phase of sustainable development .
In fact , we are only half-way through the time period covered by the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , so there is obviously plenty more to be done in tackling the current and emerging threats to our environment .
In the coming months the Commission will produce new proposals , many of which are included in Parliament 's report .
These initiatives include the review of the directive on national emissions ceilings , and a package of proposals in the area of sustainable consumption and production .
We are also preparing a legislative proposal on restricting timber trafficking from illegal logging .
After the summer , communications will be ready concerning the European view on the issue of halting deforestation and on finding ways of recording companies ' results using criteria that go further than GDP .
We are also preparing a proposal to prohibit trade in the skins of seals that have been inhumanely hunted .
Improved implementation of Community legislation is a major priority ; it is the key to creating a better environment .
Only by ensuring the correct implementation of the acquis communautaire in its entirety can the goals of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme possibly be achieved .
Effective implementation is connected with better legislation .
I can now express my satisfaction because in the last two years the Commission has been able to disassociate better legislation from lower environmental standards .
The truth is that the older and simpler legislation is one of the better ways of improving the implementation of the new rules and can thus contribute to better environmental protection .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am especially pleased that in your report there are constructive conclusions on the way in which Europe can successfully create a better environment and genuine sustainable development .
I assure you that the Commission will examine these conclusions with great care when analysing areas where it can see policy gaps and when setting out priorities for the coming years .

Let me thank the rapporteur , Mrs Myller , for her efforts and likewise Mr Karim , Mrs Jeleva and Mr Navarro from the Committee on International Trade , the Committee on Regional Development and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their excellent recommendations .
It is obvious that there is broad agreement as regards the way forward .
It now remains for us to transform this support policy into concrete action to ensure a better environment from 2012 onwards .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( HU ) In terms of the goals set out in the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , we are lagging behind in many regards .
I would like to mention just two of these here .
The air in our cities is polluted and unhealthy .
In the absence of Community legislation , in many cities achieving the goals set out in the thematic strategy on the urban environment seems a very long way off .
The Commission must therefore put forward legislation that clearly defines a framework for the urban environment and urban transport in the whole of the European Union , as otherwise our citizens will continue to suffer from poor air quality and other forms of pollution .
Similarly , implementation of the Water Framework Directive keeps stalling .
If legislation on industry does not accord with policies on agriculture and rural development , then our water resources will continue to be polluted .
As demonstrated by the foam on the River Raba in Hungary resulting from pollution by Austrian leather manufacturers , current legislation is not able to prevent contamination of water resources .
The Member States and the Commission must do everything in their power to ensure universal compliance with the Water Framework Directive and the Floods Directive . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , many thanks to Riitta Myller for her excellent report and for her cooperation .
As the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety says , the implementation of the EU 's Environment Programme is in many respects late , but what is even more startling is that , even if all the concrete targets set thus far were fully achieved , the EU would still not be on the road to sustainable development .
For example , we probably will not manage to halt the decline in biodiversity by 2010 , even if we are committed to doing so .
The unpleasant truth is that our society is constructed to work in a way that is unsustainable .
If everyone on earth consumed resources the way Europeans do , we would need four earths to produce the necessary resources .
If the middle classes of China , India and other developing countries copy our consumption habits the planet will be in crisis .
I hope that the wake-up call that is now on its way thanks to climate policy will result in a more comprehensive reassessment of our lifestyle and production habits .
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
Let me begin by saying that I , too , disagree that implementation of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme is going according to plan .
Moreover , in many cases concrete quantitative and qualitative targets and timetables are lacking , not only in the Action Programme , but also in the thematic strategies .
There is no doubt that implementation of the Sixth Action Programme is behind schedule ; we have not yet managed to meet the priority environmental objectives set out in the Programme , and implementation of the legislation in the Member States keeps stalling .
Let me give you a concrete example .
First : no concrete steps have been taken to draft legislation concerning indoor air quality .
A particular priority in this regard is the drafting of provisions relating to schools and other public indoor spaces used by vulnerable groups .
At the very least , pilot projects should be initiated .
Second : implementation of directives on the Natura 2000 networking programme has also stalled .
Best practice needs to be disseminated , and fiscal measures put in place against polluters .
I myself have approached the Commission with a submission relating to contamination of Natura 2000 areas , but the Commission has merely been sitting on its hands and has not taken any action .
Third : illegal dumping of hazardous and municipal waste in the territory of other countries has proliferated in recent times .
Africa and Asia are often the destination of European waste , and this is unacceptable .
Equally unacceptable is the fact that several German Länder are illegally transporting many thousands of tonnes of waste to eastern Europe , and then refuse to take it back - take the case of Bavaria , for example .
Fourth : whatever happened to the fine principle of preventing cross-border pollution ?
One Member State , Austria , has been polluting the River Raba for the past seven years , as Mr Hegyi mentioned earlier .
Thick foam floats on the surface of the river .
I have raised this issue at least half a dozen times already , and indeed I have also made a formal complaint , but to no avail : the foam on the river remains , while the Commission sits there doing nothing .
Fine principles are meaningless unless they are implemented .
The Commission is the guardian of European Union law .
It is time for this guardian to do its duty and not give in to Member States , but instead to ensure compliance with the laws that we have jointly adopted . Thank you very much .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work .
I think it reflects Parliament 's concerns about how much the Union has so far abided by its commitments within the framework of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme .
The Commission 's mid-term review reveals that coordinated efforts are required to plug the gaps in legislation with new legislative proposals .
It is also necessary to secure the requisite resources to ensure proper implementation of Community legislation .
Meanwhile , it is becoming understood that a greater reliance has to be placed on a sustainable model of production and consumption , and that economic growth must become more dependent on natural resources .
It is just as important to emphasise the international dimension of European environmental policy .
The Union must be encouraged to continue promoting ambitious environmental policies and requirements , and to develop technology transfer and the exchange of good practice with developing countries .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I really do not think that the document that we are considering is what it could be , and I will explain : it is a document to assess what has been done with the broad guidelines that the European Commission had proposed for the environment , and for all environmental policy .
I do not think that it is an assessment document .
It is not a detailed assessment document that could have helped us to plan for the future , perhaps because the Commission is not accustomed to being judged or assessed , nor does it vote , or have a group of shareholders that demand results from it .
I do think , however , although it may appear to be a contradiction , that the Commission can be congratulated on the results that it has had in recent years , but not on the document .
I think that environmental policy has been absolutely integrated into municipal and regional policies , and industry itself is responding to the European Union guidelines .
However , the document lacks a projection of how we need to change for the future , because those points where the system has not worked well need to be reviewed .
Europe has been making environmental policy for more than 25 years and it needs to review some of its methods , because this is not the only thing that explains the failure of some policies .
I do not see any examination of how we can change the ways that we involve the regions and create networks , whether or not these are EU dominated in attitude .
There are now many countries , as happened with the Soil Directive , that already have much better regulations than Europe can give them and others that do not have any .
In response to this imbalance , Europe needs to take different positions and look for new ways of working , because it is logical that , if the world has changed , we should change our working methods .
Thank you very much , congratulations on the results but let us change in the future .
( SK ) In my opinion , it is very important that the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme has brought to light an important fact : implementation of this programme is running well behind the planned schedule .
As a result , the likelihood that everything will be done by 2012 and that the priority goals will be met is rather low .
I share the opinion that clearer and more tangible quantitative and qualitative goals still need to be incorporated into the programme .
I also agree that the submission of thematic strategies has not generated effective results .
For this reason , I would stress the need for further efforts to eliminate loopholes in environmental laws by means of new legislative proposals .
It is also very important to ensure the effective implementation of environmental regulations .
Climate change , biodiversity , health and resource use will continue to be among our most urgent challenges for the future .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should carry out these evaluations from time to time , and in particular publish the findings from the Member States in a register , as conflicts do occur on the individual issues , of course , over the years , for example in the case of the Water Framework Directive , where we are going to great lengths on the one hand to promote renewable energy , but on the other hand are wasting unused water .
There are also problems with Natura 2000 .
We should be listening to citizens here and adapting the programmes accordingly from time to time .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first mention the excellent comments that have been made tonight .
The Commission will of course take these into account and put them to good use accordingly .
In its mid-term review , the Commission came to the conclusion that the EU was generally on the right track as regards fulfilling the measures set out in the Sixth Environment Action Programme .
If we continue to make progress in these crucial years , we shall be able to carry out the proposals contained in the programme up to 2012 .
The preparation of the proposals , however , and even their adoption and approval , account for only half of the work required .
As has been pointed out tonight , without effective implementation of environmental policy , we will certainly not reach the environmental targets set in the Sixth Environment Action Programme , however well the legislation may have been prepared by the European institutions .
For precisely this reason , I fully share Parliament 's view that greater efforts are needed and sufficient resources must be made available to the Commission to enable us to continue to deal properly with implementation issues .
This will allow the Commission to help national authorities to develop those capacities necessary to achieve the results we are aiming for .
The Commission also shares Parliament 's view that it is vitally important to incorporate environmental issues into other policies .
As the report makes clear , this integration is crucial in trade policies , since the EU has highly significant economic relations with other countries of the world , and trade has an obvious environmental impact .
It is just as important , however , that environmental issues be incorporated into agricultural , regional and transport policy : if the essential funding is provided , Community policies will have a significant effect on the regions of Europe .
The impact study procedure , also established by the Commission , aims to improve the cohesion of Community policies and includes an assessment of all the environmental parameters of our proposals .
The Commission would like the European Parliament 's support so that a full assessment of all environmental aspects can be guaranteed during the consideration of proposals by other institutions as well .
Finally , the report highlights the key role of the national , regional and local authorities , as well as of citizens , consumers and businessmen , in attaining the environmental targets set in the EU 's Sixth Environment Action Programme .
I assure you that the Commission will do everything it can to raise the programme 's profile and to secure the support of the parties concerned .
I am sure that Parliament will assist in these efforts and I hope that the protection of the European environment will be one of the main issues of concern to voters in next year 's elections .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Madam President , I wish to thank everyone who took part in the debate and the Commissioner .
Parliament and I , as rapporteur , are actually aiming at a situation where the Commission acquires new instruments to get environmental policy on a path which leads to the targets under the Sixth Environment Action Programme being attained .
In its mid-term report the Commission said it was its opinion , just as Commissioner Dimas remarked , that the means cited in the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme would be enough to achieve this , but a study which has been undertaken on the Commission 's current policy indicates otherwise .
This report , which hopefully will be adopted tomorrow with a large majority , indicates areas where improvements are still needed at European level , and it mentions very largely the same remedies as those proposed in the Commissioner 's speech .
In other words , we are of the same opinion as to what needs to be done , but , as Mrs Hassi said here , whether or not the means proposed are generally adequate to get the European Union on the road to sustainable development we shall certainly have to have very frank discussions together .
We are now on the right path with regard to climate policy .
If we establish such ambitious policies in the other areas , then surely we will succeed .
I said I had tabled a few amendments in order to clarify this report .
I would just like to mention that that the Finnish in Amendment 14 is very odd : the English text should be used as a reference .
( FR ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I think it would be a good thing if we were to accept the Sixth Environment Action Programme according to Article 251 of the EC Treaty , i.e. through a codecision procedure .
Protecting the environment is a matter of exceptional importance for the EP , which , after all , represents some 500 million Europeans .
Including the EP in the codecision procedure distinctly demonstrates the role it has .
The 10 year operating period of the Sixth Action Programme requires regular evaluations , especially as regards its priorities .
It is true that the thematic strategies included in the programme have improved the participation of stakeholders and developed the dimension of environmental policy , but at the same time they have delayed or prolonged the process of law-making in this sphere .
A disgraceful example has been set by the unfinished air quality directive .
Parliament has rightly commented that the greatest progress has been made in those subsections of the Programme concerning which no separate thematic strategies ( e.g. climate change ) were drafted .
On the other hand , though , we should bear in mind that the Sixth Action Programme urges us to support sustainable production methods and consumption models by fiscal means .
Although it is difficult to see this mid-term review as highly satisfactory , it is nevertheless the only mechanism through which the EU can effectively push for achievement of the goals set .
A lack of achievement in this area would damage the credibility of the EU and of its Members who are genuinely concerned about the deteriorating state of the environment .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Commission Communication regarding the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme ( EAP ) confirms the fact that climate change , loss of biodiversity , health and use of resources represent the most pressing environmental challenges and , for this reason , it is essential for this programme to become an important instrument in the strategy for sustainable EU development .
Taking into consideration the measures implemented so far by this programme , it is improbable for the priority environmental objectives to be achieved by 2012 .
For instance , the objective of stopping the loss of biodiversity by 2010 cannot be achieved , and the strategies proposed for protecting the marine environment and the soil will give no concrete results by 2012 .
At the same time , the actions taken to improve air quality , as well as those set in the Thematic Strategy on Air Pollution and the objectives regarding ambient noise reduction are not enough to achieve the EAP objectives .
Neither the settlement of problems , nor the reticence of certain Member States toward the implementation of directives regarding the habitats and Natura 2000 are dealt adequately with in the Commission communication .
Once the N2000 sites are designated , it is necessary to formulate , promote and monitor the conservation objectives .
This review calls attention to these problems and requests the Commission to aim at ambitious results in the field of environmental protection .
Eurostars ( debate )
( FR ) The next item is the report by Paul Rübig , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on support for research and development performing SMEs - C6-0281 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , today we are dealing with the Commission proposal to support the Eurostars Joint Programme , and I thank you for giving me a few minutes to explain the key features and the importance of this initiative .
The Eurostars Joint Programme aims to support research and development performing SMEs .
These SMEs are able to bring new products and services onto the market thanks to their own research and development work .
They have the ambition and the capacity to grow and to become the ' stars ' of tomorrow .
A group of 29 EUREKA countries , and now Luxembourg , which has just applied to join , have decided to develop the Joint Programme , specifically designed to support SMEs undertaking their own research and development activities , in cooperation with their partners .
In order to enhance the impact of this initiative , the Commission has proposed to the European Parliament and the Council participating financially in the Eurostars Joint Programme , based on Article 169 of the Treaty , with an amount of up to EUR 100 million .
This amount will leverage approximately EUR 300 million from the participating countries for the next six years .
An essential aspect of this initiative is that the participating countries commit themselves to integrate their national programmes in order to create a joint European programme .
In addition , Eurostars reinforces the cooperation between the Framework Programme and EUREKA .
For these reasons , I think that this initiative is a further step towards the realisation of the European Research Area .
I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Rübig , and also to the members of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for the good cooperation and the improvements they are proposing to the Commission proposal .
On behalf of the Commission , I can inform you that we accept these proposals .
I particularly appreciate the fact that you agreed to handle this proposal swiftly , so that we will be able to contribute to the first Eurostars call .
A rapid adoption by Parliament and the Council would indeed send a strong signal to the SME community that a continued investment in research and innovation activities is crucial to maintain and enhance their competitiveness .
Eurostars should be a good example of how Member States can cooperate by bringing their national programmes closer together , and of where Community funding results in more impact for the programme , for the benefit of the European SME community and , of course , for the benefit of Europe as such .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the Slovenian Presidency , too , as it has done everything it can right up until the last minute to ensure that this programme is able to be implemented on time .
I should also like to thank all my fellow Members , of course , because we have demonstrated once again here how effective European legislation can actually be .
When you think that the report was only introduced in January and that tomorrow we shall be voting on it , then you see that this House , the Presidency and the Commission are able to work together very effectively .
We can be extremely proud of this .
I should also like to thank the Secretariat of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , as it is not easy to negotiate a relatively complex matter in such a short space of time , to prepare and implement the basic principles accordingly .
We are very happy that Slovakia , the United Kingdom and - at the last minute - Luxemburg , which we did not know about until yesterday , have expressed a wish to join this programme in recent weeks .
I shall also be tabling an oral amendment on this tomorrow , and I would ask the Presidency that Luxembourg therefore be considered tomorrow when the Member States are named , so that small and medium-sized enterprises in Luxemburg , too , are able to take part in this programme successfully .
During the negotiations , we in Parliament have been emphasising a transparent and above all unbureaucratic , but efficient programme for promoting research .
This should also , in particular , make possible our very earnest wish for one-off payments to be made and quick decisions taken , so that enterprises raise the funds needed to carry out research activities and do not take out a bank loan in advance , and then often have to wait a very long time for the money .
I believe , Commissioner Potočnik , that this programme is a sign of better regulation , that we have really succeeded here in implementing the objectives concerning SMEs and better regulation under the Seventh Framework Research Programme appropriately .
Participation and management by Eureka is also exemplary , as Eureka is able to make very efficient and rapid decisions on this as well as ultimately bearing a large share of the responsibility .
The Community ultimately provides up to one third of the support .
Commissioner , as you have already said , we are talking about up to EUR 100 million .
New to the programme is also the fact that this is a genuine bottom-up programme , and therefore comes from the business community , from the small , research-intensive or medium-sized enterprises .
I am actually proud of the fact that the Eurostat Secretariat in Brussels is operating on the market here very efficiently and very quickly in close cooperation with the national funding agencies , and that it is therefore also becoming possible to focus on market-oriented research activities aiming at short- and medium-term commercial results .
This is a key element of the work of small and medium-sized enterprises , and it should be cost-effective .
High costs should not be incurred in the process for either the enterprises or the authorities ; instead , everything should be clearly and coherently worded in order that each individual enterprise is also able to respond to the questions asked as part of its activities without a huge outlay .
We have recently checked this . It has been a great success .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur , Paul Rübig , on his report and I would like to thank him for having agreed to present an oral amendment to include Luxembourg in this programme and to thereby remedy the administrative dawdling that caused its absence .
We have known , Commissioner , at least since the first evaluation report on the Lisbon process , that SMEs play an essential role in the field of research and innovation .
However , their level of participation is not yet meet expectations and the latest investment figures are proof of this .
This special programme should therefore facilitate the participation of SMEs , and also reduce any excessive bureaucracy .
In fact , in some ways it is a matter of setting things straight , covering the risk and counteracting the hesitancy of companies when it comes to investing in research and innovation , which is perhaps also an evil of the European corporate mindset .
I congratulate our rapporteur for insisting on adoption at the first reading , which should accelerate the implementation of this programme , guarantee its effectiveness and prove that European legislation is perhaps not as cumbersome as people sometimes accuse it of being , but that it can act effectively in the interest of citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Thank you , Madam President .
Commissioner , thank you for attending this debate .
I would also firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
For some time now , in various forums and also in Parliament , the possible relationship between the Community Framework Programme and the EUREKA intergovernmental programme has been the subject of analysis and debate , as both involve considerable aid to SMEs .
The result of these synergies has been Community funding for the Eurostars programme , on the basis of Article 169 of the Treaty , a programme that complements the Framework Programme through what I understand to be the main virtues of EUREKA : its bottom-up structure , which enables better adaptation to the needs of SMEs and facilitates participation , given that the bureaucracy required in order to participate in the Framework Programme is , in many cases , an excessive burden that is impossible for many SMEs to bear .
Supporting greater integration of SMEs into R & D is something that Parliament has always advocated , and Eurostars can have a considerable mobilising impact .
We therefore especially welcome this initiative .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Mr Rübig has - as usual - presented an excellent report .
Congratulations to him .
This is a very important subject , since the introduction of research results into industrial and business practice may be relatively promptly facilitated via SMEs .
This is a fundamental aspect of the Lisbon Strategy .
It is consequently a good thing that the Eurostars programme builds on the 7th Framework Programme for transnational enterprises and finances work in the sphere of science and technology put into effect by SMEs in cooperation with higher education institutions , research entities and other companies - large ones .
The direction of research is also important ; it should be pro-market and have practical applications that are as prompt as possible .
This good idea , which supports business initiatives and should be free of bureaucracy and clear , including its financial aspects .
This is important for all partners , especially for business people .
The success of this programme will set a good example for the future .
Let us hope that our one hundred million euros are not wasted .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Small and medium-sized enterprises provide 70 % of jobs in the European Union .
That said , these enterprises invest only 4 % in science , research and technological development , which is without any doubt the reason why they do not make better use of their business potential .
We need to develop the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises within the framework of the renewed Lisbon Strategy .
There are several ways to do this : give them better access to information , offer them better credit conditions , enable them to cooperate better with the public sector and help them to improve ties with large businesses so that both small and big systems are mutually linked .
I think that this is feasible and can be achieved in a relatively short period of time .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the EU extends its reach into more and more areas .
The problem is that there is no principle for deciding what the EU should do .
A sound principle is the one paid lip-service in policy speeches but ignored in decision-making : the subsidiarity principle .
That argues against centralising research and development , except as regards very large-scale projects on the lines of Galileo or fusion energy .
Research and development bureaucratised in large organisations gives less return on the money put in , not more .
There is seldom any reason for Member States to send money to Brussels and then have their researchers ask for it back later .
This assessment is particularly valid when it comes to research and development for small and medium-sized businesses .
The enthusiasm shown by researchers and businesses comes from the fact that they are conned into thinking that more funds will be available overall .
There is nothing to indicate that this is the case . Thank you for your attention .
( SK ) First of all , allow me to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work on this report .
I think that thanks mainly to Mr Rübig this Parliament has managed to find a compromise that is acceptable to both the Commission and the Council and should result in adoption of this proposal at first reading .
I believe that the EUREKA initiative concerning a research and development programme for small and medium-sized enterprises is very much welcomed by the business community .
The fact that so many countries participate in this initiative confirms that prior to this programme there had been a lack of interest in solving the problems of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In spite of the European Parliament 's efforts , the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development has not solved the problem of how SMEs approach the funds provided to support their research , development and innovation activities either .
It is thus extremely encouraging to see that this bottom-up initiative has met with so much approval in all the relevant European institutions .
Although there is no doubt that some progress has been made , the fact is that some questions still remain unanswered .
I am thinking here of the eligibility criteria for the SMEs , in particular the proportion of time and annual turnover dedicated to research activities .
Personally , I am of the opinion that when setting these criteria we should be more broadminded and consider opening the Eurostars programme up to smaller enterprises with substantial innovation and development potential in spite of their size .
In conclusion I want to say how pleased I am that my country , Slovakia , is also involved in the cooperation : this should improve the situation of small and medium-sized innovative enterprises whose development has to some extent been lagging behind until now .
( RO ) First of all , I congratulate Rapporteur Rübig and I would like to specify certain elements .
For the economic competitiveness of the European Union , it is essential to support small and medium-sized enterprises investing in applied research .
The 22 Member States and the 5 states in Eureka that have decided to invest , together with the Commission , the 400 million euros to support the research carried out by small businesses , contribute to the achievement of the Lisbon Strategy objectives .
We should not forget that the SMEs represent 99 % of the total European enterprises .
The selection of projects to be financed by the Eurostars programme shall be made according to the scientific excellence and economic impact .
Nevertheless , I call attention to the difficulty that small and medium-sized enterprises meet in ensuring the co-financing of 50 % of a project 's value .
Many of the small enterprises would rather assign their specialists to projects bringing rapid income , to the detriment of long-term research programmes .
Also , the financing of small businesses based on a business plan might determine a very large number of SMEs participating in the European research .
I hope that , during this programme , the Erasmus programme for young entrepreneurs will also continue .
( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is extremely important to support small and medium-sized enterprises as well as to stimulate their scientific and technological development .
SMEs need a solid technological base to enable them to boost their contribution to economic growth and development .
As a rule SMEs have a great capacity for initiative and adaptability since they are not stifled by bureaucracy and are normally run by entrepreneurs and managers who are highly committed to their work of wealth creation .
That capacity for initiative and adaptability makes it easier to launch new business ventures involving the manufacture and / or sale of new products or the operation of new services tailored to the needs of consumers or other businesses .
Such new products and services could frequently require a more solid technological base than is available in many such small enterprises , therefore the Eurostars joint research and development programme aimed at supporting SMEs could be very important because of its potential impact on the ' real economy ' .
It will thus help to improve the skills of small and medium-sized enterprises in various European States , serving citizens as consumers as well as the European economy .
It will thus also help to create more and better jobs .
For all those reasons Mr Rübig 's report has been most useful .

( RO ) First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Rübig for the correct and rapid way in which he managed this report .
This report creates a premise for a new approach of the Lisbon Strategy by simply relating research to SMEs .
Thus , we give a new value to competitiveness and a new boost to start-ups , SMEs with innovative activity .
Eurostars should become the starting point for relaunching the European economic activity , a programme of European innovative stars , a transparent , flexible and non-bureaucratic programme .
I end by requesting the Commission , together with all the states participating in this programme , to encourage and promote this programme closely related to the European priority themes : climate change , energy efficiency , promoting renewable energy resources and , last but not least , the fight against cancer .
( SK ) The Eurostars joint research and development programme supports research and development-performing SMEs in executing market-oriented research in transnational projects , implemented on behalf of various SME associations .
I would like to stress in particular the importance of the transfer of knowledge and the need for cooperation within the framework of this programme between enterprises themselves and with other institutions , based on industrial and economic partnerships .
The fact that this is a bottom-up programme , directly adapted to the needs of research-performing enterprises that participate in it , is a very positive aspect .
The key issue is that the research activities are market-oriented and aimed at short to medium-term commercial results .
I also want to mention a new feature of this programme : namely the introduction of the Risk Sharing Finance Facility designed for more risky RTD projects .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Potočnik and Mr Rübig .
The Eurostars Joint Programme is an excellent means of achieving the Lisbon goals , of enhancing competitiveness , and of strengthening innovation .
Research and development SMEs that spend at least 10 % of their turnover on research and development are key players in this domain .
Hungary is a member of this programme , and interest in it has been enormous .
More than 200 businesses fulfilling the criteria have applied , although a problem now emerging is that Member States have not set aside adequate resources .
In Hungary , for example , only EUR 500 000 are available , sufficient for only 2-3 projects .
Consequently , I think the Member States should at all events increase the resources allocated for this , or try to spend at least 3 % of GDP on research and development so that we can be competitive at world-class level too .
I believe that Eurostars and EUREKA are the kind of programmes that provide an excellent means of achieving this .
Congratulations again .
( PL ) Mr President , simply put , it pays to invest in small businesses .
Scientific studies have shown that small businesses with simple technologies have room for good innovations , and I would very much like to emphasise this .
This is also the case with family firms , in which investment is made in one child in the given firm 's line , so there is a certain continuity , and I consider this to be a very sound way of going on .
Moreover , these firms are highly flexible , and for a small outlay are capable of moving from one place to another , and also from one product to another ; I believe , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that if more than 60 % of income in the EU comes from SMEs , it would be a major error on our part to skimp on investment in them and their development .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking everybody not only for supporting the proposal in the report but also , and even more , for supporting the SMEs .
SMEs are a vital part of the European economy and here , as I have already said , in the Eurostars programme we are talking about SMEs which will be the ' stars ' of the future .
This is an innovative approach .
It is not easy to implement approaches where we combine money from the Member States with Community funding , but it is definitely worthwhile , because that is exactly the direction in which we should go in the future .
We are joining the best of EUREKA - flexibility , simplicity , decentralised approach , market orientation - with the best of the Framework Programme : centralised management , common evaluation and common selection .
I can assure you that also in the other parts of the Framework Programme we are keeping our eyes very much open for the benefit of the SMEs .
Simplification is the name of the game , so we have introduced , as you are probably aware , a higher funding rate for SMEs than for the rest .
So they have a 75 % co-funding rate in the Framework Programme , while the rest of the bigger companies have 50 % , which means that we are stimulating their participation .
We have introduced a guarantee fund , which very much simplifies their participation in the Framework Programme , because the fact that they have to submit some bank guarantees in advance was one of the major problems for SMEs ; and we are also about to introduce a ' unique registration facility ' which will again ease the job because you will have to apply only once and all your data will be stored and the next time you apply this will be done automatically .
Therefore , if we look at the results of the first year - and as you know , we agreed about the target of 15 % funding which should go to SMEs from the cooperation part of the programme - we can say that it is working .
While in Framework Programme 6 we were not achieving the target , from the first evaluations and first insight into the results , we can see that this figure is closer to 20 % than 15 % , which is a major step forward .
We are also working in the Commission .
I have just come from a meeting of the competitiveness group where we discussed the Small Business Act - that is the working title - where we want to address all the issues connected with SMEs in an organised way .
I would also like to mention that , although today we are deciding about financial participation from the Community side , in fact this has already begun , and more than 200 have applied for the first call , which is an important success .
Finally , I should like to mention that I am extremely glad that Luxembourg has decided to join .
There is definitely no problem in substance .
We should all do our best to make its accession to the programme as quick as possible .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Potočnik , ladies and gentlemen , in summary we can say that we have again set ourselves an objective here that focuses on the Lisbon Agenda .
Implementation of research results in the short-term will , we hope , create new jobs and lead to higher net wages .
Of course , an essential feature of innovation is that new products are offered , and thus also success is achieved on the market .
I am also pleased that , together with the European Investment Bank , we have succeeded in providing an additional instrument for risk sharing , and that these sums can therefore be spread significantly further .
We have also devised an evaluation in order to see whether the funds are actually being claimed and check that the European Parliament is not having to make cutbacks again on account of the funds not being completely exhausted in the previous year , as happens with other programmes .
I believe this programme can ensure that the funds are exhausted , and I would ask my fellow Members to ensure in the Member States , too , that cofinancing works as intended .
It is in the interest of all of us that the take-up of this programme be good . I believe that it should also be communicated accordingly .
I would also ask Commissioner Potočnik to arrange with Commission Vice-President Wallström for this programme to be presented to the public as exemplary : this is part of the process .
I should like once again to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency : this is a product and a project that is really worth showing off .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) Commissioner Potočnik , talking about the role of SMEs is the done thing in this House .
Indeed , small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the EU economy .
In Germany alone , almost 20 million people are working , researching and developing in more than 3.3 million small and medium-sized enterprises .
Whether Europe grows or stagnates mainly depends on them .
Small and medium-sized enterprises produce more patents , innovations and jobs than the large conglomerates . Yet the SMEs continue to have too little access to loans and funding programmes .
Eurostars is a good example of how things work .
Unlike the Seventh Framework Programme , which is based on a top-down approach with central funding by the EU , Eureka and Eurostars are bottom-up approaches .
The programmes are managed by the Eureka Initiative .
This is a good thing , and could also perhaps be a model for our Seventh Framework Programme .
The advantages of the Eurostars programme are as follows :
• research-intensive SME required in leadership role
• eligibility checking and evaluation by international experts
• harmonised invitations to tender and workflows in all Member States
• fast decision making regarding funding : 14 weeks after the cut-off date
• the Commission awards additional top-up
• funding exclusively in the form of non-repayable grants ( cash allowance )
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly on his work .
I wish the programme every success .
in writing . - ( SK ) By voting for Paul Rübig 's report , the European Parliament is sending a clear signal to small and medium-sized enterprises in the Member States .
Small and medium-sized enterprises can often be effective participants in research and development but they have to put up with less favourable conditions than those that apply to large international corporations .
From now on , SME associations performing research and development can avail of financial support from Europe and operate within a European network together with other small and medium-sized enterprises .
Slovak SMEs will thus be able to contribute their knowledge and capacities to the European research and development sector .
In Slovakia many small and medium-sized enterprises are located in rural areas with less developed infrastructure , which hampers their development .
Many women are employed in research and development performing SMEs , whether directly or indirectly .
European funds are useful because they give SMEs a start , thus allowing their professional capacities to serve the common interest .
The Eurostars programme is a programme for researching and developing new products and services at European Union level .
SMEs play a key role in Eurostars projects .
It is a real pity that the Slovak Republic , an EU Member State , does not participate in this programme .
Slovakia 's small and medium-sized enterprises consequently have no access to the significant financial support available for the effective development of new products , techniques and services .
Research Fund for Coal and Steel ( debate )
The next item is the report by Adam Gierek , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision on the multiannual technical guidelines for the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel - C6-0248 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first and foremost , I wish to express my gratitude to the European Parliament , and particularly to the rapporteur , Mr Gierek , for the interest and support shown regarding the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
Let me also thank the chairwoman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Ms Niebler , and the shadow rapporteurs , Ms Laperrouze and Mr Březina , for their constructive help .
I understand that the request for a debate was made by a number of members of the ITRE Committee . I am therefore more than happy to summarise what is at stake .
In 2002 , a protocol annexed to the Treaty of Nice created the Research Fund for Coal and Steel , a smart financial design using the interest accrued from the assets made available at the expiry of the European Coal and Steel Treaty .
Activities under that Treaty were funded through a levy paid by the coal and steel industries , 27.2 % and 72.8 % of the budget being respectively allocated to coal and steel .
Through a bottom-up approach , this Research Fund is intended exclusively to fund research projects in the sectors related to the coal and steel industries , two major traditional sectors where research is still needed : firstly , to comply with current EU policies on environmental standards to combat global climate change and , secondly , to maintain energy security of supply by having a fuel mix that meets European demand .
The essential principles and proper decision-making procedures related to the management of this fund are defined in the multiannual technical guidelines for the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
These technical guidelines are to be reviewed or supplemented every five years , the first period ending on 31 December 2007 .
On 10 July 2007 , the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council decision on the revision of these technical guidelines .
This proposed revision looked to further the positive results achieved during the first five years of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel research programme , notably in terms of environmental protection .
In the Commission 's view , no major overhaul was needed , but rather a fine tuning of the existing rules in order to adapt the guidelines to EU enlargement , to the Seventh Framework Programme and to current European regulations , notably in terms of gender balance and financial management policies .
This proposal for a Council decision was sent to the European Parliament for consultation , and this is the reason why we are here today .
I would like to express my appreciation of the fact that Mr Gierek 's report by and large supports the Commission 's proposal .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Commission 's decision regarding the continued functioning of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel should be received with satisfaction .
This fund arose as a payment of 72.8 % made by the steel industry and 27.2 % made by the coal industry following the expiry of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty .
The interest from this Fund amounts to around EUR 60 million a year , which makes it possible to provide top-up subsidies for research that does not come under the 7th Framework Programme .
This concerns essential research for rationalisation of the functioning of both the iron and steel industry and coal mining , as well as research leading to further improvements in finished product quality in this industry , that is to say coal and steel .
The need for such research activities is particularly relevant to these industries in the new countries of the European Union .
Steel .
Steel is still the most important construction material .
The technological potential to raise the quality of various grades of steel and improvements in the efficiency of steel production are still far from exhausted , particularly where new technologies for the production of intermediate products for subsequent machining are concerned .
Increased reliability of steel structures and increased operating efficiency of various items of machinery and equipment require considerable volumes of empirical research in this sphere .
This also applies to improvements in chemical composition , and to improvements in the functional properties of various steel grades .
Work on an effective and environmentally sound method of recycling scrap , e.g. steel from problematic galvanised automobile industry scrap , is also of exceptional importance .
Coal .
Coal means energy security .
The competitiveness of this solid fuel , the definition of which , according to the proposal made in this regulation , is to be expanded for practical purposes to include bitumen shales , also known as oil shales , which are mined in Estonia , depends on efficient utilisation of its regional reserves .
The specific problems of coal mining depend to a large extent on local geological conditions and require routine surveying work .
These studies should precede the construction and operation of , for example , deep coking coal mines with a methane problem .
Coal utilisation can also include the non-conventional method of its underground gasification .
The continued proper functioning of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel requires that each advisory group include in its make-up experts able to guarantee optimal representation from the aspect of the location of the coal and steel industry in the European Union , with particular regard to experts from the new European Union countries .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( CS ) After a period of five years , in accordance with the Council guidelines , the European Commission reviewed the operation of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
This Fund manages the assets of the now expired European Coal and Steel Community and invests the interest generated by the capital in coal and steel research .
I welcome the fact that the Commission 's proposal consistently reflects the changes that have taken place over the last five years , takes account of the provisions laid down in the Accession Treaties at the time of 2004 enlargement of the EU ( one specific example already mentioned is Estonia 's Treaty of Accession ) , incorporates the fact that the definition of the term ' coal ' is now broader , and focuses in particular on job protection and on effective use of materials and energy resources in production and manufacturing industries .
The provisions dealing with amendments to the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development and to those areas that the Seventh Framework Programme does not cover in detail are also an important part of the proposal .
In addition to the Commission 's proposal itself , I would like to praise the work of the rapporteur , Adam Gierek , and his report .
The results of the vote in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which adopted all the substantive amendments , are a testament to the excellent groundwork and sensible approach to further investment in science and research in the area of coal and steel , two raw materials for energy and production that are currently irreplaceable .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask my colleagues to reject unambiguously the proposals by certain groups aimed at undermining the importance of coal and steel and conventional energy sources in general , or , as the case may be , the importance of the future of this Fund , which has proved to be irreplaceable in terms of financing research .
Coal and steel are among the most important raw materials for energy and manufacturing that have developed significantly in recent years .
The report should thus take into account , for example , the geographical location of reserves : this will contribute towards more effective energy use and better energy security in the European Union as a whole .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) The Research Fund for Coal and Steel was established after the expiration of the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community , the first treaty upon the foundation of the European Union .
Europe possesses important coal deposits , but we need to invest in new , cleaner processing solutions .
Steel is a product still used by many industrial sectors , but research is necessary in this sector as well in order to identify cleaner and more efficient solutions from the energy point of view .
The importance of this research is even greater since the two sectors entail a large number of jobs that must be kept and whose working conditions need to be improved .
This research should also result in better working conditions for the employees of the two sectors .
In Romania , approximately 34 million tons of coal are extracted every year and approximately 8 million tons of steel are produced .

In these two industrial sectors , the number of directly or indirectly employed people is several hundred thousand .
This is why I believe this document is extremely important .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , research efforts in the steel sector are necessary to protect the European steel industry and therefore the European economy .
However , my approach to the coal industry is more guarded .
James Hansen , climatologist and research director of NASA 's Goddard Institute for Space Studies , recently declared that the scale of climate change had been underestimated but that we have various tools at our disposal , one of which is the closure of all coal-fired power stations by 2030 .
One gas-fired power station emits between 300 and 400 kilograms of CO2 per megawatt-hour , a latest generation coal-fired power station emits 800 kilograms and a power station running on lignite emits 1 000 kilograms of CO2 .
How consistent is the European Union being if , on the one hand , it is developing an ambitious plan to combat and adapt to climate change and , on the other , it is supporting coal as a clean energy source ?
Humanity has gone from the wood age to the coal age , then to the oil age .
Today , Parliament has the choice of supporting a return to the coal age or being consistent with the climate package and therefore not establishing coal as a clean energy source .
For this reason my Group intends to support some of the amendments by the Verts .
In conclusion , allow me to give you a wonderful quote from Alphonse Karr : ' A lover is almost always a man who , having found a glowing coal , puts it in his pocket believing it to be a diamond . '
Love is indeed passion .
For energy , let us opt for reason instead .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those people who championed the irrelevant amendments in committee .
Yet in line with what Mrs Laperrouze said about coal , it is not at all clear to me why the Commission should stipulate subsidising coal ad infinitum , as it were .
Coal has been subsidised to an unbelievable extent for 50 years , and continuing this is contrary to all the EU 's statements on climate policy .
We believe that , on the contrary , these coal subsidies should be replaced with more consistent support for renewable energies and energy efficiency .
Otherwise Europe will not be in a position to meet its targets on climate policy .
Steel is another story .
Yet the Commission has omitted to make it clear that steel continues to be subsidised and coal does not .
In my opinion sufficient provision has already been made for coal , a dirty energy source , in the Seventh Framework Research Programme .
( NL ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , coal and steel were central at the start of the European Union , and still are , albeit as part of a completely different agenda involving globalisation , climate change and energy issues .
It is ' all hands on deck ' , as it were ; the input of this fund , however small , contributes to the technological revolution necessary to keep the steel sector competitive and to make coal a clean fuel , a clean raw material : ' clean coal ' .
The European Commission has also opted for this , on the eve of our pilot projects to achieve carbon capture and storage , for example as a technological innovation .
I am emphatically in favour of this .
I am not in favour of closing ; I am in favour of keeping open .
For example , NUON , a Dutch electricity company , is envisaging in Groningen a coal gasifier involving complete capture etc .
This kind of project requires support and more resources than are currently on the table .
More important - as Commissioner Potočnik knows - is my plea for a better combination of funds , Structural Funds , input from the European Investment Bank , etc .
More matching , bundling , is required to enable major research into infrastructure and investment .
The existing rule ' one fund , one project ' is a definite hindrance .
We must also tinker with these rules , and fortunately the European Commission is already testing the boundaries in this regard .
On 5 and 6 March we spoke in Brdo , Slovenia , about more focus and bundling of European projects .
This summer , the Commission will be presenting a new profile for the Esprit programme , to achieve more targeted investment .
This is what we want to hear about , not the phasing-out of coal .
That is indeed the wrong course to take .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Gierek on his report .
Ladies and gentlemen , a research programme that manages its own resources outside the Seventh Framework Programme and that has an annual budget of EUR 60 million cannot but be well received and supported by Parliament , especially taking into account that steel is still used a great deal in various sectors of industry and that there are still many scientific and technological challenges to overcome in order to make production processes cleaner and more efficient .
With regard to coal , the challenges are even greater due to its implications for energy production and for achieving our objectives for combating climate change .
Making coal more competitive in the energy market , improving the safety and operating capacity of the mines and achieving cleaner combustion requires R & D , and the new technologies for capturing and storing CO2 are an area of research that the European Union has clearly backed .
I therefore fully agree with the content of this report .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his sensitivity to gender equality by proposing measures to achieve a greater presence of , and participation by , women in a sector in which men are still in the majority .
( RO ) Starting from the immediate political priorities of the European Union , I would like to emphasize some budgetary aspects of this report .
The Commission 's proposal refers to the Green Paper on energy and the objective specified in it to increase the use of coal as an important source of energy , by using clean technologies , of reducing and storing carbon dioxide .
The actions that could receive European financing from the Research Fund for Coal and Steel include pilot projects and projects demonstrating the latest technologies in this field .
The problem is the extremely low budget allocated to this fund : 57 million euros every year .
It is difficult for me to imagine how this amount could cover a significant number of projects throughout the territory of the European Union .
I remind you that more than one quarter of the European Union countries continue to meet their energy needs by using coal as the main source .
From this point of view , I believe greater financial involvement from the European Union is necessary in this sector , both by way of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel , and by the programmes of the Seventh Framework Programme .
Mr President , I did not intend to contribute , but I feel compelled to on the issue of clean coal technology .
The importance of clean coal technology is absolutely essential , and the question which needs to be asked is : what can the EU do , as the previous speaker just said , to support new technologies , including clean coal technology ?
The advancement of clean coal technology is essential to our fulfilling our climate change targets , and there is such an urgency with this .
The urgency can only be addressed by us working together across the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am particularly pleased that today the European Parliament is already discussing the second research project .
I believe that steel research , in particular , is particularly important , especially in the face of climate change , because we are naturally striving to make production as efficient as possible and to make efficiency criteria an essential component of consumption .
I should therefore like to reiterate my particular congratulations to the rapporteur on this report , and I can say that today is a real day for research .

( RO ) My speech starts from a few aspects : first of all , I am glad that coal and steel return , even if not very often , to the Parliament 's agenda .
I believe Europe 's economic power relies on having the best steel at the lowest costs , therefore the results coming from common research should be shared at the Community level .
In many European countries , there are regions that depend mostly on coal and steel production .
The conversion of the labour force employed in coal and steel production is still unsolved and , unfortunately , the regions in question have entered the category of regions with problems in the standard of living and need cohesion programmes .
At the end , I ask myself rhetorically if Europe will stop buying coal and steel from outside the Community if it does not want to align with the European Union environmental protection programme .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I appreciate the comments which support the proposal as much as I appreciate also the comments which called for a view of how we will approach energy and climate change solutions in the future .
I must make it clear that today we are talking about additional funding for R & D based on an existing fund , based on a protocol - to be more precise , we talk about the technical guidelines .
I believe that it is better that this money is used for research and development rather than for anything else , because it is true that in energy and climate change there is no room for complacency .
CCS is one of the activities which will also be addressed , but it is far from being the real answer .
So the real questions , and the real debate about the issues which you opened today , will come when we discuss the strategy for the energy technology plan - how to approach this , how to act in the future , and how to find the right answers .
In this respect , it will be extremely important that we are aware that ' business as usual ' is not an option .
We lack human resources and we lack funding .
The Framework Programme is only partially a solution for that .
We will have to address that issue seriously because we need to look at it both from a short-term point of view , looking for possible solutions to fill the gap where the need is urgent , and at the same time for long-term solutions .
Such solutions are very much needed and we must concentrate on renewables from today onwards .
So I think that will be when we have to discuss that .
Do not forget that the financing of energy in 1980 was approximately four times higher in Europe than it is today .
So approaching these problems as though business as usual could continue would be another illusion .
Do not make that mistake .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am perhaps taking up just one issue that has been raised here today , namely the view that mines should be closed as soon as possible for environmental reasons .
I think that energy security , for example in my country , in the Czech Republic and in many other EU countries , is not consistent with this view , and this view is not generally accepted .
Quite the contrary , in fact : if only because of new technologies that are being developed , such as ' clean coal ' and ' CCS ' , we shall probably be opening new mines in the future .
Coal will continue to be an important and competitive source of energy in Europe for some time to come .
We must also not forget - and here I am addressing those who would like to close all mines - that coal is not only an important raw material for energy , but also a chemical raw material .
Firstly , then , the Research Fund for Coal and Steel is necessary .
Secondly , this Fund is not met by the 7th Framework Programme , as it deals with an entirely different sphere of action .
Thirdly , a rise in qualified costs from 40 % to 50 % is indicated .
Fourthly , failure to include bitumen shales in the Research Fund for Coal and Steel programme - and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance also put forward a proposal of this nature for these amendments - would have been injurious to Estonia , whose power generation is chiefly based on this fuel .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) In Poland , 95 % of electricity comes from coal-fired power stations .
Consequently Poland is particularly interested in new technologies for coal utilisation that improve efficiency in power stations , reduce CO2 emissions and enable coal to be converted into hydrocarbon fuels with restricted CO2 emissions .
New technologies open up the possibility of utilising nuclear reactors as emission-free heat sources to achieve the stated aims of the coal industry .
In order to implement the synergy between coal and nuclear energy , however , we need high-temperature reactors ( HTRs ) .
In Europe , research into high-temperature reactors has been going on for some years now .
Unfortunately there is not a single European research centre working on HTRs that might have the goal of introducing a coal-nuclear synergy programme .
Such a centre would enhance Europe technologically , including the coal industry .
It could also do much to support the acceptance of nuclear power in Europe through direct cooperation with the coal industry , striving to modernise it and not competing with it .
Bearing in mind the importance of coal in the Polish energy sector , it would appear to make sense to set up such a European centre in Poland .
Without decisive action , we shall lose the technology race in this sphere against the United States , South Africa , China and South Korea .
I call upon the Commission to consider the need to establish such a centre as part of long-term technical guidelines relating to the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
in writing . - ( ET ) Under the Protocol to the Nice Treaty on the expiry of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty and on the Research Fund for Coal and Steel all assets of the ECSC were placed at the disposal of the European Commission in 2002 .
The revenue from these assets is to be used for research in the sectors related to the coal and steel industry .
The Council has adopted two regulations to improve implementation of the research programme : a financial regulation and a technical regulation .
The Gierek report concerns the latter .
Under the Treaty of Accession of Estonia to the EU , oil shales were given the status of coal .
As a result , the European Commission proposed that the Council should make the technical guidelines for the research programme on coal and steel consistent with the Treaty and included oil shales in the definition of coal under the technical guidelines .
As a result , Estonian research into oil shales is eligible to apply for funding under the research programme on the same basis as coal .
The Polish rapporteur , Adam Gierek , has proposed replacing ' oil shales ' in the definition with ' bitumen shales ' , on the ground that the term ' bitumen shales ' also covers ' oil shales ' .
In fact , the opposite is true : ' oil shales ' is a broader term than ' bitumen shales ' .
The Greens have made a proposal to remove oil shales from the definition of coal completely .
Once again I draw your attention to the fact that when it acceded to the EU , Estonia agreed that oil shales were to have the status of coal and therefore the basis of funding for the oil shales research programme must be the same as that of the research fund for coal and steel .
in writing . - I was Parliamentary rapporteur when discharge was being granted for the last time in respect of the European Coal and Steel Community 's activities .
The funds in the expired Community were accumulated from the coal and steel industries , and so it is only fair that any money left over should go on research in these sectors and not be used to cover research in the oil industry .
Research and research institutions are needed if we are to use emission-free or ' clean ' coal .
This includes carbon capture and storage ( CSS ) , although there is not enough money in this fund to finance this , despite the huge need .
It is interesting that today by chance Shell happened to call for public funding , meaning EU funding , for this .
Mr Gierek , as rapporteur , is clearly tending to promote the use of coal in energy production , and he represents the best interests of his country in this .
Moreover , it is not forbidden in the EU , but there is still a long way to go before we have clean coal .
Cultural industries in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Guy Bono , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on cultural industries in Europe .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , the report I am presenting follows on from the request made by Mrs Trüpel - who is here today and whom I welcome - and I , at the time of the 2007 Culture report three years ago , for greater recognition of the cultural industries , which I recall are now larger than the automotive industry in the European Union , accounting for 3.1 % of the active population of the European Union and generating 2.6 % of GDP .
I have therefore prepared this report by consulting as much as possible with all those involved in the sector .
Consequently I would like to thank all the experts and professionals from the industry , as well as web user and consumer associations and finally my colleagues in the Committee on Culture for all the discussions we have been able to hold on these crucial issues .
This report is based on the following postulate : culture and the economy have today become inseparable .
The economy needs culture and culture needs the economy .
In view of this , culture urgently needs to be restored to its rightful place on the Lisbon agenda .
With this in mind , I make a number of proposals in this report .
The first would be to set up a task force to explore the relationship between culture , creativity and innovation in the context of Community policies .
Secondly , it is essential make more room in our Community funding for the cultural industries .
In this report , at the level of the Member States I recommend private / public funding as well as the promotion of a regulatory and fiscal framework that favours cultural industries , and more specifically the application of tax credits and reduced rates of VAT to all cultural products , including online works .
I also call upon the Commission to look into the possibility of setting up a programme similar to the MEDIA programme for all the cultural industries .
Thirdly , this report proposes that culture be better incorporated into the European Union 's external policies because - and I want to stress this - what makes Europe so rich is its culture or rather , as I should have said , the diversity of its culture .
I therefore invite the Commission and the Member States to increase the amount of aid for translation .
Finally , if you will allow me Mr President , I would like to return to the issue of intellectual property rights , which are the subject of a great number of amendments in this report .
On this subject , I strongly oppose the position of some Member States whose repressive measures are dictated by industries incapable of changing their economic model in line with the needs imposed by the information society .
Cutting off internet access is a disproportionate measure in view of the objectives .
This is a penalty with powerful effects , which could have serious repercussions in a society where internet access is essential for social inclusion .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think we need to make a distinction between mass piracy and consumers acting without a profit motive .
Rather than criminalising consumers , we need to set up new economic models that strike a balance between the ability to access cultural activities and content , cultural diversity and genuine remuneration for those who hold intellectual property rights .
It seems to me that this is the only way cultural Europe can truly enter the 21st century .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am happy to be here for the debate on Mr Bono 's report and I should like to thank him for his contribution and the committee for its work .
I am sure , as he said , that culture is important to our lives and it is more and more central to the future of the European Union .
I would like to add that it defines our Community much more than business or geography .
We also need to understand that culture makes a contribution ; culture creates ; culture is something positive , not consuming our budgets or conflicting with our needs but bringing a lot of enrichment , including jobs and growth .
This was the first time that the European Union was able to explicitly recognise last year 's summit conclusions , in the study we presented some time ago , and now in the cultural agenda for the European Union at a time of globalisation .
I would like to underline just three specific ideas or items from your report , because there are many and I will not comment on all of them .
First , you ask us to establish a European vision of culture , creativity and innovation .
The European agenda we have now agreed does exactly that .
We are strengthening the cooperation between Member States , including the promotion of creative industries .
This is one of three pillars .
Part of that work will need to look at how to measure more accurately the contribution these industries make to the economy and how best to support them .
Second , you ask us to look at the external dimension .
This is one of the three priorities of the agenda and we are very active now in encouraging our partners , our Member States , to ratify the UNESCO Convention - because not all Member States and also other countries in the world have done so - and also in ensuring its implementation .
And we are increasingly including cultural elements both in our development cooperation and in our bilateral relations with emerging economies .
Third , I agree with you that full attention has to be paid to implementing Article 151 fully in EU policies .
I have established really good contacts and cooperation with my colleagues , including Commissioner McCreevy on the internal market , on the various aspects of copyright protection .
I am confident that , with the help of all of you , we will achieve the objectives laid down in this Treaty article .
You also mention the mobility of artists and cultural workers , which is very high on our agenda , especially this year .
Member States have already constituted a working group on this topic and the Commission is implementing the pilot action on the mobility of artists proposed by this Parliament last year .
The Commission will support all these efforts , in particular with a study to better understand the links between culture , creativity and innovation , as well as another study on how to have an environment conducive to the development of creative and cultural industries , including support for small and medium-sized enterprises and risk-taking .
The results of these initiatives will feed into a Green Paper on cultural and creative industries , which the Commission plans to publish in 2009 .
I am looking forward to the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , new technologies are gaining ever greater weight in Europe 's cultural industry .
Particular attention must therefore be given to protecting intellectual property .
The task of the European Union , and of the Member States , should be to provide the necessary resources to ensure that intellectual property rights are respected and protected .
Combating piracy is particularly important in this regard .
All those involved should be aware of their rights and obligations regarding a common solution to this task .
In its report , our committee has argued in favour of awareness-raising and education campaigns , particularly with regard to consumers .
Preparatory and education measures explaining the value of intellectual property should start among young people in schools .
In this context I should like to emphasise once again the committee 's opinion that criminalising consumers who are not seeking to make a profit is not the right solution to combating digital piracy .
We have repeatedly emphasised that free information structures such as the World Wide Web are of great significance to the European creative sector and that we have to strike a balance between the openness of the Internet and the protection of intellectual property .
In this context , Mr President , allow me one final comment on the revised version of Amendment 22a tabled by 40 Members .
My group - the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - has clearly stated that it is prepared to support the first part of the amendment , and to emphatically reject the second part of this amendment .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , at a time when traditional economic sectors and industries are suffering from a significant downturn , and the pressures of globalisation are putting European businesses at a significant competitive disadvantage , the sector of cultural industries is one of the few to offer considerable possibilities for multi-faceted economic , regional , social and cultural development .
At this stage , over and above Article 157 of the Treaty and the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions , Europe must aim at an appropriate balance to help businesses , agencies , production and services in this sector to be fully competitive .
At the same time , Europe must not put its distinct cross-cultural nature at risk or endanger diversity .
For this reason , Commissioner , during the coming year , which is the European Year of Creativity and Innovation , as you have said yourself , I think that it is the right time for the EU to turn actively towards the cultural industries .
We must get away from the perception that they are a luxury , but make specific policies to boost investment in this sector .
Madam President , we fully support Mr Bono 's report , which I think will also be seriously examined by Commissioner Figeľ , so that he can discuss and continue his creative work .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , we often encounter cases where the role and significance of culture are neglected .
Business gets noticed , but culture is seen as something incidental , a sort of add-on .
Not only is the cultural significance of culture underrated , but also its economic and social significance .
Thanks to this report , we are presented with a different image of culture .
Let us please just look at the numbers .
The European Union has at its disposal 1 % of the GDP of all Member States , while the culture industry alone provides 2.6 % of GDP and over 3 % of employment , so this is a very important problem .
These data are incomplete , though .
We know that they do not include the role and significance of crafts , handicrafts and artistic work , and they also fail to include numerous areas that are influenced by culture .
I therefore consider this report to be a very important one , and we should continue this work and get involved , and support Commissioner Figel ' , because he has adopted a very good course - one which offers everyone an opportunity .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rigid debate between the concept of culture as purely an end in itself on the one hand and the total ' marketisation ' of culture on the other is forced open by the Bono report .
We are emphasising the significance of the creative industries as part of the Lisbon Strategy for economic growth without at the same time subjecting cultural policy to purely economic constraints .
The creative and cultural industries are seen as independent economic sectors , and they have been the driving force for jobs in Europe in recent years .
In Germany , for example , they are creating more jobs than the car industry , and the European Union and the Member States must orient their policy accordingly .
There is a great deal still to do in this regard .
I should also like to emphasise once again - in the face of all the complicated arguments surrounding copyright - that the appropriate political rules still have to be found for the products of intellectual property in the digital world , to ensure open access to the Internet for private end-users on the one hand and create new income opportunities for artists who produce creative content on the other .

Mr President , Mr Bono 's report is an excellent document which we support .
I shall be brief and restrict my remarks to the question of copyright .
In the pre-digital world purchases of books and records could be regarded as a reflection of normal consumer trends .
Photocopiers and cassette recorders dealt a blow to authors ' remuneration and yet purchase continued to be the rule .
With the digital world comes a paradigm shift .
The Internet means that the sharing and free circulation of ideas , information and works have cast off their old physical restraints .
In this world payment is a thing of the past .
The free circulation of works is culture 's natural habitat .
We combat piracy for profit , but we are completely opposed to criminalising consumers .
We still need some constraints and blocks in the digital world because we have not yet discovered another way of providing authors with suitable remuneration ; but those days are numbered .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , Europe has a rich and diverse cultural heritage and one which enriches our lives , not just aesthetically but economically .
The sector contributes 2.6 % of the EU 's GDP , as has been said .
It shows higher growth than the economy in general and over five million people are employed in it .
These are three very clear reasons why the Commission should keep its hands well away , unless we want to see culture go the same way as fishing and agriculture .
However , the trading deficit in motion pictures alone between the EU and the United States grows year on year as European audiences choose American , rather than European , products .
That deficit , according to the latest figures , was GBP 7.2 billion in one year alone .
Free from the restraint placed on them by reliance on state funding , the six major US motion picture companies turned over USD 42.6 billion in 2006 , whilst , according to a report by the European Audiovisual Observatory , the overall situation of the European film industry is deteriorating .
That is because subsidies and legislation do not inspire artists - they breed bureaucrats and parasites .
( SV ) The possibilities for culture have changed radically with the emergence and spread of the Internet .
In my opinion , these developments have been almost exclusively positive .
Culture has been vitalised , democratised and disseminated widely .
Despite this , much of the European debate currently focuses on problems which the Internet is claimed to create for those engaging in cultural activities .
That is unfortunate .
That is not to say that there are no challenges to culture .
Copyright infringements and illegal file sharing are examples of such challenges .
Large parts of this report also focus on these problems .
Many proposals are currently circulating in Europe on how we are to deal with these issues .
Unfortunately , in many cases little attention is devoted to our fundamental freedoms and rights as citizens .
For example , perhaps the most controversial of these proposals right now seeks to ban those who have committed copyright infringement from accessing the Internet .
I should like to take this opportunity of urging my colleagues to support the amendment which I have tabled to this report .
Briefly , my proposal emphasises the positive role which the Internet has played in culture and democracy , but it also rejects the idea of banning individual citizens from access to the Internet .
Copyright infringements and file sharing must be combated by sanctions which are proportionate and which respect fundamental rights and freedoms .
Forbidding individuals to access the Internet is in my opinion a gross violation of freedom of expression and information and is anything but proportionate .
The Internet is more than just a copying machine or a channel for the illegal dissemination of films or music .
It is an arena for free speech , information and communication .
For my younger brother , the Internet is as natural as watching television or chatting in the school playground at break time .
And are we going to impose similar restrictions when a copyright is infringed in other ways ?
It was not so long ago that I was at university and there , unfortunately , many students illegally copied their course literature , but to punish them by forbidding them to read books or write articles would clearly be unreasonable .
Someone who has shoplifted food is not forbidden to buy milk and someone who has stolen a bicycle is not forbidden to use the street .
So let us not do anything so silly as regards other offences just because they have been committed on the Internet . Thank you .
( ES ) Thank you , Madam President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bono , on this report on cultural industries , which covers a wide range of questions that he has sought to answer .
I would like to comment briefly on one aspect that I consider to be a priority : in the information , communication and digital technology society new forms of production and distribution are constantly emerging that mean new opportunities for producers , creators , artists and consumers .
In this new context it is essential to find new , balanced formulas that combine respect for the rights of creators with citizens ' access to these cultural assets .
In addition , cultural industries and creators , including SMEs , due to their dual cultural and economic roles , contribute both to promoting cultural diversity and to creating new jobs and possibilities for economic development and , given that they are part of one of the most dynamic sectors our economy , aid for the creative sector should be seen as an investment .
Therefore , promoting lifelong learning that fosters creative talent and the phenomenon of synergies between businesses in the sector and schools should be a priority in European policies .
( PL ) Madam President , may I offer my congratulations on this important report on culture .
The statement that , if he had to start all over again , he would start with culture , is attributed to Jean Monet .
The written history of Europe goes back two and a half thousand years , and how rich and various is its content .
Culture is a significant component of the development of our civilisation .
Action favouring the industry that is linked to culture should be supported .
It would be a good thing if funds could be found for the development of a network of modern libraries in Poland , with thought for people who cannot afford to buy books .
There are still districts in Warsaw where there are no proper academic reading rooms .
There is no working inter-library exchange system .
Young people have to go into the city centre to access scientific works .
The library system in the United States might serve as a model .
Funds are needed for the development of local libraries that would provide access to the necessary materials , thus enabling people to educate themselves .
I do not fully agree with Recital T of the report . National identity and language are at the root of creativity .
Modern European culture only began when Dante and Petrarch began writing in Italian .
The reason for the development of European civilisation has always been the spread of human individuality , its spiritual progress and the fact that peoples have made use of this to enrich the content of their own collective life .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , culture is a particularly strong and economic factor for us all , and we have seen that it generates multi-billion amounts in Europe , that millions of employees have a part in it and that many small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , are active in this field and are becoming very creatively and passionately active in the population .
It is important to me that these cultural driving forces have optimum access to the new digital and audiovisual formats .
It is important to be able to introduce oneself to the relevant audience , and to devise new products in lifelong learning , in particular , as it is precisely these new and innovative means that are developing and promoting creative talents appropriately .

Madam President , I would very much like to thank Mr Bono for this report , which highlights the important role of the creative and cultural industries and , particularly , the increasing part they play in our economy .
As most of you know , I represent London , which is , of course , one of the creative hubs of Europe .
Because of that , I am very aware indeed of the benefits that creative industries can bring to a locality .
London is diverse in culture and thriving in its creativity and , as the cultural industries represent a significant sector of London 's economy , I very much welcome the recommendations to support their sustainability and growth .
But , having said that , there is one matter of great concern , which has already been alluded to in discussions on another report this evening .
That is that , while there are a huge number of employees within the industry who are women , there are not very many women in higher positions in the creative industries , and I very much hope that we will be able to address this in future deliberations .

( PL ) Madam President , the draft resolution draws attention to the link between a flourishing cultural industry and the cross-frontier mobility of artists ; it urges the Commission to issue a Green Paper on the internal market for creators of products and services , which will provide an opportunity to compare achievements in this sphere .
The report emphasises the role of culture in Community politics , and also the role of cultural education in the development of personality and a sense of identity .
Creativity , and involvement in the creation of added value , are what determine the important economic role of the cultural industry .
Its actual contribution to economic development , especially in the music and publishing sector , is many times in excess of expenditure on the development of culture .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
( CS ) Cultural industries are key providers of value-added services , which are the basis of a dynamic , knowledge-based economy .
They are an important source of job creation in creative areas that contribute significantly to a more competitive European Union .
The calls to support cultural and creative industries through better qualification , education and training systems , in particular by seeking to provide students at all levels of education in cultural and artistic disciplines with professional training , reflect this situation .
I support the calls to the Member States to include entrepreneurship studies in national secondary and higher education programmes , particularly in the fields of humanities , arts and culture .
Further progress is also needed in the area of the mutual recognition of diplomas in art studies .
I , too , would ask the Commission to take greater account of the special nature of the cultural sector in all policies relating to the internal market , competition , trade , business , and research and development .
( DE ) Madam President , I should just like to rule out any misunderstandings once and for all .
This report is not about barring anyone in any way from access to the Internet .
The Committee on Culture and Education has unanimously rejected this .
It is about achieving a balanced relationship between open access to the Internet and the protection of intellectual property , and here we do indeed still have a large number of tasks to resolve and instruments to find that take account of both objectives .
I should therefore like to specifically ask for this approach to be followed in the votes , too .
Madam President , I appreciate this report , but I would like to make some remarks .
The topic of the cultural industries is closely connected to the topic of the economic value of culture .
Culture is now referred to in terms of means towards economic growth , and many studies now emphasise the economic impact of cultural activities .
In this context , I recall the study The Economy of Culture in Europe made in 2006 by a private consultant , KEA European Affairs , that presents some impressive numbers for the cultural sector ; however , these numbers are debatable since MP3 players , mobile phones and publicity are also considered by this study as ' culture ' .
Therefore , we feel that focusing on such economic aspects may lead to confusion , and important things such as creativity or artistic potential may be put in second place if they do not turn out to be sufficiently profitable .
I am in favour of a cultural policy that supports cultural diversity , artistic creativity and the development of the artistic potential of individuals and communities : these are all guidelines that I think we should keep in mind for future action .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) I have listened to the debate with interest .
Of course , the report itself is very interesting and as the Chairwoman of the Committee , Mrs Batzeli , said , in many ways it also represents a stimulus for the Commission , for the Member States and for the world of culture and creative industries .
I think that the main theme or main goal is to get an overall picture , to make these stimuli a centre of attention and to create an environment that is favourable to creativity , innovation , culture itself and the status of culture in our society and our relations .
Allow me to say just a few words .
We cannot exist without the economy but it is culture that lends meaning to our relations and our identities , and that defines the values that unite us in the Community .
That is my answer to those who worry about everything being seen nowadays in economic terms and expressed in monetary values .
Culture is about more than money but it is important to see it as a creative asset , as something that creates jobs and helps to develop the economy .
The absence of culture in most cases results in the deterioration not only of the economy but also of politics and society .
The absence of culture therefore has many consequences .
That is why I am pleased to see broad support for creativity and innovation in the proposals concerning the European Commission 's proposal for 2009 .
The formal proposal itself is already in this Parliament and I hope that the legislative procedure will soon lead to its adoption and to preparations for the European Year of Creativity and Innovation .
In conclusion , I would just like to say a few words about fighting piracy .
I believe , like many of you here today , that we must achieve a balance between accessing culture and its accessibility , communication and cultural opportunities on the one hand , and protecting intellectual property rights on the other hand .
We must combat the abuse of intellectual property rights since this is often the reason why smaller and weaker enterprises collapse .
That is the position of the European Commission .
One way of dealing with this problem is through education : raising awareness of the importance of protecting intellectual property rights and not abusing freedoms .
The other method is to invite and organise all stakeholders or those who have responsibilities in this area , to get them to cooperate and contribute to the efforts to protect intellectual property rights while developing access to electronic networks in modern communications .
This is , after all , what we proposed for the first time in our recent proposal to reform the electronic communications networks and services ( Telecoms Package ) and it is also the European Commission 's attitude to the fight against piracy .
Of course , a lot has to be done by the Member States themselves .
That is all I wanted to say , thank you .
I look forward to further cooperation .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I think we should not forget what we are trying to achieve .
Despite what some subjective studies would have us believe , it is not the 13 % of Europeans downloading cultural content illegally who are threatening our culture , but it seems to me that it is the concentration of our culture in the hands of a few large groups that is damaging our diversity and therefore the richness of our cultural heritage .
I will only give you one example , that of records .
Today , 95 % of what is distributed comes from the four big record companies .
I believe it is important to ensure that consumers have genuine choice and it is necessary to guarantee pluralism of content in a very concentrated market where those chiefly responsible for innovation and creativity are small , not big .
You were talking about SMEs , Commissioner , recommending a study which I think is a really interesting idea .
The permission for a merger between Sony and BMG granted by the Commission totally contradicts the European policy to support SMEs in the music industry , which create more jobs than the large companies and represent 99 % of the market players and 80 % of innovation in this sector .
It seems , therefore , that there is an urgent need to support diversity in the cultural sector , which is a genuine driver of growth and a means of development for individuals .
In conclusion , I will say that it is the diversity of culture that makes it rich and not the other way around .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Culture and creativity play a central role in promoting European citizenship .
Both these items , culture and creativity , must be taken into consideration in future policies of the EU .
An analysis of the economy of culture in Europe was sponsored by the Commission and important data has emerged .
It transpires that culture taken in a general sense makes a substantial contribution to the economy indeed much more than originally estimated .
Five years ago it was assessed that the cultural sectors contributed 2.6 % of the EU GDP .
In 2004 3.1 % of the EU active population was working in this sector .
The relationship between cultural activities and the economy in Malta and Gozo can be assessed by a recent 2007 study made by the National Statistics Office involving a total of 5086 participants enrolled in 34 dance schools .
These dance schools employed 109 persons and generated a financial surplus of nearly 400 000 Euro .
Total income surpassed 1 million euros .
This is only one example proving the importance of cultural activities for the economy .
in writing . - My region , the West Midlands , is leading the way in developing creative industries , with more than one in ten now employed in the sector .
The region is one of the most multicultural regions in the UK and is proving that its competitive advantage in cultural diversity is becoming a source of creativity and innovation .
However , the EU must make a stronger commitment to supporting cultural industries by stimulating job creation in this area to counter the relocation of the EU 's traditional industries to emerging economies .
What is needed is joined-up action and greater financial assistance for business start-ups and SMEs in cultural industries through the Seventh Framework Programme , the Structural Funds and the EU Social Fund .
This will further harness the skills and talent of Europe 's entrepreneurs and workers , to ensure that the necessary skills are available to further develop the sector .
The EU must support creativity for more innovation and entrepreneurship .
In the European Year for Intercultural Dialogue , we should also recognise the importance of cultural industries in creating awareness and understanding of other cultures , and , therefore , their importance for social cohesion .
Similarly , Europe has a great deal to gain economically from its cultural diversity .
in writing . - ( FI ) I wish to thank the rapporteur for producing a report that deals so comprehensively with the multi-faceted nature of cultural industries and the main problem areas associated with them .
When pondering the status of cultural industries in European society , there are two basic principles that need to be remembered .
Firstly , we need to understand how important culture is for people 's quality of life .
Cultural products enhance wellbeing .
The Community recognises that Europeans have basic rights to education , which include people 's right to culture .
We are therefore talking about fundamental civil rights .
Secondly , we need to understand how important culture is for those who produce it .
For many the work is not just a passion - it is a livelihood .
Receiving appropriate payment for one 's work is a basic right .
It is up to the legislators to ensure that such people can work in an environment which is not detrimental to their rights .
There is no cultural output without its creators , and if they are not paid for the work they do , the result is a limit to cultural growth .
Legislation on cultural industries , such as the protection of intellectual property rights and neighbouring rights , therefore always has to strike the right balance between culture 's two social dimensions .
It requires special sensitivity on the part of the legislator .
It has to be recognised that cultural industries are a very special sector and therefore require a very special legal status .
The main challenge for cultural industries is obviously information technology .
They clearly benefit from developments in technology and the information market , but at the same time they need protection when new systems are being used .
We also need the Commission to deliver prompt measures to clarify the relationship between intellectual property and culture and the economy .
The main challenge is how we can guarantee fair and genuine remuneration for every right holder and each individual cultural industry for the work done , at the same time ensuring that consumers have choice and easy access to cultural products .
in writing . - As the production of material goods is increasingly mechanised and outsourced , more people in Europe engage their talents in producing cultural goods .
The KEA study commissioned by the European Commission significantly underestimates the contribution of cultural industries to our economy and society .
While only 3.1 % of the EU 's active population may be directly generating monetary value in the cultural area , their impact is noticeable almost in every aspect of our lives .
Pop culture carries cultural and social messages .
Musicians and actors were instrumental in releasing the green economy wave .
Music and film are powerful promoters of better understanding between people and of European values .
Cultural industries predominantly created the demand for new technologies , for digital platforms .
Therefore , it is vital that the European cultural industries remain viable .
First of all , we must ensure that creative people are able to sustain themselves by their creativity .
This means that we must enable the creators to distribute their work as widely as possible , without any fear of abuse from the middlemen or the consumers .
I continue to see this as the leading motive of this report , for which I thank the rapporteur and my colleagues who contributed their thoughts .
Culture in a globalising world ( debate )
The next item is the report by Vasco Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on a European agenda for culture in a globalising world .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having proposed a general framework for cultural matters in the context of the Lisbon agenda , I decided to incorporate into my report the many proposals put forward by Members since they were in line with the general approach .
Therefore , if the report contains some points that might seem redundant when set against other instruments already approved in the meantime and in force , they serve to emphasise the topics thought to be the most relevant .
Recalling the main points of that framework , I would say that the European Union has a very special duty to safeguard Europe 's cultural richness .
The European cultural heritage , in all its dimensions , must , by every means , be preserved and disseminated both within and outside the Union , without denying the fact that it is wholly desirable to take as open an attitude as possible to every other culture , which has , moreover , always been the hallmark of Europe .
Our cultural heritage , encompassing its diverse forms of expression and the combination of its founding sources , such as , Graeco-Latin and Judaeo-Christian antiquity , has , over the course of history , placed Europe in the vanguard of all the continents .
It has proved to be an unrivalled driver of innovation , development and progress , which has spread in every direction , and today still constitutes an essential reference point for humanism , spiritual enrichment and enlivenment , democracy , tolerance , and citizenship .
In an increasingly globalised world , the outstanding specific qualities contained within the nucleus of Europe 's cultural richness constitute genuine European added value and their identity-giving role is vital for Europe and the Union in that it helps them to understand the world , bring about cohesion , emphasise their uniqueness , and assert themselves in relation to other peoples .
The particular ways in which the influence of European cultural heritage has over the course of history found expression in other continents must lead to special measures emphasising those factors which serve to build civilisation , mutual understanding and a constructive approach uniting the peoples represented .
We recommend the Council and the Commission should enhance the prestige of Europe 's classical heritage and the historic contributions of national cultures in all their dimensions down through the centuries , while also allowing for the needs of the culture sector in the future .
We therefore suggest that the year 2011 be considered ' European Year of the Greek and Latin Classics ' in order to make the peoples of the Union and the rest of the world more aware of this essential aspect of cultural heritage now in danger of being forgotten .
For the same reason we stress the need to develop the promotion of European languages in the world and their role in creative artistic activity in other continents , so as to facilitate both mutual knowledge and understanding and the cultural interaction generated and conveyed by those languages in their extra-European dimensions .
On the other hand , the existing Community programmes in the culture sector do not fully reflect the implications of Europeans ' common cultural heritage , which is why we need specific programmes in order to foster creativity and preserve the links , on a wider scale and at a deeper seated level , with the goods and values , both tangible and intangible , that constitute European cultural heritage and to enable those goods and values to interact according to the humanist conception of identities and differences and in present-day cultural works .
The programmes in the cultural sector will all do a great deal to foster cohesion , real convergence , economic growth , sustainable development , innovation , employment and competitiveness , but we should not forget that culture and cultural products have value in themselves ( culture qua culture ) .
We would remind the Council that the intended budgetary funding for the measures proposed in the Commission communication and those already in existence need to be reviewed immediately and as a matter of urgency .
Finally , since there is no time to mention any more points , I welcome the Commission 's communication and its approval by the Council .
We agree with the objectives set .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Graça Moura for his commitment , the Committee itself and all relevant contributors to this report .
I believe that it confirms that culture deserves a more central place in our discussions , and in our days and years of cooperation .
I think it is confirmation that we have moved from an original agenda dominated by hard material - coal and steel - to intangibles like culture , education , creativity and citizenship .
We cannot measure it in kilos or tonnes but it is about the future of our unity , of our communities at local , regional and national , as well as European , level .
I think that is why we put forward the proposal .
Since last year it has received a great deal of concrete attention and support in the public domain in the Member States as well as in the Council .
I am happy to see it because this was the most important answer : we want to work more through culture , for culture and also for the world of cultures or culture in the world .
I am happy to see your support for this agenda , which is also very important .
It has always been very clear to me as Commissioner , and also to the Commission , that the Parliament seeks to do more in these areas .
Of course we need to adopt a common approach .
This is the way to implement this agenda .
The three basic areas are important , and were also mentioned in the previous report : creative industries ; cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue ; and , equally important , the external dimension - external cooperation in culture and culture in the Union 's external policy .
I agree with you that we should not give too much weight to the economic importance of culture , but we really need to get the right balance in our cultural policies .
Your report rightly recognises the importance of giving culture a larger role in international relations .
We consider that this is an opportunity to build a proactive and constructive agenda on cultural diversity in Community policies .
I know I can count on your collaboration in this matter .
On the issue of mobility , we support the need for transnational mobility of cultural players as a major tool for building a European cultural area .
Look , for example , at Erasmus in education .
After a decade - now two decades - we have a European higher education area , the most popular programme and a lot of modernisation and openness at our universities .
I think this quest for mobility , knowledge , respect and acceptance should also be developed in the area of arts and culture .
I believe we can achieve a great deal now by starting the pilot project on mobility that you in the Parliament proposed last year .
Last , but not least , it is important , as I said , to adopt a common approach .
I am happy that Member States endorsed open methods of coordination .
In November last year two expert working groups with representatives of Member States were set up with the aim of enhancing mobility of artists and culture professionals , as well as maximising the potential of the cultural and creative industries .
You will be duly informed of the results of the work within these groups .
As you know , we set up the cultural forum and the first was organised under the Portuguese Presidency , for which I am grateful .
We also suggest that the cultural and creative sector at large should set up a platform on the cultural and creative industries and one on the access to culture , along the lines of the existing platform on intercultural dialogue .
I think that there is a growing volume of potential contribution and I am happy to work with my colleagues in the Commission , as well as here with you in Parliament , to reinforce the mainstreaming of culture in many other EU policies .
I am , of course , looking forward , not only to the debate , but especially to the implementation of this agenda .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to Mr Graça Moura on a good report that , in a coherent and specific manner , presents the priorities in the sphere of culture and defines the long-term aims .
The report shows the importance of culture for the development of the European Union and for enhancing the potential for innovation and increased competitiveness .
Culture is a sector that creates jobs and gives a genuine boost to economic growth .
On behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to draw your attention to the significance of the regions of the European Union as an important forum for cultural cooperation .
Culture and language stimulate the development of regions and are a magnet for investment , especially in poorly developed regions with meagre natural resources and few tourist and leisure attractions .
This is why local and regional authorities have such an important part to play in generally supporting and nurturing culture in the areas under their control .
There is just one item in the report about which I have reservations - and here I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , so that I do not have to repeat myself in a moment - and that is what we find under Recital K , which suggests that we demand that immigrants and tourists subordinate themselves to European tradition and heritage .
This is not a good piece of phrasing .
During the Committee 's work , the members of the ALDE Group voted against this .
In the Year of Intercultural Dialogue it is worth pointing out that the European Union should , in putting into practice the values of intercultural dialogue , be open to other cultures .
It should promote and create common ground for cooperation by putting forward interesting programmes .
It is therefore not a good thing that the potential for European third countries to take part in the exceptionally engaging and prestigious European Capital of Culture programme after 2010 has been scrapped .
Madam President , I was supposed to be making a further speech in just a moment , so I would like to request another 10 seconds this time round , if I may , and then I shall not get up a second time .
I believe that it is first and foremost those countries covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy that should have the possibility of taking part in this programme .
I keenly support the demand made in the report for 2010 to be declared as the European Year of Fryderyk Chopin , given that it is the 200th anniversary of the birth of this composer of genius , who made an incontrovertible contribution to European and world culture .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , first of all , I should like to thank Mr Graça Moura most sincerely on behalf of my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , for his excellent report .
Thank you , too , to the Commission for presenting this communication on the European agenda for culture .
It can count on Parliament 's support for culture as a horizontal task , for increasing artists ' mobility , for increasing regional cooperation and for strengthening international cooperation .
However , we also note the absence of something on this agenda .
This is a subject we discussed in detail a little while ago .
The cultural industries and their growing significance also mean that the economic aspects are becoming considerably stronger than has been the case in the past .
The agenda for culture is not only about issues of better cooperation on the cultural agenda or of increased funding , but also of the legal framework .
In that regard , it is indeed true even within the European Union that , if culture is in competition with internal market law or competition law , it always draws the short straw in case of doubt .
You will all remember the Lévai report : the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services described collective management societies for online music as obstacles to competition on the internal market .
Here culture clearly draws the shorter straw and is in a weaker position than European internal market law .
Hence the urgent need , and tomorrow Parliament will decide the same way as the Committee on Culture and Education .
The Unesco Convention must be applied not only to securing cultural diversity with regard to third countries , but also as a matter of the utmost urgency in our own European law .
Our heartfelt plea to the Commissioner , therefore , is that we have just one time slot , and therefore need a proposal quickly for strengthening cultural diversity in European internal market law .

on behalf of the PSE . - ( ET ) Colleagues , our colleague Vasco Graça Moura has carried out some excellent work in compiling a report which refers both to cultural heritage and future needs , to common principles and specific initiatives .
As shadow rapporteur , I express my thanks .
I would like to focus on just a couple of points .
As of the beginning of 2009 our circumstances will have changed : the Lisbon Treaty will have entered into force .
In order for our diplomatic representatives to be able to represent our cultures properly , the cultural dimension should be consistently incorporated into our external policy .
Currently we are a long way from achieving that .
Initially we are talking of incorporating a cultural dimension only into development activities although this in itself poses difficulties for us .
There are many very valuable elements in European culture , but instead of enjoying the aggregate of those elements we seem to achieve only an arithmetical average .
European culture has , unfortunately , only a small presence worldwide .
I venture to believe that the world 's finest film-makers and writers live in Europe , yet the world 's cinemas are dominated by Hollywood and the bookshops are full of entertainment in paperback form from America .
Why do we translate mass foreign products , and why do we not translate each other 's best authors ?
Why do third countries aided by us prefer to spend money on American cultural products ?
This situation is in need of change .
We must without doubt place greater focus on re-establishing a common European cultural space .
A cultural space which includes the countries of the Mediterranean and Central Europe as well as the Nordic , Baltic and East European countries .
We will be stronger as a result , and will achieve an aggregate incorporating all the valuable elements , an aggregate which is greater than the sum of its parts .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , this is a very valuable and thoroughly prepared document .
I congratulate Mr Graça Moura .
The draft resolution draws attention to the need for a specific approach to the problems of culture at a time of globalisation .
Regardless of our openness to the heritage of other cultures , it is exceptionally important to protect , disseminate and promote European culture .
It is important to remember the roots of our culture , and especially the role of the Greek and Latin classics ; however , we should also look at those areas of culture that cross borders without hindrance and without the need for translation .
I have in mind music and painting .
In 2010 it will be 200 years since the birth of Fryderyk Chopin - a composer of genius who is known throughout the world .
Emphasising the significance of this event will make it easier to perceive the part played by all the outstanding European musicians - Mozart , Liszt , Handel , Haydn , Schumann , Verdi , Grieg , Berlioz , Paganini and many others - in the creation of European civilisation and in its contribution to world culture .
The report also draws attention to current problems faced by artists in such matters as crossing frontiers , as well as the impact of their mobility on artistic development , and emphasises the role of art in economic development .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the interesting thing in this paper on a European agenda for culture in a globalising world is that it really asserts the strategic claim not only to organise cultural policy as a sector , but that culture should be an integral part of various European policy fields , such as foreign policy , urban development policy and Structural Funds policy .
This really is a new quality .
It changes the European Union 's self-image regarding the importance of culture and its strategic importance to policy as a whole .
Culture is always a double-edged sword , and this is what is particularly interesting .
It is always a product , but it is more than a product because it carries meaning and purpose .
This evening I should like once again to put it in graphic terms : I am anticipating that this dual nature of culture will really have an effect in all policy fields , particularly regarding internal-market logic .
Besides , Commissioner Figeľ will be very strong if he is successful in imparting the strategic importance of culture to the other Commissioners .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) A globalised world implies global culture .
This , however , is a term that can be interpreted in many ways .
Across the European Union a global culture can be the essence of the best that individual European cultures represent .
It can also be a post-modern universal culture that gradually overrides and forces out original European diversity .
Personally , I favour the former scenario .
I want the European Union to promote cultural diversity that enriches nations and lets them learn from each other .
A globalised world globalises our lifestyles and ways of working .
Multinational companies have turned our cities into a common marketplace so that sometimes we do not know whether we are in Paris or in Prague .
As far as I am concerned , we have now had quite enough .
Culture has a place in the soul of a nation and roots in its place of origin .
Culture can be communicated and is capable of both absorbing and eliminating .
It is also vulnerable , however , if it becomes a mere commodity or makes concessions to popular tastes in order to be ' accessible to all ' .
Culture should indeed be accessible to all but it should promote high values instead of pandering , set higher targets instead of reflecting our low demands , because the general public does not need a great deal to satisfy it .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for emphasising in his report the importance of preserving the cultural heritage of all European nations .
( HU ) Madam President , I warmly welcome this worthwhile report by Mr Graça Moura .
In this European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , we must emphasise the special significance of culture in reinforcing European identity .
As an ethnic Hungarian from Romania , I would like to draw Member States ' attention to supporting Europe 's minority and endangered cultures .
Examples of these include the ancient cultures of the ethnic Hungarians living in Romania , the Moldavian Csangos , the Szekler people of Transylvania , as well as those of the Macedonians in Greece and Bulgaria , the ethnic Serbs in Romania and the Basque people in Spain .
The recommendation adopted by the Council of Europe on the basis of a report on the Csango people by the Finnish MP Tytti Isohookana-Asunmaa is a concept that could be emulated , as its objective is to preserve the Csango culture , which is on the point of extinction .
In the context of the European Union 's foreign relations , we must also pay heed to Tibet , under occupation by the Chinese Communist dictatorship and where , as the Dalai Lama has put it , cultural genocide has been unleashed on one of the world 's most ancient cultures . Thank you .

( FR ) Madam President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Graça Moura for the quality of his report , which in every point reflects his knowledge and high level of expertise on the subject .
This report reaffirms culture 's place in the construction of Europe and the need to protect it and to promote diversity .
He underlines the essential role it plays in meeting the Lisbon targets and in the EU 's external relations .
He quite rightly calls for the strengthening of actions in areas such as literary translation , the promotion of European languages , the teaching of art and the cultural industries , but also in the protection and promotion of our heritage .
In this regard , we need to promote existing cultural programmes and support new initiatives such as the creation of a European heritage label , which will help to develop a common identity while encouraging cultural tourism .
This report also highlights the opportunities offered by digital technologies in terms of access to and the promotion and spread of culture , while emphasising the need to protect intellectual property rights .
In this context , it is right to support the setting up of specific projects such as the European digital library , the purpose of which is to digitalise our heritage and access to it , and preserve it for future generations .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you to the rapporteur and also to the Commission for this document .
Once again the central role of culture in European integration and in the worldwide image of the European Union is being highlighted .
How we choose to deal with this recognition , which is not new but is extremely important , and integrate it into every area of policy - as is already specified in Article 151 - has been well defined in the present agenda for culture .
It is pleasing that , during the preparatory work , a wide consultation process took place with various cultural stakeholders who do essential cultural work , for which we must thank them .
We urgently need this cultural strategy in order , for example , not only to be continually referring to our cultural diversity with pride , but also to be able to cope with the challenge of dealing with this diversity and the problems that arise .
Implementation of the strategy will be crucial , however .
President Barroso announced a task force for culture back in November 2005 in Budapest , which could be an important signal to the outside world , but has not so far been implemented .
I hope this will not be the case with this agenda for culture .
Promoting culture is a return on investment in the areas of intercultural dialogue , of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy and of internal relations , and it is also above all a social value added .
We use art and culture .
It offers us great benefit in almost every social and economic field .
It should not be exploited , taken advantage of or starved out , however , and we should also therefore be thinking of an appropriate budget .

( RO ) I congratulate the Rapporteur , my colleague Vasco Graça Moura , for the way in which he knew how to manage the rather large number of amendments to this report .
Personally , I was glad when the Committee on Culture and Education of the Parliament approved , with a large majority of votes , my amendment regarding the study of the European Union history in all Member States .
The European Union construction should be studied so that young people would know the stages of the European Union 's establishment and development .
I believe that , in order to know the culture of a country , each of us should know the history of the given country .
Creating a parallel with the European Union , in order to know and understand European culture in a globalized world , we should learn the history of European construction , especially since , as of 2009 , the new Treaty of the European Union will become effective , we will all be European citizens and each citizen has the obligation to know his / her history .
My initiative aims at preventing future situations in which young people learn parallel histories , which have no ground in reality .
Since the European Parliament has just celebrated half a century of existence , I believe it deserves to have a history that promotes cultural identity and European culture in the context of globalization .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I particularly welcome this report because it shows that this Europe is growing together and that culture plays a very special role in this .
If we think of the Capitals of Culture alone - next year it will be the city of Linz in Upper Austria - these give many creative artists the opportunity to get to know another new part of Europe .
Later on there will also be a lot of visitors travelling from Linz to the other Capitals of Culture .
This programme contributes a great deal to mutual understanding .
In the case of Vilnius , in particular , we have a very good opportunity to show how strong cooperation can actually be .
This should also be an example for the future .

Madam President , the point I want to make concerns equal access to culture no matter what your background ; rich or poor , culture has to be accessible to all .
Free entry to museums and art galleries - certainly in Scotland and the United Kingdom - has seen record levels of people visiting cultural institutions .
That is why free access to cultural institutions and cultural events is so important across the European Union .
Many of the points in this report - paragraphs 10 , 25 , 26 , and 46 about 2011 being the ' European Year of the Greek and Latin Classics ' - are very interesting .
The decline in the teaching of classics in state schools in my country of Scotland is deeply depressing .
How can we understand the present without understanding the past ?
I am grateful for the report .
( CS ) The European Union has a duty to safeguard Europe 's cultural wealth because our cultural heritage must be preserved , disseminated and shared both within and outside the Union .
If this plan is to be implemented , it must receive political and financial support .
The Community 's existing cultural programmes do not fully reflect the scope of our common European cultural heritage .
I support the calls to the Commission to propose specific programmes to promote both artistic creativity and the tangible and intangible goods and values that constitute European cultural heritage .
This cultural heritage should be managed in a sustainable manner .
The support of public / private partnerships is vital to achieve this goal .
The proposal to establish a European arts sponsorship scheme may be a step in the right direction .
( RO ) It is more than suitable to discuss , in the Year of Intercultural Dialogue , a true European agenda for culture , which is to be promoted both inside the European Union and internationally .
Therefore , I welcome the drafting of this report , which correctly emphasizes the importance of this field and the need to mobilize its potential fully .
Culture is the basis of promoting the values of peace , democracy and tolerance , as well as a highly-performant economic growth that could deal with the challenges of globalization in the 21st century .
From the report 's multitude of recommendations , I would like to reiterate two aspects .
First of all , at an internal level , it is essential for the local and regional actors to get involved in promoting culture , as factors of economic development and Lisbon Strategy implementation , as well as of consolidating cultural heritage and promoting cohesion in contemporary society .
Second , it is in the European Union 's best interests to promote culture and intercultural dialogue at an adequate level in its foreign policy .
In this field , the countries included into the Neighbourhood Policy should be the main beneficiaries of these actions .
Member of the Commission . - ( SK ) Thank you for the debate and in particular for the positive , constructive atmosphere .
This is a testimony to the belief in the importance of culture and the current agenda .
I want to assure you ( although I am one of the new arrivals from the enlargement ) that never before in the Union has culture been as prominent and as central as it is today .
Of course , this is not only about the formal agenda : it is about a process , progress and implementation .
In recent years several things were achieved for the first time in history : the European Commission 's role as a representative of the Community as well as common representation of Europe 's 25 or 27 Member States in UNESCO are the results of a certain cultural maturity .
A few months ago the Member States agreed to introduce an open method of coordination although many people did not expect them to do so .
We have a permanent forum for culture , 2008 is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue and there is a consensus on making 2009 the European Year of Creativity and Innovation : all this represents enormous progress .
On the other hand , culture has of course a dual nature .
It has an economic dimension but it is also a vehicle for conveying meaning and substance .
That is why culture is specific and lacks exclusivity in European law .
That is also why in individual cases or disputes we want European law to apply but at the same time we want the specific nature of culture to be taken into account : the need to maintain and strengthen the culture diversity that is our heritage , our distinguishing feature .
Before I finish , let me say that I agree that more investment is needed .
The Commission proposed a budget of EUR 500 million for the Culture Programme but only EUR 400 million was approved .
In the future it may be possible to support cultural aspects under other programmes as well .
When we were summing up the contributions of the Structural Funds to individual structural operations in the 27 Member States , I was very pleased to find out that for the period 2007-2013 approximately EUR 5 billion have been allocated to culture as a whole , across the entire Union , from the Structural Funds .
If we act responsibly , we can combine our individual potential , resources and policies .
This , I assure you , is also my responsibility and I would like to invite you to cooperate and help to implement this agenda .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Vasco Graça Moura once again .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , after so many good contributions I am sorry to have to reply briefly just to some of the points that I consider essential , but I think they all , like the many points in the report not mentioned here , bring extraordinary enrichment to this debate .
First I should like to stress the new policy to introduce culture in the terms set out in the Commission 's communication .
That was mentioned by Mrs Trüpel and it is a question of ensuring that the cultural aspect is included in other European policies .
I think that is fundamental .
The second point was raised by Mrs Mikko , and concerns the cultural dimension that should be incorporated in Europe 's external policy , not merely European Union culture but the culture of the Member States - it is absolutely essential .
Thirdly , as Mrs Hieronymi mentioned , there is a fine balance between economic aspects and the economic utility of culture and culture as a value in its own right ( culture qua culture ) .
Just two more points , Mrs Staniszewska mentioned the importance of cultural action at regional and local level that is also emphasised in the report , but I think needs to be underscored .
I am in complete agreement with that .
Finally , I must also stress that giving families and students access to culture via schools and society , as well as building bridges between cultural heritage and the exact sciences , innovation and technology , are fundamental aspects of those concerns .
Madam President , since it is impossible to go into any further aspects , I should merely like to conclude by saying that culture is an inalienable and indispensable system of individual collective values and experiences and that it is with those collective and individual values and experiences in mind that Europe should approach the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I wish to use this opportunity to outline some major issues presented in the Graça Moura report on the ' European agenda for culture in a globalising world ' .
First , the social situation of artists : I agree with the fact that we should work out an appropriate legal framework in the areas of tax , labour and social security for artists and performers .
We should also focus more on the preservation of cultural heritage .
The Culture Programme is good , but is not enough , and I support the idea that we should have other programmes alongside it , more focused on the preservation and promotion of European cultural heritage .
Last but not least , I wish to emphasize the need for an effective partnership between the public and the private sector .
In order to overcome the present challenges , culture should be partially funded by the private sector .
Therefore , a European arts sponsorship scheme should be created as soon as possible .
in writing . - ( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the efforts of the Commission in proposing an agenda for culture enabling a European strategy to be pursued both within the European Union and in the EU 's relations with third countries .
In this Year of Intercultural Dialogue , it is important to devote special attention to promoting diversity and intercultural dialogue , as culture is a key dimension of the Lisbon Strategy and we will not achieve the fundamental Lisbon goals unless we treat it as such .
I was disappointed to see that the report pays scant attention to relations among cultures , minorities , national or ethnic groups , or among the countries they live in .
We cannot ignore the fact that the arts have a prominent role to play in the integration of minorities , but they can also provide social support for talented but impoverished artists .
By supporting the arts and artists , we can provide prospects for poor ethnic groups that are transnational in character , such as the Roma people , who have preserved their centuries-old cultural tradition to the present day .
Furthermore , we must ensure that regulations governing commercial ( Internet ) relations are open and transparent to ensure fair market access , thereby allowing European cultural industries to develop all their potential , particularly in the audiovisual and musical sectors .
Alongside adequate consumer protection , we must eradicate the root causes of counterfeiting and piracy , and protect Europe 's cultural diversity by means of sound and fair regulation of competition based on achievement .
Fishing activities of Community and third-country fishing vessels ( debate )
The next item is the report by Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning authorisations for fishing activities of Community fishing vessels outside Community waters and the access of third country vessels to Community waters - C6-0236 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all allow me to thank the rapporteur for his work on this report .
Since the adoption of the Council Regulation on fisheries outside community waters in 1994 , many conditions have changed and international obligations have increased for the authorisation of Community vessels outside Community waters .
This proposal has , therefore , been put forward as part of the 2006-2008 Action Plan for simplifying and improving the common fisheries policy .
The aims of the proposal reflect that spirit by integrating existing legislation into one regulation , while ensuring that the rules applying to Community vessels in third-country waters are applied equally to third-country vessels in Community waters .
Many provisions are unchanged regarding the current system of issuing fishing authorisations .
The major new points of the proposal can be summarised as follows .
Firstly , all fisheries agreements under which Community vessels fish are included in the scope of the proposal , those being fisheries partnership agreements , bilateral fisheries agreements , agreements in the context of regional fisheries management organisations and private agreements .
This wide scope is essential , as all flag states under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea are responsible for the vessels flying their flags .
Consequently , vessels fishing under all kinds of agreements should be included .
Secondly , a mechanism to reallocate under-utilised fishing opportunities has been introduced in order to optimise the utilisation of fishing opportunities under the fisheries agreements .
This point was raised during the discussions on most fisheries partnership agreements and is now integrated into each of them in order to increase the value for money under each agreement .
As a last point , I would like to mention the proposed provisional application of fisheries agreements , which will grant the Commission the necessary legal basis to transmit licence applications to third countries prior to the adoption of the Council Regulation concluding the agreement .
This will , in most cases , ensure that Community vessels can continue their fishing activities in third-country waters without interruption .
Turning to the report , I would like to comment on the amendments proposed .
The Commission can agree to Amendments 1 , 3 , 5 , 11 and 16 .
As for Amendments 7 to 9 concerning the eligibility criteria , this list has been transformed into a positive list , rather than a negative one , in the first Presidency compromise text .
In general terms , the compromise text , however , covers the Committee 's concerns , except for the extension of the eligibility criteria regarding infringements in the past 12 months , which is Amendment 8 .
The Commission finds that this provision should remain unchanged , believing it important as a precautionary measure in case of possible serious infringements .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment 2 on the definition of infringements , as the definition of serious infringements is clear and is set out in Regulation No 1447 / 99 .
Regarding the amendment concerning non-transmission of all applications , which is Amendment 12 , it should be noted that Article 10 has been deleted as part of the Presidency compromise text .
This was done on the basis of the opinion of the Council 's legal service , which stated that the Commission has no legal basis to penalise the vessels of Member States as proposed in this article .
The Commission also finds that the Member States ' possibility of giving their opinion on any decision is already provided for in Article 9 ( 2 ) and that any informal procedure prior to or after a negotiation should not be contained in this regulation .
Therefore , Amendments 6 and 10 cannot be accepted .
Before closing , I would like to stress the following .
Firstly , the daily transmission of catch data is required under the Regulation on electronic logbooks .
Secondly , closing a fishery implicitly means that fishing authorisations are no longer valid for the stocks or areas concerned .
Thirdly , all fishing activities in mixed fisheries must be considered as affecting the stocks concerned .
Fourthly , national legislation determines what can be used as evidence in a court of law .
This is why the Commission cannot accept Amendments 13 , 14 , 15 and 17 .
Amendment 4 and Amendments 18 and 19 cannot be accepted , since the text proposed by the Commission is correct - in the case of Amendment 4 - or is sufficiently clear - in the case of Amendments 18 and 19 .
Equally , I cannot accept Amendments 20 to 24 , since the scope of the proposal is to cover all agreements and not just third-country agreements , as I said at the outset .
In addition , the reallocation of unused fishing opportunities is necessary in order to ensure the best possible utilisation of the fishing possibilities under the agreement .
Such reallocation is best dealt with in the context of the issuing and renewal of licences .
Finally , I would like to stress that this proposal is part of a package containing the proposal on combating IIU fishing , as well as the revision of the Control Regulation to follow later this year .
As referred to by the Committee on Fisheries , the Commission will , while keeping transparency and simplification in mind , aim to harmonise these proposals and avoid any overlap between them .
Just to explain : because it is a Commission proposal , the Commission speaks first .
I think Mr Morillon was looking as confused as I was .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , nothing surprises me , and in particular nothing surprised me in the Commissioner 's communication .
Commissioner , thank you for that very detailed exposé .
I would simply like to recall here that the declared objective of the Council 's proposal for a regulation is to simplify and improve the procedures for managing fishing authorisations .
It was a question of introducing general provisions applicable to all authorisation applications , as you yourself said , Commissioner .
A single procedure for managing all fishing authorisations has been proposed .
The sharing of responsibilities between the Commission and the Member States is defined .
New eligibility criteria , penalties in the event of infringements and provisions regarding reporting are also proposed .
Compliance with the international regulations laid down by the different agreements is strengthened by the introduction of measures requiring Member States to exclude vessels from fishing if they are found to be involved in a serious infringement or if they have been placed on a list for taking part in illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
Mrs Stihler had been designated for this report but because the majority of members of the Committee on Fisheries did not agree with her on two points she considered key , she preferred to remove her name from the report .
It therefore falls to me to present this draft as Committee chairman .
However , I would like , in passing , to thank her for her work and I will leave it to her , when she presents her amendments , to give us the reasons for her decision .
Within the framework of the consultation procedure , in her report which is now mine , the Committee on Fisheries has proposed a number of amendments to the Council 's proposal for a regulation , and you gave an exhaustive list of these - not a list but the numbers , Commissioner .
These were adopted by a large majority of 19 votes for , 5 against and 2 abstentions .
I will only present the main ones here .
Firstly , the regulation should not apply to overseas territories of EU Member States .
Secondly , an infringement should not be considered to be serious unless it has been confirmed by a successful prosecution in accordance with the relevant national legislation .
Thirdly , the IUU list should be understood to mean the list of fishing vessels identified in the framework of a RFMO or by the Commission under the Council Regulation establishing a Community system to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing - that very important task , Commissioner , which you are personally rather keen on .
Fourthly , the Commission shall not refuse to transmit applications to the authorising authority without having given the Member States the opportunity to submit their observations .
Fifthly , the Commission may not refuse to pass on applications unless it comes to the Commission 's knowledge , on the basis of duly substantiated facts , that a Member State has not complied with its obligations under a particular agreement .
Sixthly and finally , Community fishing vessels for which a fishing authorisation has been issued shall transmit to their competent national authority the data concerning their catches and fishing effort with a frequency appropriate to the agreement and fishery concerned .
The transmission requirements shall be compatible with those contained in the e-logbook regulation .
I will leave it to my colleagues to talk more about some of these amendments , because some of them are the authors .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , in general terms , apart from some aspects on which the Committee on Fisheries , in agreement with the Council , has corrected the Commission in order to avoid excess discretion , we support the fundamental aspects of this proposal , the objective of which is for there to be a single framework for the Community system of authorisations for vessels operating outside Community waters .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is therefore going to vote against the amendments already rejected by the Committee on Fisheries that have been tabled again with 40 signatures , which go precisely in the opposite direction , in that they insist that agreements on exchanges of quotas should remain outside the general legislation on licences to fish .
In my opinion , given that the Court of Auditors ' report on the shortcomings of the control policy is still making the headlines and it has been decided to tackle once and for all the fight against illegal fishing , it is not very acceptable to claim that some agreements should continue to be outside a general framework that is very necessary as a basic legal guarantee of equal and non-discriminatory treatment , both among operators and among Member States .
It should also be pointed out that we are immersed in working on an integrated and coordinated focus for the different Community policies , in particular maritime policy , a focus that Parliament has fully supported , as well as the even more necessary process of simplifying Community legislation .
In this respect , it should not be forgotten that we are talking about more than 9 000 vessels that operate under the different agreements and regional fisheries organisations , which means processing more than 16 000 fishing authorisations , as no agreement , in either the North or the South , is exempt from this obligation .
If it is time for anything , then , it is time to harmonise and simplify a framework to make it as standardised as possible and not to continue creating differences that only make monitoring difficult and generate mistrust of the rules .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I am glad to have the opportunity to speak on the Morillon report on fishing authorisations - or I should say the ex-Stihler report .
As the original rapporteur , I was compelled to remove my name from the report when the Committee on Fisheries rejected my key amendments .
The report was supposed to simplify fishing authorisations .
Instead , the Commission over-reached itself with an unnecessary article awarding itself the right to reallocate fishing quotas .
If supported unamended , this report will unjustly discriminate against northern countries and their historic fishing rights and jeopardise relative stability .
To give the Commission carte blanche to reallocate fishing opportunities beggars belief , especially when fishing opportunities are scarcer .
We have to ask ourselves whether we are facing a fishing free-for-all in the North Sea .
This is not in the interests of Scottish fishermen , nor is it in the interests of protecting and conserving stocks .
The next review of the common fisheries policy is due by 2012 and this report is a wake-up call that historic fishing rights are under threat in the North and Baltic Seas .
I have retabled key amendments for the plenary and urge colleagues to support them .
If these amendments are defeated , I urge voting against this report .

Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Morillon on taking over this report on behalf of the committee , but I really have to commiserate with Ms Stihler , because she did a lot of work and then , as we heard , she had to withdraw her name from the report .
That is always a great cause for frustration , after a rapporteur has put a great deal of hard work into the preparation of a complex bit of work like this .
But I can well understand her reasons for doing so .
While few in this Parliament would argue with any proposal that seeks to enhance fisheries compliance , it is of major concern to me that Article 13 of the report , which deals with under-utilisation of fisheries opportunities , will simply provide the Commission with the right to reallocate fishing opportunities from one Member State to another .
This would clearly undermine the entire concept of relative stability and as such would destabilise one of the core principles of the common fisheries policy .
In fact , Article 13 is something of a Trojan horse , as it seems to have more to do with gaining access to fishing opportunities previously allocated to other Member States than with reducing bureaucracy and red tape and improving compliance , which I thought the report was all about .
I know that in the Fisheries Council the UK , Germany , France , the Netherlands and Denmark have all expressed similar concerns , so , as Ms Stihler said , this is a resurrection of the old North-South divide , which I thought had disappeared long ago , and that is something that we do not want to see coming back .
I very much hope - contrary to what Commissioner Borg told us in his earlier remarks - that tomorrow Parliament will vote in favour of Amendments 20 , 21 , 22 and 23 , tabled by Ms Stihler and signed by 40 MEPs .
( ES ) Thank you , Madam President .
Mr Stevenson , I am sure that we are going to vote against the amendments that you have just mentioned , and I do not have any doubt that this North-South situation is completely new to you .
So far you have only experienced the situation in the North and we have experienced the situation in the South .
We would now like to experience something of the situation in the North , because it seems to us that it works well for you in the North , and therefore those of us in the South would like to share some of it .
I would firstly like to congratulate the Commission for agreeing to simplify the text of the proposal as it is true that the first version had some elements that were difficult to accept .
The review of the control Regulation , the Agreement with Greenland and something that the Commissioner mentioned , the proposal for a Regulation on IUU fishing , all enable the scope of this proposal to be limited .
I am sure that tomorrow my group will , as it did in committee , vote against those amendments that aim to avoid the adoption of a general mechanism for using surplus fishing opportunities , something that we have always advocated , just as we have always been in favour of the need to have a uniform system for using surplus fishing opportunities that applies to all agreements , not just to southern agreements , which was the Council 's commitment when it ratified the Partnership Agreement with Greenland .
Consequently , I think that I can say that my group will vote against those amendments that are an attempt to make this system apply only to southern agreements and not to northern agreements .
Therefore I think that we are going to apply it to all of them , so all of us will feel more comfortable .
Regarding Article 12 , we agree with there being an interim procedure for allocating licences before the Council adopts the decision ratifying the agreement , for and we think that a legal solution needs to be found this issue .
We therefore agree with the Commission on the need to have a mechanism that ensures that fishing opportunities are not put at risk , as stated in Article 12 , if the process of ratifying a fisheries agreement has not been completed .
Madam President , according to the Commission , the aim of this proposal is to serve the objectives of the common fisheries policy and to allow the Community to better ensure compliance with its international obligations .
The Community fishing fleet is active in the territorial waters of around 20 countries under the scope of bilateral agreements .
But as we seek to manage our fisheries sustainably by limiting fishing in the European Community waters , we should be careful not to export the problem of over-fishing by handing out authorisations for vessels to freely exploit waters of third countries .
As I pointed out to Commissioner Borg only last month , we must pay particular attention to our international moral obligations to Africa .
Unsustainable exploitation of marine resources in Africa 's oceans on a massive scale is causing the collapse of fisheries , the loss of critical ecosystems and the extinction of marine wild life .
A large part of the problem is unreported illegal and unregulated fishing by the EU and other fishing companies .
In 2005 alone an estimated 40 % of fish were caught without licence or in violation of regulations in the waters of Guinea-Bissau .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all on the issue of the inclusion of overseas countries and territories , I wish to clarify that the regulation does not apply to them , since the scope of the proposal does not cover vessels flagged with overseas countries and territories .
However , it does apply to the outermost regions , which are considered Community waters .
I agree with those who have supported this proposal as it stands , with its wide scope in order to make all agreements more effective and to ensure more value for money , in line with the overall objectives set by the Committee on Fisheries itself and others , like the Court of Auditors .
On the amendments , let me again say that some of the amendments are accepted , as I indicated .
Others have been overtaken by virtue of the first Presidency compromise text or because the proposed amendments are already provided for elsewhere in the regulation or in some other legal provisions .
I would like to repeat that all fisheries agreements under which Community vessels fish are to be included in the scope of the proposal .
This is essential , because the states party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , as I said before , are responsible for the vessels flying their flags .
Secondly , the reallocation of under-utilised fishing opportunities is there to optimise utilisation of fishing opportunities under the fisheries agreements .
This is , after all , only proper management of fisheries agreements and it will not undermine relative stability , given that Article 13 ( 6 ) of the proposal states the following : ' Transmission of applications in accordance with this article shall not in any way affect the future allocation of fishing opportunities amongst Member States . '
So it will be a reallocation to maximise the fishing opportunities granted or available under fishing agreements and not a means whereby a precedent would be set which would undermine relative stability .
Finally , I would also like to say that this provision is becoming a regular feature of fisheries partnership agreements with third countries and it has also been included , with the agreement of the Council , in the Greenland agreement .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , I will probably not need all that time to say that this debate will have been worthwhile and that the fact that some of our colleagues have tabled amendments despite the nearly unanimous vote , made it possible .
You will have realised , Commissioner , that there are two concerns on this matter .
You replied in part to the first concern expressed , which is the maintenance of relative stability .
That is the purpose of amendments 20 to 24 tabled by our colleagues .
The second concern is the one expressed by Mrs Stihler , namely that with this revision of the regulation , there could be unreasonable exploitation of fish stocks , in particular the fish stocks of third countries .
Some of my fellow Members here have echoed this and that is why they signed .
I think I can say , regarding this , that there is nothing in the text of the report that will be voted on tomorrow that could give rise to this concern , but it is up to our fellow Members tomorrow to decide because I think , Madam President , that you are going to announce that this report will be put to the vote tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 April 2008 .
Rights-based management tools in fisheries ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Attwooll on rights-based management tools in fisheries .
rapporteur . - Madam President , my thanks are due to the shadow rapporteurs and all on the Fisheries Committee for producing a well-balanced report on what is a very complex and in many ways sensitive issue .
In some public debate , rights-based management is equated with the employment of individual transferable quotas .
The report takes a much broader view , treating the term as covering any of the forms that can be taken by the right to harvest fish , given that these are seen as a common public good .
So understood , it is clear that there is a variety of such forms currently in operation throughout the EU .
For example , the extent of the right may be specified by reference to the territory to be fished , the amount of fish to be harvested , the effort allowed or some mixture of these .
Similarly , although the right is implicitly transferable , there are various limitations in this respect .
For example , that from Community to Member States is conditioned by the principle of relative stability .
Further , there seems to be a considerable range of such limitations .
One particular form of divergence between Member States is how far transfer for economic value is permitted , either formally or informally , and thus amounts to a tradable right .
The central issue is , then , how fisheries management should engage in constituting the right to harvest in order best to obtain the objectives of the common fisheries policy .
The Commission communication raises the question of the extent to which a single system might be introduced , either at Community level or by harmonising the practice of Member States .
The report of the Fisheries Committee details a number of concerns about the adverse impacts that certain types of rights-based management might have , but also touches on the manner in which some of these might be prevented .
It indicates too the way in which certain types of rights-based management can have positive effects , provided they are properly devised .
The report notes the variety of systems of rights-based management currently in place , the degree to which the forms of right concerned are hybrid ones and the complexity of the issues involved .
It is consequently rightly cautious about the idea of moving to any single system .
Over and above the need to protect artisanal fleets , we raise the question of whether , on a more general basis , the same system would be appropriate for both single species and multi-species fisheries .
We finish by asking the Commission to address a number of different questions in its study and , in view of all that needs to be taken into consideration , to allow a longer time for debate .
In conclusion , I would like to touch more deeply on one aspect of the report .
Although rights-based management is essentially a juristic concept , I have the impression that much of the drive towards its discussion has come from economists .
I do not think that anyone here would doubt that fisheries management must take account of sound economic principles .
Indeed the report indicates some of the positive outcomes to which economic efficiency may give rise .
But such efficiency has to be seen as an instrumental good .
As the report states , it is valuable insofar as it promotes the objectives of the CFP .
I have personal doubts that economic efficiency is sufficient , in itself , to promote all these objectives to the desired extent and suspect that there are ways in which it may prove counterproductive to some aspects of them .
I seek reassurance , therefore , that the Commission will take a genuinely rounded approach , both in relation to the content and to the outcome of the study .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all allow me to thank the rapporteur , Ms Attwooll , and all the members of the Committee on Fisheries for a very thorough report , the contents of which I can almost fully endorse .
The report recognises the main advantage of rights-based management systems as being increased economic rationale in fisheries .
This is a crucial issue in the present context , where poor economic performance is the rule rather than the exception .
The quest for a higher degree of economic efficiency generally has very positive effects on overcapacity and hence on sustainability of fisheries activities .
The report , however , also accurately identifies the possible negative effects .
In my opinion , such effects could be contained , if not eliminated , by introducing provisions intended to limit concentration of rights , to deal with allocation issues and , as proposed by the report , to protect artisanal fleets .
These are being dealt with by various means in third countries where rights-based management systems in general , and individual transferable quotas in particular , have been in place for quite some time .
As stated in the report , such systems are a complex matter , but difficulties associated with them are not insurmountable .
On balance , I think the possible benefits are larger than the possible negative effects .
However , I would like to confirm once more that the Commission has no intention of proposing Community management systems .
Nor is it the Commission 's intention to promote a given and universal rights-based management system .
Different fisheries will require different systems .
I am also fully aware of the sensitivity of this issue in relation to relative stability .
The Commission will continue working on this issue .
In the short term , we are aiming at increasing the general knowledge on rights-based management and identifying best practices to be shared with Member States ' national or regional governments with fisheries competences .
We will also consider issuing guidelines or similar supporting documents to that effect .
The results of the consultation process - including , of course , the report of the European Parliament - and the outcome of the ongoing study on rights-based management systems in the Member States and experiences in third countries will be important inputs for this process .
In the medium term , rights-based management is going to be one of the topics in our reflection towards the next reform of the common fisheries policy .
The Commission will keep you informed about these future developments and I look forward to further fruitful discussions with you on this important issue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , more than 10 years ago , Parliament considered the possibility of introducing fishing rights into the CFP , through an own-initiative report on the future review of the CFP .
We can therefore only express our satisfaction at the Commission 's decision to finally examine the possibilities of this fisheries management tool , although in my opinion , in a too simplistic and superficial way , undoubtedly due to a fear of unleashing the fury of the Council regarding these matters .
Those who are the most resistant to change and the least enterprising , both in the fisheries sector and in the Council , have always feared any change to management systems , even for the better .
This does not mean that these sectors and Member States are in a better situation , or even in the same situation as they were 30 years ago , but rather they are dragging the more dynamic sectors towards a dead end .
It is true that management through the allocation of fishing rights raises questions with regard to implementation , but it is just as true that countries in which fishing is an important sector for the future have been able to resolve them , demonstrating that , at least for parts of the fleet that are able to evolve towards more modern , efficient and sustainable approaches , it has advantages that are far from negligible .
We therefore also welcome Mrs Attwooll 's report , which , alongside the concerns , has succeeded in reflecting the possible advantages , which could include improvements in control , a reduction in capacity , a decrease in discards and lower dependency on public aid .
I would like to say to Mrs Attwooll that fishing is indeed an economic activity , and one that needs to be profitable , which is now ceasing to be the case , therefore perhaps we need more economists in fisheries than there are at present , to analyse these issues in more detail .
Having said this , I wish the Commission great success in this debate and I hope that the management model , which has been a failure , can be changed in the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I should like to congratulate Mrs Attwooll for her hard work to achieve the maximum possible consensus on her report .
This is a complex and controversial issue but it is extremely important for all who are concerned about the sustainability of resources , and this includes the sustainability of the most precious resource for all who make up Europe 's innumerable fishing communities .
I therefore think that the report strikes exactly the right balance between the different points of view .
The results of the vote in the Committee on Fisheries - 21 in favour out of 24 - bears out what I have just said .
It is important not to avoid this debate but equally important not to decide too hastily .
As a Member elected for a Member State where the small-scale and multi-species fisheries which predominate in the south of Europe are very important , I am concerned about the introduction of management systems involving trade in fishing rights , which might bring benefits for shipowners with greater purchasing power to the detriment of smaller shipowners .
I also fear that the general adoption of such a system might be counter-productive , possibly even leading to higher catches to offset the cost of acquiring the fishing right .
I therefore repeat that I support the overall conclusions of the report , to the effect that no decisions should be adopted until we have studies covering all Member States and the different types of fisheries plus a wide-ranging debate to assess all the variables involved in this issue .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) I should like to begin by paying tribute to the commitment of the rapporteur , Mrs Attwooll , in drawing up a balanced report on a question as fundamental as the sovereignty of Member States in the management of their fisheries resources and the setting up of private property rights for access to and exploitation of that public good .
However , although we appreciate paragraph 11 , the report contains many points on which we totally disagree , for example , viewing this debate as an anticipation of the necessary modification of the existing management policy or including points that more or less explicitly argue for adopting fishing right management mechanisms at Community level .
In our view , each Member State should be responsible for managing its marine resources , in particular as a way of safeguarding its food sovereignty .
We therefore reject any step-by-step process that could , in future , lead to the setting up of a rights-based management system in Community fisheries , that is the marketing of fishing licences , days at sea or quotas , which would inevitably lead to the appropriation and concentration in private hands of a public good .
Madam President , this is a complex area and I certainly commend Ms Attwooll for her report and her efforts in that regard .
Representing a region whose overall experience of the common fisheries policy has been far from positive , I must say that my natural inclination is strongly against the imposition of any EU-based management system .
Rather , I am quite clear that Member States should be able to decide what management system works best for them .
Moreover , maintaining stability , I fear , could be severely jeopardised in the industry if unregulated transferable quotas were embraced , with particular threat to single and small-scale operators .
It would be better by far in my book to repatriate real powers over fishing to Member States and concentrate on getting in place viable local management systems capable of enjoying the confidence of those affected .
I also fear that this new study will prove to be another protracted excuse for putting off real and helpful change .
I hope that does not prove to be so , but we have seen that in the past .
( PT ) I would also like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Attwooll , and to say that , in my opinion , the natural marine heritage should be preserved and should be used in a sustainable manner by the fishing communities whose lives are traditionally bound up with that environment ; it cannot be regarded as just another business .
I therefore do not share the vision of marine ecosystems and the associated fishing communities as a market , where fishing rights may be freely traded , perhaps even on a kind of stock market , which would naturally lead to the industrialisation of fishing and pose a threat to the equilibrium of the ecosystems and fishing communities .
Even more , it seems to me that we simply must not allow anything to jeopardise the principle of relative stability and I therefore think that the Commission should be as cautious as possible in this debate .
Madam President , I would like to thank Ms Attwooll for her work and welcome this report as it has initiated a much-needed debate on alternative management measures .
I strongly agree with the report when it points out that the current fisheries management systems within the EU , specifically in the area of TACs and quotas , do not provide an answer to our problems , and that it is necessary to hold a wide-ranging debate .
In its green paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy , the Commission states that : ' Alternative management mechanisms can play a significant complementary role in Community fisheries management . '
However , I would venture to suggest that alternative management measures should and must play a compulsory role in the future , as we need to take on board a range of factors , including climate change and up-to-date marine and fisheries research based on sound science .
As I pointed out in my now redundant opinion of the Committee on Fisheries for the report by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , I have no doubt that climate change will impact on EU fisheries regulations , as allocations of quotas based on historic catch patterns will need to be revised as a result of the shifting distribution of fish stocks .
Furthermore , fisheries management will have to be increasingly based on adaptive approaches as historical data will be less valuable .
As climate change and other factors increasingly impact on our fish stocks , our management will need the necessary flexibility , based on sound peer-reviewed science , to adapt to the new conditions and ensure sustainability of resources .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I think that we all share a common objective : that of achieving a balance between the economic efficiency of such systems but , at the same time , protecting small fisheries .
I agree with what the rapporteur said , namely that fisheries cannot be looked at purely in economic terms .
I need to stress here that the subject is far from simple .
I certainly agree that such systems are a complex matter .
As I said before , we have to take into account in our reflections possible limitations on the concentration of rights , the resolution of allocation issues and measures for the protection of artisanal fisheries , and we have to approach this matter gradually .
In the short term , we need to learn more , we need to identify best practices and we need to study where rights-based managements systems have operated successfully in certain Member States and look at experiences in third countries .
All this will clearly be an important issue for discussion in the context of the next reform .
I certainly look forward to the input from the Committee on Fisheries on this issue .
I have noted all the comments made by all the parliamentarians who have spoken on this subject .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I cannot say that I am altogether reassured by the Commissioner 's response , because it seemed to me that , in what he was saying , he was actually giving pre-eminence to one particular form of rights-based management , whereas what the report is seeking is a review of all different types of forms to assess their merits and demerits .
I think we are all agreed that the common fisheries policy is in need of reform .
A newspaper in my constituency that picked up the European Parliament press release on the report cites me as being cautious about the reform of the CFP .
This is certainly not so if it is taken to mean that I have any doubts about the need for reform .
I am cautious , as I think we all are , to the extent of wanting to be reassured that the reform is in the right direction .
In the course of writing the report , for example , it occurred to me to ask just how compatible with one another the different ways of defining the extent of the right to fish are .
My feeling was that , whilst quota and effort limitations both combine readily with territorial restrictions , neither of the first two sits that comfortably with the other .
This in turn made me realise that , technical though a report on rights-based management might , on the face of it , seem , the issue it raises goes to the very heart of the common fisheries policy .
Whilst generally applauding the direction of current reform , I hope that the discussion may trigger a more radical reappraisal of the tools we use , so as to achieve the best possible balance between improving the livelihood of those engaged in fisheries , having a sustainable marine ecology in which fish stocks are conserved and maintaining the viability of fisheries-dependent communities .
I would not like to think that , in advance of a thorough study , some prior decision had been taken as to what might achieve the very best balance .
2009 budget guidelines - ( sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII et IX ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lewandowski on the 2009 budget guidelines - ( sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ) .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , today , with the adoption and discussion of the guidelines , and tomorrow , with the vote on the Guidelines for 2009 , we are taking the first step in a budget procedure that departs from the pattern of previous years in at least two ways .
The first departure is that we are testing a new cooperation formula between Parliament 's administration and the Committee on Budgets ; we are treating this as a pilot project , but this should comply with the generally binding principles for the budget procedure following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Secondly , 2009 brings new challenges , which no-one is questioning .
One such challenge is certainly the likely entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , and with it a fundamental enhancement of powers of the European Parliament 's codecision , the paving of the way for Parliament 's activities as a genuine legislative body .
Secondly , this is an election year , so there will be costs linked to the election campaign and certain costs - besides the obvious savings - linked to the end of the current parliamentary term .
Thirdly , the Statute for Members will come into effect , which will increase the personal cost burden , the burden of our costs in the European Parliament budget .
In many of these matters we already have certain quantifications , certain calculations since , in parallel with the principles , we are getting to know the forecasts , the first budget preliminaries for 2009 .
In the most important area , however - in other words , in the area associated with the increase in the powers of the European Parliament following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon - we have got as far as a working group , which will establish the extra costs that may be associated with this .
Recognising the specific challenges that await us in 2009 , we cannot at the same time exempt ourselves from the duty of frugal management of European taxpayers ' money , i.e. from certain self-imposed restrictions which we shall also expect from other European institutions .
Proliferation of the administration in an election year is certainly not the message that the European electorate wants to hear - the electorate to whom we are turning for a renewal of the European Parliament 's mandate .
A further essential aspect of the guidelines is internal obligations , to look for opportunities for what is referred to as the redeployment of existing human resources , not to increase staff numbers , and to concentrate on those functions that will mark out the future of the European Parliament , which we define using the term ' correctivity ' , and which are associated with legislation .
Today we must also discuss , and we should discuss , an issue that has a certain media resonance and that clearly also has extra-budgetary dimensions .
What we need are three new regulations in parallel .
The first is the introduction of a Statute for Members , with a distinct budgetary dimension ; the second is new pension fund principles ; and the third is employment rules for assistants , which must be transparent enough not to arouse temptations , and not to arouse suspicions surrounding the European Parliament .
As rapporteur I propose that this material be referred specifically to our Parliament 's resolution of 25 October 2007 and to the unanimous decisions of the Praesidium and the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament .
I know that at present our curiosity is being stirred more by the calculations than by the guidelines , and so I am counting on this document being smoothly voted through tomorrow .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( RO ) The budgetary orientations of our institution for the year 2009 represent the document based on which the budget of the European Parliament will be established this autumn .
Nevertheless , beyond the amounts and programmes , this year 's budgetary orientations bring to discussion an issue I consider very important : the legal situation of the European Parliament assistants .
I would like to thank Mr Lewandowski for having approached this subject as well .
I believe the time has come for the old system to become clearer and more transparent and to provide these young people with social and fiscal rights equal to the rights of the other members of the institution 's staff . For the latter , there are the Staff Regulations of the European Communities , a very comprehensive document , which provides the staff working in the European Union institutions with adequate social protection .
Most of the parliamentary assistants are also foreign citizens in relation to the country where they carry out their activity and , consequently , they should enjoy the protection provided to all workers in international organizations .
I don 't think it is normal to have cases in which the Belgian state imposes additional tax liabilities on assistants , taking into account that they pay all due taxes and contributions to social insurances in their country of nationality .
Still , the Parliament needs clear regulations for assistants as regards situations such as disease or maternity as well .
In several resolutions , the European Parliament has already requested the Secretary General and the working group on the Members ' Statute and Assistants and Pension Fund to draw up a new set of rules that would solve the problems the assistants are currently dealing with .
I believe it is our responsibility toward the European citizens to have only clear and transparent rules in this institution .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , the European Parliament 's budget for 2009 will be a very special one , as this Parliament will have codecision in almost all areas for the first time if the new Treaty enters into force in 2009 .
The Treaty of Lisbon achieves what our predecessors were already calling for more than 50 years ago without obtaining it : not just advisory powers , not just assent procedures , but codecision and democratic control by this Parliament over nearly all of Brussels 's policy areas .
The inclination to call for more staff is therefore great .
Codecision means a more difficult procedure in each committee , but it does not mean double the workload .
This budget therefore remains cautious , and that is good .
Where additional staff are needed , redeployment is attempted .
Few new staff will be employed - indeed , that would be hard to justify with almost 6 000 employees .
The work of this Parliament must indeed be made more visible .
Web-TV is to be launched after the summer and , on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I hope that the editorial team enjoys a position of independence , with full freedom to show the debates held here .
We owe our voters that openness .
What we also owe our voters is full verifiability of our expenditure , and good management of human resources .
Assistants must have a proper contract , with the social security and pension provision usual in each European institution .
At least 1 in 10 members of staff are working here without any social protection .
This has to change .
A statute for employees must be brought in , preferably by the end of this year , and it is incredible that there are attempts to oppose this , to oppose the social spirit , the spirit of solidarity , of the European Union , from the ranks of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Further work will have to be done on long-term strategies , regarding for example the purchase of buildings and technological innovation .
The Statute for Members also has an impact on the budget .
Subsidies to the Sakharov Foundation in Moscow must be no more than one-off cases , nor is it the primary role of this House to finance museums of European history ; such expenditure must be borne by the European budget .
Further debate is needed on this .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Lewandowski , for a good report , and also by expressing my satisfaction with the new procedure and the more open dialogue and early briefing of the committee that has been evident .
As several in this House have remarked , 2009 is a special year .
Even though the Lisbon Treaty has not yet been ratified in all countries , we have to take account , in our budgeting , of its entry into force in 2009 .
The European Parliament 's new powers - giving it , for example , influence over the agricultural budget and over legal policy - will mean adjusting some of its priorities to cope with the new responsibilities .
Then there are the elections to the European Parliament and the Statute for Members , which also have an impact on the budget .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe is content with Parliament 's draft budget remaining within 20 % of EU administrative expenditure .
There is no guarantee that this will be feasible in the next few years , but it is important that we hold administrative expenditure in check .
I should also like to express the ALDE Group 's great satisfaction with the emergence of a new model for the remuneration of Members ' assistants .
Our group has wanted to see a statute for Members ' assistants for a long time . It is the right solution for Parliament to take over the administration , and this is reflected in the 2009 budget .
Considerable savings have been achieved from the sale of buildings over the last 10 years , but I agree that we have now reached a point at which this policy must be revised , and that the buildings policy in general should undergo a service .
We have yet to see a proposal for the other institutions , but there is cause to keep a watchful eye on the growing buildings expenditure of those , too .
Finally , the issue of the financing of the future EU Minister of Foreign Affairs and the President of the European Council remains important , but we shall come back to that later .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the guidelines for the 2009 budget procedure presented by the rapporteur , Mr Lewandowski , relate principally to the European Parliament , and have the potential to apply to other sections .
In view of the financial restrictions that have been adopted and the immensity of the new tasks linked to the Treaty of Lisbon , the elections to Parliament , the change in the Statute for Members and the proposed introduction of a statute for assistants , 2009 will be a very difficult year .
There are a lot of unknowns , so the most important matter will be implementation of the guidelines .
Detailed analyses of needs and the associated cost analyses will enable us to keep within the financial framework and at the same time should ensure that Parliament functions smoothly and that the new tasks can be handled .
Our political group will be voting in favour of the report .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , 2009 is the year of new things , and therefore of uncertainties and dangers .
It will require all the talent of our rapporteur , the former chairman of the Committee on Budgets , to meet this challenge .
A new Treaty that is going to double the scope of Parliament 's codecision .
Imagine the effort that will be needed for this , particularly in budgetary terms .
A new Statute for Members .
Totally unknown at present : which countries are going to allow their future elected representatives to fall into this new system , and which elected representatives are going to want to do so ?
An election campaign , a new code of practice , particularly for assistants .
I have been asking the Bureau for this for nearly ten years and I am delighted to see that this dossier is finally ready .
It is quite simple though , since we are all aware of the package that will not cost taxpayers a penny : putting assistants on a Community footing , for those working in Brussels , and those who pay them directly under Parliament 's control , for those working in the constituencies .
There should be a constant budget for this because honesty does not cost a penny , just a little political effort .
I am also passionately in favour of new working methods , particularly on buildings issues , because like many of my fellow Members , I am always surprised after a call for tenders at how astonishingly high construction costs are when it comes to building work by the European institutions .
If we really want to make savings , perhaps it is not necessary to translate everything I have just said into Maltese , Latvian and Hungarian , because in eight months ' time it will not be read by anybody and that would save EUR 17 million per year .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , Mr Lewandowski 's report presents a calm view of the size of Parliament 's budget .
The Social Democrats and Greens have quite unnecessarily proposed amendments which would mean a less controlled way of spending money .
The view taken in the report on the ' House of European History ' is along the right lines when the rapporteur states that it is not for Parliament to finance such a project , even though it is the idea of the current President .
The report also adopts a position on the Commission 's budget .
The comment is made that its administrative expenditure does not extend to some 2 000 employees , who are outsourced for employment in its agencies .
This expenditure is excluded from the total sum , from which 20 % is deducted for Parliament 's use .
Parliament cannot outsource its operations in the same way , and it also has to finance support for the pan-European political parties out of its own budget .
( SK ) I agree with the view of the rapporteur and the Committee on Budgets that when preparing the European Parliament 's budget for 2009 the priority is to take into account Parliament 's more extensive duties after ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
In particular , there is the European Parliament 's new role of sharing law-making equally with the Council of the European Union .
Although the transition from the consultation procedure to the codecision procedure will not necessarily mean doubling the workload of the parliamentary committees , we have to remember that the increase in codecision powers will be unprecedented , and that Parliament will assume responsibilities for producing legislative acts .
The European Parliament 's political priorities must therefore be properly funded .
Of course we have to try to save money wherever possible but only under the condition that the budget continues to be adequate .

( FR ) Madam President , in Mr Lewandowski 's very comprehensive report , I was particularly interested in the Parliament budget for this election year , which has consequences for the institution 's communications policy .
Improving communication to European citizens was one of Parliament 's priorities for 2009 .
For them to feel more involved in the forthcoming elections and to get the highest possible turnout , it is important for MEPs to be closely associated with a decentralised information campaign in the Member States .
We also hope that local media will be fully integrated into this campaign because they play a key role in passing on information .
Parliament 's communication budget and the actions planned for 2009 should therefore make sure that they interest and directly affect European citizens , who often feel that the European institutions are too detached .
Note that generally speaking these actions follow on from those begun and funded in 2008 .
We also hope that the new visitor centre and the web TV will soon be operational to provide better information on Parliament 's activities and to improve the relationship between citizens and the European Union .
( LV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in preparing the European Parliament 's budget for 2009 , the issue of the total budget expenditure ceiling and whether it should not exceed 20 % of total EU administrative expenditure has once again come to the fore .
I would , however , like to endorse the approach taken by the rapporteur , namely that the European Parliament 's level of expenditure should be based on requirements that are justified following careful evaluation .
Certainly , 2009 will bring significant changes to the European Parliament 's work .
With the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , the volume of legislative work will increase considerably , and the change in the system of remuneration for MEPs will give rise to additional costs , as will the publicity campaign in connection with the European Parliament elections .
By focusing on the main spheres of activity , however , and carefully analysing the budget requests , as well as evaluating the possibilities for re-allocating officials internally before creating new permanent posts , it is possible to keep the level of expenditure in the European Parliament 's budget within the 20 % limit .
All opportunities to reduce inappropriate paper and energy consumption at the European Parliament have not yet been exhausted .
I am pleased with the support given last year to the proposal to reduce the circulation of paper versions of individual documents , stipulating that paper versions of these documents be accessible on request , instead of automatically being distributed to all Members and officials .
Implementation of this proposal is making it possible to save over three million sheets of paper a year .
This principle can be applied to many more types of document .
Regarding the European Parliament 's budget for next year , the issue of expenditure on Members ' assistants cannot be overlooked , and I therefore call upon the working group set up by the European Parliament 's Bureau to come forward with proposals to make the payment of these costs more transparent and more easy to monitor . Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Madam President , there are three issues in this debate to which I would like to draw attention .
Firstly , the level of inflation in individual EU countries is rising sharply , and as a result the average level of inflation across the EU will be around 4 % in 2008 , so indexing expenditure at 2 % annually actually means a fall in expenditure .
Secondly , one consequence of adopting the Treaty of Lisbon will be a marked increase in the powers of the European Parliament , the codecision procedure in all areas , and also the powers of the Member States ' parliaments , which will cause a sharp increase in the European Parliament 's functioning costs .
Thirdly and finally , 2009 is a year of European Parliament elections .
So far the turnout for these elections has been exceptionally low , particularly in the new Member States .
Additional expenditure is therefore needed for an information campaign aimed chiefly at regional and local media , through which the electorate can be most effectively reached .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to take the opportunity to canvass support for the amendment by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the secretarial allowance .
I know that the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have tabled another amendment ; ours has the same wording as the decisions of the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents , which all group chairs voted unanimously to support .
I do not actually think it fair what is now being said about the Committee on Budgets living up to its reputation of doing its own thing again .
The amendment by the Verts / ALE Group talks of a statute for Members ' assistants .
This will be the result if the Bureau 's amendment , that is , the result of the negotiations with the Council , become available .
We , too , are striving for this statute for Members ' assistants , but we do not yet know whether we shall obtain it , whether we can even come to an agreement with the Council .
I should therefore like to request that this phrase not result in the rejection of all the Bureau 's wording .
I think it is very important that we proceed in this House with as much agreement as possible and do not needlessly quarrel over details we do not have the power to establish .
Hence my heartfelt plea to endorse our amendment .
Not a single word has been added or left out .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to offer my thanks to all those who took part in the debate .
The problem that arose most often in this debate , apart from the specific challenges of 2009 and the need to manage European taxpayers ' money frugally , was definitely the problem of Members ' assistants .
I want to avoid the manner in which this problem is resolved becoming a battlefield for rival political groups , as all groups in our Parliament are united by an awareness of the need to resolve this problem in a way that removes the temptation to engage in corruption and the suspicions that surround this matter , while at the same time taking into account the heterogeneity of the 27 countries that make up the European Union .
I would like to reassure my fellow Member Mr Kuźmiuk that expenditure is set to rise by 4.8 % , so probably by more than the level of European inflation .
Meanwhile , may I wish Mrs Gräßle success in completing her reports before midnight .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 10 April 2008 .

in writing . - ( FR ) I should first like to acknowledge the excellent work of my Polish colleague Mr Lewandowski on the 2009 budget guidelines of the ' other institutions ' , namely the European Parliament but also the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor .
This document runs through the main challenges that will be on Parliament 's agenda for 2009 , particularly the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Everything must be done to ensure that Parliament 's enhanced responsibilities following the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon are taken into account in the budget .
However , I wonder whether , prior to the budget procedures , an audit should be carried out of the human resources allocated to the European Parliament 's activities .
The European Parliament 's political leaders are becoming increasingly important and it is essential that MEPs have the means to work in complete independence .
It would seem that the resources currently allocated are no longer a match for the broader political responsibilities that the European Parliament is having to and , in future , will have to take on to represent European citizens properly .
Amendment of regulation on a standard financial regulation for executive agencies - Framework Financial Regulation for the bodies referred to in Article 185 of Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 ( debate )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission thanks Parliament , and , in particular , the rapporteur , for his constructive approach .
The Commission is entirely committed to providing for full transparency vis-à-vis the budgetary authority as requested today by Parliament and in line with the joint statements of the European Parliament and the Council of July 2007 .
In particular , as regards the decentralised agencies , the Commission will insert in the regulation accrued information requirements concerning the number of contract staff , operating surpluses , assigned revenue , transfers and waivers to recoveries .
More transparency of information on the work of the agencies , and not only in financial and budgetary matters , is also a concern recently expressed by the Commission in a communication to Parliament and the Council .
At this point , let me recall the Commission 's proposal to set up an interinstitutional group to engage in a political discussion on the role and place of agencies in European governance , both with the Parliament and with the Council .
The Commission is indeed convinced that , if we have a consistent approach to agencies , we - all three institutions - can promote the transparency and effectiveness of an important part of the European Union 's architecture .
This is why I would like to conclude by expressing the wish that the interinstitutional working group proposed by the Commission starts its work soon .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the opportunity to speak here even at this late hour , and thank you all for your understanding .
I requested permission to speak here .
I am speaking for the Commissioner 's sole benefit , as I think it is important to tell the Commission that we consider the amendments we have tabled , on which we shall also be voting tomorrow with a very large majority , to be important .
I wish to tell him that we are only at the consultation stage with this dossier , and I should like to assure him on behalf of the whole Parliament that our amendments will help to bring greater order into the agency system .
It is therefore very important to us all across the group divide that the Commission take them on board .
I am obliged to the Commissioner for his assurances in this regard , and I shall also be monitoring the situation .
It is very important to me that he also understand why we want this .
We need better accountability in the agencies and greater transparency , particularly among staff members .
This concerns our budgetary law most directly .
The Commissioner will also be aware , of course , that if our wishes are not taken on board we shall find our own ways to fulfil them .
We regard this essential to our budgetary law .
The Commission had originally intended the present reform of the Financial Regulation to consist of merely technical modifications .
We talk of better regulation , yet I have noted with great sorrow that the latest joint decision on agencies by the Council and Parliament in July has not been incorporated .
The Commission 's draft came somewhat earlier , but it would have been nice , of course , if it had been subsequently reworked .
I should have also thought this fairer than leaving the work to us .
The European Parliament has introduced political changes with great unanimity right across the group divide .
We want to bring internal operations , responsibilities , transfers of appropriations and accountability of agencies more into line with the operations and practice of the Commission Directorate-General by means of a declaration of assurance .
We also want a better overview of the personnel and financial costs of the agencies .
We want to be informed of all employees and not just those on the establishment plan .
This is an absolute necessity .
I should like to give an example from a recent report by a decentralised agency on financial management in 2007 .
Thirty-nine posts are listed on this establishment plan , whereas 43 temporary staff and 11 contract staff appear in the text two pages before this .
No two figures match , therefore .
It is left to the reader 's imagination as to whether we now have 39 plus 11 posts or 43 plus 11 plus 39 , or whether the 39 posts of 43 staff are listed and the 11 are then added .
We just do not know .
I shall clarify the issue , but clarifying this issue for the large number of agencies is no fun , of course , and reporting and the reporting system are more or less equally chaotic in all the agencies .
The agency I have just quoted , ENISA , is interchangeable with any other , and I should indeed like to ask why the information we are given is so full of inconsistencies .
We also want more information on the agencies ' revenue - which , thinking of Alicante , can indeed be sizeable - and we want to know what is happening to this revenue .
I thank the Commissioner in advance for taking on board these amendments - as he has just announced his intention to do .
Currently , we have 29 decentralised agencies with 3 914 employees on the establishment plan for 2007 , with a budget of EUR 1.1 billion , EUR 559 million of which comes from the EU .
The five executive agencies have 176 posts .
The latest Commission communication on agencies was a very interesting one .
The offer of a joint working group is very important .
All three institutions must undertake to think through with each other the issue of the agencies ' future and area of work .
In Germany , the issue of agencies and the growth of agencies is in the public eye .
The media resonance is always great .
The reputation of the European Union is also at stake if we do not succeed in conveying to the outside world why we actually need these agencies and what role they play in the European Union .
We should also be pleased if the Commission could prove why programme management is more efficient and better value when done by the executive agencies than by the Directorates-General .
This is a request that those of us concerned with the budget have already put forward on a number of occasions , but has still not been backed up thus far in writing by the relevant facts and figures .
Parliament 's amendments serve to maintain an overview of the European agencies , and our urgent request to the Commission is to help us to bring more order into the agency landscape .
As the Commissioner should know , we in Parliament trust the Commission on this issue .
We know that this institution is our last resort , as it were , when it comes to creating order and transparency and providing a better overview in this regard .
I should like to thank my fellow Members from the other groups , and particularly Mrs Haug , the rapporteur on agencies from the Committee on Budgets , and the two rapporteurs Mr Mulder and Mrs Herczog from the Committee on Budgetary Control for their suggestions , all of which we have taken on board .
I therefore believe that we have put forward the proposed and desired amendments by Parliament that are most pressing at the present time .
I beg the Commissioner also to incorporate these amendments in the corresponding draft .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would also like to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Grässle , for her important work within the framework of these reports , which enhance the plans for a financial regulation for executive agencies .
At a time when the European Parliament is set to see its prerogatives strongly reinforced within the framework of the Treaty of Lisbon , I think it is particularly important to remember what our institution 's competences are , obviously as co-decider of the budget .
This Parliament , elected by direct universal suffrage by the citizens of the EU , must be able to do more and better to control the proper use of Community funds spent , this time by the executive agencies .
I would like very briefly to highlight four points in this report , which seem essential to me if Parliament is to be able to play its role fully and make it as easy as possible for citizens to understand our institutions .
Firstly , I would also like to emphasise the need for better control over the use of assigned revenue .
It seems important for the director of the agency to tell us about any transfers between titles exceeding the 10 % threshold .
Secondly I should also highlight the importance of the figures for the establishment plan , as our fellow Member has just mentioned , whether for temporary staff , contract workers , seconded national experts , etc . , so that we as the budgetary authority have a clear picture of the development of the human resources budgets of the agencies .
Thirdly , I think it is quite natural that we should be asking for a summary of the development of the agencies ' budgets to be sent to the European Parliament each year , in accordance with the recommendations of the European Court of Auditors .
Fourthly and finally , the provisions in the report concerning the harmonisation of the deadlines for the discharge procedure should also give Parliament real control of the proper execution of the budget .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to take my turn at complimenting Mrs Grässle on the excellent work she has done , and obviously the Commission for this development concerning the agencies .
I would like to highlight the very important provisions on the internal auditing of our agencies and suggest , following on from the comment by my fellow Member a moment ago , that we could work towards a consolidation , a sort of sub-consolidation in the EU 's accounts for all agencies , so that third parties and particularly MEPs , have a picture of the development of the accounting mass represented by all the agencies of the European Union .
( PL ) Madam President , in taking the floor in the debate devoted to amendment of the financial regulation for executive agencies and their offices , I would like to draw attention to two matters .
Firstly , there should be support for the rapporteur 's proposal that directors of agencies be obliged to notify the European Parliament if they have transferred funds from operational to administrative in an amount that exceeds 10 % of the ceiling .
Secondly , in view of the fact that executive agencies ' functioning costs are covered by the budgets for individual programmes , the almost ten percent level of these costs has an impact .
The failure to specify these costs in the case of the Trans-European Transport Network Executive Agency in particular has an impact when linked to the information that there is a shortfall of more than EUR 40bn for the projects that this agency deals with .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Mrs Gräßle on two very good reports .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Before we begin with the agenda , I would like to wish a warm welcome to my fellow Spaniard , Mrs Victoria Sobrino , Vice-President of the Provincial Council of Ciudad Real , where I am from , who is seated in the gallery today .
The Green Paper on ' Adapting to climate change in Europe - options for EU action ' ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the Green Paper on ' Adapting to climate change in Europe - options for EU action ' by Guido Sacconi , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change - B6-0014 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have no doubt whatsoever that it is vital for the European Parliament finally to take a thorough look at the issue of adapting to climate change , the scale of which we have in truth underestimated until now .
The Commission 's Green Paper has therefore given us a valuable opportunity to examine this subject .
As everyone now knows , we are engaged in a very tough battle to do our best to mitigate global warming , and we are discussing a legislative package which should enable us to take a major step towards this goal .
We are nevertheless aware that the effects of climate change are already being felt in many parts of the world , especially in the poorest areas as well as in large parts of our own continent and the European Union .
It is therefore necessary to react by developing an appropriate policy which goes in the right direction without conflicting with the primary goal of , I repeat , reducing emissions and mitigating global warming .
I believe some very significant progress was made in Bali from this point of view , given that it was decided to provide finance for the Global Environment Fund , specifically earmarking a share of the CDM to financing adaptation projects in developing countries .
I have also read , if I am not mistaken , that the programme of work drawn up last week in Bangkok to follow on from Bali - Bangkok being the first major meeting since Bali - has scheduled another meeting in Bonn this June to focus specifically on the subject of adaptation .
The reason why I have singled out this aspect , the international dimension , is that it seemed to me , when drafting the resolution adopted in the CLIM Committee and now being put before this House for its appraisal , that international cooperation was the top priority .
The European Union must set about developing cooperation and financial , technical and scientific collaboration with the countries most in need of help , countries less well-equipped to confront the sometimes devastating effects of global warming .
We need only think of the Pacific islands : we held a hearing which was attended by representatives from some of those countries , and they explained to us how precarious their situation already is now .
Another priority is of course to strike a careful balance so as to preserve a dynamic link between mitigation and adaptation .
The third priority is to stimulate research and experimentation .
There is still insufficient know-how , given the extreme diversity of territorial situations , to properly gauge the likely effects of global warming ; hence it is difficult to devise long-term policies to adapt to and prevent the most worrying developments .
The key point over the next few years will of course be dovetailing these policies with others , which calls for political resolve on the part of all players at all levels .
We have emphasised in particular the rethink that is needed in order to factor climate change into our cohesion policies , a rethink that must begin with the adaptation of agricultural policies and , more generally , land management policies .
On this point I think we should back the amendment that has been tabled , calling on the Council to adopt a common position on the soil protection directive at long last .
Finally - I think I am still within the five minutes , Mr President - I also believe it is very important to find the right balance , as it were , between European policies and action at local level .
The principle of subsidiarity must be interpreted dynamically and not in a bureaucratic fashion .
The extreme diversity of situations in Europe means that no single policy can be drawn up .
We have the southern areas of Europe , of course , and also the Alpine belt , where the effects are very different and very significant .
The various committees must therefore establish a very close one-to-one relationship with regional authorities .
I am thinking of large-scale regional bodies such as the Alpine Convention and the Carpathian Convention , which are developing some very worthwhile initiatives and can be used as a model for international cooperation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I hope you will tell us how work is progressing on the preparation of the White Paper , after the consultation held on the Green Paper .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to talk about the Commission 's work .
It is being developed to help us adapt to climate change in Europe and in the rest of the world .
Very poor countries especially , without having contributed to the greenhouse effect , will nonetheless suffer the most detrimental consequences .
Mr Sacconi mentioned that the Commission is preparing a White Paper , which is to be published in autumn 2008 as a follow-up to the Green Paper on adapting to climate change , published in June 2007 .
The main aim of the White Paper is for the EU to have an ambitious and effective strategy for limiting the effects of unavoidable climate change .
This change has already happened .
It will continue to take place in the coming years , despite measures to reduce carbon dioxide emissions , which I hope we will take and will be able to agree on in Copenhagen in 2009 .
The EU will continue to play a leading role in international initiatives relating to adaptation .
These initiatives are being developed under the aegis of the UN International Treaty .
Meanwhile , the Commission has continued to cooperate with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and with other scientific organisations carrying out research into related fields , in order to determine the most appropriate ways for the international community to deal with the challenges pointed out in recent reports .
The Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's resolution on the Green Paper and I can tell you that it supports the greater part of it .
I refer in particular to the need to derive the greatest possible gains from the harmonisation of efforts to reduce emissions and adaptation .
There is a need to increase research and collect more scientific information , protect ecosystems , and analyse and evaluate current and future funding strategies .
It is also important to strengthen the relationship between research and various policies and integrate the parameters of adaptation into the EU 's internal and external policies where necessary .
We must ensure the full participation of all national administrative bodies and civil society in tackling the issue .
In drafting the White Paper on adaptation the Commission will , of course , make full use of the contributions of concerned parties within the framework of dialogue , as well as the European Parliament 's views .
Let me thank you for all your support so far for the European Commission 's endeavours .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Sacconi , the rapporteur , for an excellent document which I fully support .
I would like to say that it proved possible to avoid discussing issues other than adapting in this document .
We focused on adapting and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for limiting the document to cover only issues relating to adapting and reducing the effects of climate change .
Nonetheless , I would like to emphasis four matters I consider to be very important .
We should remember that beyond Europe , that is to say , in Asia , Africa and Oceania , the effects of climate change are very considerable indeed and bear no comparison to what we are experiencing on our continent .
Secondly , we need to develop technology and ways of adapting that will reduce the impact of the climate changes taking place at present and enable us to adjust and adapt to what is happening to the climate .
A further reason for acting in this way is so that we can then share our experiences with poorer and developing countries .
You may well ask why we need to do all this , ladies and gentlemen .
The reason is that negotiating the post-Kyoto Protocol is a key political challenge facing the European Union , because it is much cheaper to guard against climate change and prevent it happening than to adapt to it .
Anyone who travels to Asian or African countries or to the islands of Oceania will soon appreciate this .
Our aim therefore has to be to ensure that the whole world commits to preventing climate change .
This must come about in Poznań and Copenhagen , and it is our responsibility as the European Union to ensure that it does .
My final point is that the Union 's budget does not provide headings for our priorities .
Our current priority is to overcome climate change and also to prevent it .
This is linked to the Union 's energy policy .
We do not have any such headings at present .
The budget headings should be revised during the mid-term review , because our budget should respond to what the European Union deems to be most important .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me first of all congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , who has brought his experience on the issue of the environment and climate change to bear and produced a first-rate report .
Commissioner , as we engage in the real debate on climate change , the problems are all beginning to take shape , with great clarity and speed .
This is especially true of environmental , economic and energy problems , on which the development and growth of both the European and the international economy are modelled .
This development appears to have continued aimlessly , wasting natural and human resources , with the clear aim of accumulating capital .
However , the environment has reached a parlous state , as can be seen from natural disasters , and a credit crisis has been reached .
The energy products market is turbulent because there is no more equilibrium .
Spatial planning for energy sources and the food market are in turmoil because agriculture is being used to supply energy .
All this will prompt significant changes in the EU 's production model .
However , other rival powers such as China and the United States will also take action , in a bid to redistribute productive capital and production factors .
We hope that the policy of adapting to climate change will prepare the EU 's new European development model .
Perhaps this will protect the environment and employment and give new impetus to social policies , cross-border cooperation measures and taxation policy .
For this to happen , resources and the Community budget must be redistributed and bolstered since as far as we can judge , they are insufficient to cater for adaptation .
Commissioner , this is essential because tackling the problem of adaptation is politically costly ; there must be no gap between the policies we announce and the budget we allocate .
If there is , we will not be trusted either by the citizens of today or by future generations .
Let me say that we fully support Mr Sacconi 's report and make three fundamental requests .
Firstly , the policy of adaptation should be added to all Community policies .
Secondly , local , regional and central administrations should cooperate with each other ; all policies , such as employment , cohesion and agricultural policy , should be coordinated ; this is an important issue touched on by the rapporteur .
Thirdly , and most importantly , international agreements must be cooperated on .
We will have to bolster these policies as well as the fund , to which reference has been made .
Commissioner , we also await the results of the White Paper to which you have referred .
Bearing in mind your sensitivity to these issues and to interinstitutional cooperation between Parliament and the Commission , we believe that the European Parliament will play an important role in your endeavours .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is the first outcome of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , which we wished to set up in order to have a forum for the development of an effective policy ensuring a close link between adaptation and mitigation .
We are talking here specifically about adaptation , but we should not in fact forget the need to ensure that the resources for adaptation derive partly from the emissions trading system .
Since it is the poorest countries that bear the greatest burden of climate change , we must see to it that the proceeds from the emissions trading system are placed first and foremost at the disposal of developing countries .
I believe we can do so by applying a principle of general equity , namely by handing out free rights of emission , to be established essentially on the basis of an equity principle : ' one person , one right of emission ' .
If we think of the one and a half billion poor people in the world and the figures now quoted in the current Kyoto Protocol - approximately € 20 per tonne - the granting of a right of emission amounting , for example , to one tonne could make € 30 billion per year available to the world 's poor for mitigation measures .
Just think , this might be what is needed by Bangladesh to implement minimal mitigation measures .
Certain African states are already thinking along these lines , and this principle of equity also indicates that we , the countries primarily responsible for the phenomenon , are shouldering our responsibility for carrying mitigation forward .
Furthermore , climate change in our own countries means more intense rainfall , longer dry spells and less snowfall .
We must therefore practise integrated land management to protect the soil , and here I would emphasise the importance of what Mr Sacconi said , because in circumstances of widespread water shortages , rain must be kept where it falls so that it can water the lower slopes .
In addition , longer dry spells increase the likelihood of fires , which we can address by thinning out woodland to minimise the fire load .
However , we must act on all fronts at once in a consistent and determined fashion .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , climate change really is one of the most serious problems facing mankind in this day and age .
Contrary to what people would have us believe , however , mankind cannot make a significant impact on climate change .
The latter is part of a natural environmental cycle linked to the activity of the sun , and to changes taking place on the earth 's crust .
There is no significant scientific evidence to suggest that drastic cuts in carbon dioxide emissions will make a substantial contribution to reducing climate change .
I repeat , Commissioner : there is no scientific evidence to that effect .
There is simply the quasi-religion that so much effort is going into establishing .
In any case , reductions in carbon dioxide emissions are really only possible in Europe .
If the situation is as I describe it , and we spend unimaginable sums of money on limiting carbon dioxide emissions , whilst India , China and the United States fail to stand shoulder to shoulder with us , we might as well be throwing those huge sums of money down the drain .
That money could be put to many other uses .
It could , for instance , serve to provide people right across Europe with clean water .
It could also be used to reduce pollution and eliminate toxic gases , oxides , nitrides , sulphides , fluorides and others .
Everyone could enjoy clean air and clean water and there would still be money left for other purposes .
I do not believe that climate change will never happen and that there is no need to economise .
I do maintain , however , that there are no grounds at all for the approach adopted here , whereby the main problem is the emission of carbon dioxide as the key greenhouse gas and that action by human beings can change , reduce or limit potential climate change .
That is simply a myth .
Commissioner , some very serious studies are currently available .
There are documents signed by several hundred climate scientists questioning this type of solution .
I appeal to the Commissioner , to you , Sir , and to the scientists with whom you are working to consider the matter carefully before taking strategic decisions , as the latter will be very detrimental to the further development of mankind .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , as the previous speaker has just shown , in the European Parliament we are still far from reaching a unanimous view on global warming .
Nor do I believe that for the time being , we will be able to reconcile the two camps : those who think that global warming is a major problem and those who repeatedly and fundamentally doubt that the problem does indeed exist in this form .
What I am sure about , however , is that there is one argument which must carry weight even with those of you who take that view .
The major challenge posed by climate change and the major challenge of securing a reliable , affordable and sustainable energy supply in Europe and other parts of the world can be mastered using the same tools .
I therefore believe that everything that has been discussed in Europe to date as a response to climate change must make sense even to the sceptics : limited resources or difficult access to energy resources , which are often located in crisis regions of the world , must be addressed with concepts based on renewable energies , energy efficiency and energy saving .
These are good instruments with which to make progress in both arenas .
Perhaps there is , after all , a possibility of reaching a consensus .
As to the major debate about adaptation to climate change which we conducted in committee , there does appear to be broad agreement , and that makes me somewhat mistrustful .
To my mind , the question is this : why do we find it so easy to agree on instruments for adaptation and yet so difficult to agree on ways of actually combating global warming ?
I am not really convinced that adaptation measures are going to help us very much in Europe .
In my view , they distract attention in some ways from the fact that the wrong political strategies and wrong development and industry strategies are still being pursued and are exacerbating the problems we face as a result of global warming .
In other words , we have completely inappropriate settlement policies , the wrong agricultural policy , the wrong approach to the management of water resources , and poor protection of biosystems .
This all exacerbates the problems we face while we sit here and argue over adaptation .
I think that when viewed in relation to the instruments which we are using to combat climate change , these adaptation measures always need to be viewed with a critical eye .
I would like to emphasise one other point , namely the amendments we have tabled to Mr Sacconi 's report today .
In our amendments , we have concentrated to a very great extent on soil protection .
I hope that this will be supported , for I believe that this is a fundamental problem which has not yet been adequately addressed at European level .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that even if we were able to keep global warming to within two degrees , that would still mean a scenario of extreme climatic variations in Europe , with consequences for the local economy , the environment and the population .
Such upheavals would lead to a further increase in regional and social inequalities and disparities within Europe .
Hence we cannot adopt an approach based solely on cost-benefit analysis , because in Europe , as in the rest of the world , poor people will be those hardest hit : it is they who live in the areas most at risk , and generally they lack information and do not have the wherewithal to react to a rapidly changing environment .
We must act immediately to counter the effects of climate change , beginning for example with new buildings and new infrastructure , ensuring that town planning takes environmental impact assessments into account ; there should be no investment in infrastructure which is already obsolete in terms of the new requirements associated with climate change .
We must at the same time invest in policies to guarantee access to common goods such as water , food and healthcare resources in the areas most at risk .
Water is becoming an ever-scarcer resource , so it needs to be managed in a way that makes it available and accessible to all .
Finally , I should like to conclude by saying that policies for adapting to climate change cannot be dissociated from measures geared to social equity .
We need a new model of economic development which factors in environmental costs and makes sustainability a key means of encouraging employment and new social policies .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the European Commission and Mr Dimas for this Green Paper on ' Adapting to climate change in Europe - options for EU action ' .
I would also like to thank Mr Sacconi for all the work he has done on the motion for a resolution .
I think both documents contain very valuable elements .
Adapting to climate change can be woven into a lot of existing legislation in the areas of water , energy , agriculture and fisheries , and industry , for example .
It is also important to assist developing countries in adapting to climate change , for example in the field of environmental technology transfer .
The European Union has , in my opinion , an historical responsibility in this area .
At EU level we need to talk primarily about coordinating and gathering knowledge for our strategic policy .
Moreover , it is vital that the Member States , regions , local authorities and businesses , but also individual citizens , take responsibility for adaptation strategies .
Fortunately , positive strategies have already been created in this area .
I am delighted that this element has also been highlighted in Mr Sacconi 's motion for a resolution .
I expect that the European Commission and the Council are taking the recommendations of the European Parliament into serious consideration .
The EU will then be able to speak with a single voice to the other parties in the international climate debate at the upcoming climate conferences in Poznań and Copenhagen .
Mr President , I have four quick questions on climate change .
Firstly , is global warming happening ?
Answer : no , the world has got slightly cooler over the last 10 years and the rate of cooling is accelerating .
Secondly , is it caused by mankind ?
Answer : no , there is increasing scientific evidence to show that what climate change we see is part of natural cycles and has very little or nothing to do with human activity .
Thirdly , can we make a difference ?
Even those who believe in global warming accept that the whole of the Kyoto process , if it were fully implemented - and it will not be - would make a tiny difference in 100 years time to global temperatures .
All the efforts we are making will have practically no effect .
Fourthly , what will it do to our economies ?
It will be hugely damaging .
As Mr Pęk rightly said , we are pouring truckloads of money into a doomed project and causing huge damage to ourselves , to European economies and to our children and grandchildren .
( RO ) The creation of the Committee on Climate Change was determined by the direct impact climate changes have on the planet , endangering the existence of humankind in general .
We debate the European Treaty , we want to strengthen Community institutions , we create plans for the future .
We should be very careful , we may have no reason to do this anymore .
Our health , economy , ecosystems , our way of life , Europe as we know it is in great danger .
Scientists have expressed their position and we have agreed with them in a large majority .
Studies are very clear and we can also see here , in Brussels , how weather phenomena of all four seasons happen in one day , which is clearly not normal .
The mandate of the Committee on Climate Change is extremely clear : it has to analyze the present situation , to make a list of possibilities for combating climate change and formulate concrete proposals regarding the European Union policy in this field , at all decision levels .
Today 's resolution includes a large number of action proposals for the Committee .
Nevertheless , in order for them to have an effect , I believe these proposals should be considered thoroughly and maybe included into the Committee 's final report , adding suggestions for the implementation deadlines .
Moreover , it is absolutely necessary for the European institutions to propose , as soon as possible , a clear strategy to be negotiated at an international level .
It is useless to take action only in Europe .
We should be the promoters of combating climate change at a global level .
Just concrete actions , which would take into consideration only those arguments regarding the stability of the citizens ' lives , could diminish the effects of climate change and these actions should be implemented as soon as possible .
( FI ) Mr President , restraint is obviously the main ingredient in the fight against climate change , but we are at a point where we also need to find ways to adapt .
It is absolutely right to say that we need a pan-European framework for our adaptation policy , in which to coordinate common targets , targets which are as ambitious as possible , and pave the way for cooperation .
We nevertheless also have to remember , as has been said here , that the remedies for adaptation are also very local and very regional , so that the power of decision for employing the remedies must be at regional level .
We now know very well what we need to do to be better able to acclimatise to the future in a way that allows our lifestyles to adapt to changed circumstances .
For example , we already have available to us right now the construction technology necessary to construct buildings which do not consume energy , but , on the contrary , produce it .
It is quite unbelievable that no progress has yet been made in this field , because it is a relatively simple matter .
We also know that climate change will have an impact on people 's living conditions .
We have already had experience of heatwaves and the heavy toll of human life that results from them in different Member States .
There may be a greater incidence of epidemic disease too , with these diseases occurring in places where they are at present unknown .
It is all this that our healthcare systems must be able to respond to , with everyone having guaranteed access to healthcare services .
( SV ) I would first like to thank the Commission and the Commissioner , Stavros Dimas , for the Green Paper on adapting to climate change .
It is a document which all decision-makers and business managers , indeed all Europeans , should read in order to understand the kind of challenges that face us and what we need to do .
After all , as many speakers have already pointed out , a great many people will be affected by the changes in climate which we can see coming .
Hitherto we have talked a great deal in economic terms in the European debate , but climate change will alter the whole environment of our lives .
A subject to which we have not so far devoted sufficient discussion is health .
The World Health Organisation has indicated that 60 000 deaths last year can be linked to climate change .
It calls for an entirely different approach to social planning , entirely different technology and huge investment .
It may frighten many people , but we must make this investment in order to cope with climate change and technical development and in order to hold our own in competition with other parts of the world .
As always in an engineering revolution , there will be winners and losers , but throughout the EU system we are working to ensure that European industry and European workers will be winners in this situation .
This will require considerable investment , forward-looking decisions and cooperation across borders .
There can be no decisions on transport which do not take climate change into account .
There can be no discussion of public health or education without addressing climate change .
One of the most important matters we have begun to deal with is of course water , in Europe and at global level .
We have received visits in the committee from representatives of the Maldives , a country where the highest point is just over two metres above current sea level .
The Maldives will partially disappear if we cannot solve the climate problem .
It is the poorest countries which will suffer most .
I would therefore like to issue a challenge to the Commission : the Solidarity Fund must be boosted and given more resources , and aid from the EU must also focus on climate questions .
Otherwise we cannot help the rest of the world , and moreover , we shall not get a good agreement out of the negotiations in Copenhagen in 2009 . Thank you .

( PL ) Mr President , the debate triggered by Mr Sacconi 's question is of great relevance to the citizens of Europe .
We should link countering climate change with limiting changes in the global market that are detrimental to us .
I am referring , in particular , to the meteoric rise in the price of gas and oil , of which we are the largest importer .
We must also consider the scenario regarding the consequences of increasing CO2 .
It is a fact that trees and plants flourished when the CO2 content of the atmosphere was much greater .
During the last millennium there was a time when it was possible to travel from Poland to Sweden across the frozen Baltic .
There was also a time when grain and apples were harvested in April in my country .
At present , the apple trees are just starting to blossom .
That is why the accepted theory about the harmful greenhouse effect resulting from increased CO2 emissions should be tested against the rather different views held by a large number of scientists .
There may well be other reasons for these unusual climatic events and droughts .
Incomplete understanding of the subject may of course result in unnecessary expenditure from our coffers .
It is true that CO2 emissions are accompanied by compounds of nitrogen and sulphur , and by particulates that are harmful to the environment and to human health , especially in the ever-extending urban areas .
For environmental protection and economic reasons , sectoral policies should focus on priorities such as : actions to reduce the demand for hydrocarbons , the exploitation of renewable energy , biofuels , the promotion of nuclear energy , the use of coal in chemical processing not just in power stations , and the use of electrically-powered vehicles in transport and communication .
These priorities will significantly reduce the emissions of CO2 and other harmful substances , providing added value to the citizens of the Union .
Resources should be ring-fenced for each of these areas by way of preferential priorities and grants .
( FR ) Commissioner , I want to put a question to you .
Do you not feel slightly alone within the Commission ?
What you are proposing to us is something revolutionary .
I am not talking about adaptation because I think that talking about adaptation alone is perhaps not the best solution since we have not yet quantified the consequences .
What are the real consequences of climate change ?
At present , we really do not know .
However , we will certainly be able to quantify the consequences if we do nothing .
We also know why we have reached this point .
It is simply the result of the policies we have put in place : the agricultural policy , the economic policy , etc .
Obviously then today we must question the policies we continue to implement , for example when striving for growth .
Surely we should be asking ourselves what type of growth we want today in order to slow down climate change .
What does it mean today to ask for growth in all our Member States ?
These are fundamental questions , Mr Dimas , that you are asking us to raise today , because this is not just a matter for the Commission or for the Temporary Committee on Climate Change .
It is a matter that affects the whole world today and every one of us .
I do not like this manner , shall we say , of perhaps absolving ourselves of responsibility , and maybe even misleading our fellow citizens by trying to get them to believe that we can adapt to climate change and that at the end of the day the situation may not be as serious because we are going to have the means to adapt to it .
No , Commissioner , that would really be pulling the wool over their eyes .
Since we are at the beginning of the proposals on this issue , we are in the process of preparing an energy package and we know how much resistance there will be to achieving the level of results we desire , which is nonetheless a minimum minimorum .
As you can see , we have a long road ahead of us .
I am not saying that what you are proposing is bad .
It is encouraging , but the revolution you are proposing will have to be quantified in order to convince the other Commissioners that we need to go in another direction .
You will have to convince the Agriculture Commissioner that we need to go in another direction .
You will have to convince Mr Louis Michel that we need to mention climate change in the partnership agreements with Africa .
We need to reshape our African policies , and this policy will have to incorporated into the synergy we have created with the African countries .
Today or tomorrow Mr Sarkozy is going to propose a Union for the Mediterranean .
What has he proposed to combat climate change ?
These countries are directly involved .
I wish you luck , Commissioner , for your job is undoubtedly going to be extremely difficult .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall focus on two points .
Even today , billions of people have no access to water and hundreds of millions are dying as a result .
Climate change is bound to worsen the situation .
The price will be paid mainly by continents such as Africa , which are already enduring terrible conditions and , even though they pollute less , are harder hit by climate change .
The right to water must become a top priority for adaptation policies .
I say ' right ' because this right has still not yet been sanctioned .
International documents refer to the ' need for water ' , whilst real military and economic wars are being waged with a view to appropriating water and turning it into a commodity .
It is therefore necessary to sanction the right to water and pursue policies enabling that right to be implemented .
In this sense it may be useful - and here I am addressing the Commissioner - to draw up a water protocol for inclusion in the text of the post-Kyoto agreements .
Along with water goes soil .
We have a European directive in need of approval .
We must combat desertification and promote the role of the soil as an agent of climate balance : that is the thrust of our directive .
Good agricultural practice , unlike for example the production of biodiesel , can guarantee both food output and carbon capture .
Adaptation , therefore , does not mean surrendering to climate change but intervening to combat it .
Mr President , the EU is proud of its commitment to the IPCC 's recommendations on how to combat global warming by persuading its Member States to inject massive funding into carbon-emission control projects .
But have you backed the wrong horse ?
Last month many eminent scientists and climatologists from around the world met in New York and after two days of serious discussions issued the Manhattan Declaration , which states categorically that there is no convincing evidence that CO2 emissions from modern industrial activity have in the past , are now , or will in the future cause catastrophic climate change ; and that adaptation , as needed , is massively more cost-effective than any attempted mitigation .
They recommend that world leaders reject the views expressed by the United Nations IPCC , as well as popular but misguided works such as An Inconvenient Truth , and that all taxes , regulations and other interventions intended to reduce emissions of CO2 be abandoned forthwith .
Finally , Lord Lawson , who is a member of the House of Lords Select Committee on Climate Change , says this : ' The average temperature in Helsinki is less than 5 ° C. In Singapore it is in excess of 27 ° C - a difference of 22 ° .
If humans can successfully cope with that , it is not immediately apparent why they should not be able to adapt to a change of some 3 ° when they are given 100 years in which to do so . '
I recommend that you take advice given in the Manhattan Declaration .
( CS ) Despite my doubts that the temperature changes we are observing have been caused by human activities , I would like to support some of the key points of Mr Sacconi 's report .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that the Green Paper lacks an examination of the socio-economic dimension and an analysis of the expected consequences for the populations concerned , as well as issues of interdependence between individual sectors on impact adaptation .
I also support the requirement that the Council should lower the thresholds for mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund and that the Commission should carry out a study on the economics of adaptation , and develop scenarios establishing a balance sheet of adaptation costs and benefits .
Ladies and gentlemen , I firmly believe that if we want to act in the interests of the citizens of the EU , we should invest in research , development and education in the field of nuclear energy .
Scientific findings show that nuclear energy does not produce CO2 and that it minimises the aggravation of climate change .
At the same time it is the least expensive silicon technology and it is also reliable and secure .
I think it is a mistake that the Commission Green Paper , which we are discussing here today , makes only a marginal reference to nuclear energy .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , agriculture and forestry are among the economic sectors hardest hit by climate change and therefore have a strong interest in efficient climate protection measures , also at global level .
All states - particularly developing countries - need to be involved in the regime for the post-Kyoto period .
Binding targets for developing countries are essential , but emissions must be reduced within a reasonable timeframe .
Through animal husbandry and the use of fertilisers , agriculture does contribute to greenhouse gas emissions .
Unlike industry , transport and space heating , however , these are natural emissions .
Let me give you some examples : in Austria , agriculture produces just 8.66 % of emissions .
Since 1990 , these emissions have fallen by around 14 % .
Besides waste management , Austrian agriculture is the only sector to have already fulfilled Austria 's ' minus 13 % ' Kyoto target .
The opportunities afforded by agriculture range from CO2 storage in soils , the optimum use of humus and the production of biomass as an energy resource .
I would point out , Mr President , that industry in Austria has also made great efforts to keep its emissions as low as possible .
Currently , about 9 % of total EU greenhouse gas emissions come from agriculture , which means it is far less of a polluter than energy use , with 59 % , or transport with 21 % , for example .
Commissioner , if we really are to get a grip on climate change , energy avoidance and increased energy efficiency must be our goals .
( RO ) Climate changes are more and more obvious and humankind should change its behavior , giving more attention to environmental protection .
Europe is already dealing with very high temperatures during summer , droughts followed by heavy rains and floods , violent storms and desertification of vast regions , especially in the Southern and Eastern regions .
Romania has not been exempt from the effects of climate change either .
In recent years , we have seen devastating floods , hot days , violent storms , the desertification of regions in the Southern and Eastern part of the country , a decrease in precipitation .
All these have led to loss of human lives , important material damage and a decrease in agricultural production .
Europe needs to take firm action today in order to reduce the effects of climate change .
Europe needs to take action for a better water management , protection against floods , wastewater purification , protection of coastal areas , increase in energy efficiency , reduction of greenhouse gas emissions , adopting less polluting agriculture , adopting ecological transport , stopping deforestation .
Special attention must be given to areas under desertification .
Europe should examine the possibility of investing in an irrigation system that would assist the Member States in danger of diminishing their agricultural production following desertification in building or improving their irrigation systems .
I congratulate the Commission for the Green Paper on a new urban mobility policy .
20 % of European motorists could use public transport .
Also , reducing the speed limit will allow us to fight the greenhouse effect .
The introduction of aviation into the emission certificates trading scheme is a first step forward .
The introduction of maritime transport into this scheme is also being considered .
Unfortunately , the Union 's current budget does not integrate the necessary actions for reducing climate change sufficiently and coherently .
The budget for climate change is modest .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the effects of climate change are evident and are only going to become more pronounced .
We now know that despite the implementation of an ambitious policy to combat climate change we can only stabilise the phenomenon , and we therefore have to adapt to its consequences .
Adapting to climate change will require ambitious financing in many areas , and in my view the most important of these are : health , agriculture , water protection , housing and population migrations .
To this end , our policy on support for European research should give priority to these areas .
Combating greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to climate change should become compulsory conditions for the allocation of European funding .
This is a global problem ; we thus need global responses .
The European Union must make every effort to establish at global level a policy on adapting to climate change .
This policy should take account of the growing number of natural disasters when drawing up health and agricultural plans .
This policy should focus above all on the most vulnerable countries , i.e. the poorest countries .
Just as we can hope to benefit from the fruit of European research , we must ensure that the developing countries benefit from it too .
We should transfer our technologies to third countries without necessarily expecting any recompense .
However , adapting to climate change does not just mean making greater use of technologies .
We also need to look at some of the practices we have inherited from previous generations .
For example , in my region , the south-west of France , the old farms face directly to the south : the inhabitants had realised that the direction in which the house faced protected them from the easterly and westerly winds , and made them lighter and warmer in winter and cooler in summer thanks to shade from the trees .
They were bioclimatic houses .
Today such practices are neglected , and yet they are so simple .
We must go back to these simple , sensible actions and continue to encourage research into better housing .
It is in this sector that we need to find solutions to avoid , for example , the use of energy for air conditioning in houses .
We need to emphasise how important it is for buildings to be energy efficient .
Finally , we must move from raising awareness among the public to education and training .
We must pass on to the younger generations the appropriate and considered actions and , of course , our generation must learn them too .
I would like to finish by congratulating Mr Sacconi on his excellent and polished report .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened with interest to your opening speech .
You must know that you have many allies here in the European Parliament , but I am afraid that there are far fewer people who support these objectives of yours within the Commission itself .
In order to be in the vanguard of the struggle against climate change , the EU must above all be consistent in its announcements .
Consequently , when you rightly talk about mainstreaming and say that we must reduce greenhouse gases , the Commission cannot fund the EU 's continuing dependence on carbon and petrol .
The foreign policy of the Commission and the Council must pressurise Mr Bush , not cajole him , to commit to these agreements .
The policy must help poorer countries with a technology transfer and resources package so that they can take part in the global alliance .
You must also listen to the criticisms voiced by the European Parliament about the this obsession with biofuels , which are destroying the Amazon forests , wrecking the global climate , doubling food prices and thus putting pressure on the poorer sections of society .
To conclude , Commissioner , we are with you , but you must put up more of a fight in order to win over the Commission itself .
( Applause )
Mr President , climate change is a challenge to us all .
We must remember that we share this world not just with people today , but with those who come in the future .
However , if our policies are going to be effective , we must distinguish between man-made and natural climate change .
The first is the effect of our activities ; the other is a natural process .
Our landscapes , soils and river systems are all the result of natural and ongoing climate change .
Man-made climate change is inexcusable .
The response to it is change - change of fuels , change of consumption and change of heart .
Making the distinction is not to say that natural climate change is not a worry , but the answer to it is adaptation .
Archaeologists tell us that , in the past , when the climates changed , people who could adapted and people who could not perished .
Today we humans have burrowed deep .
Our homes and cities are cemented into the earth 's crust .
Our habits and habitats have become inflexible .
Having an ice age or an era of heat is just not on our agenda at the moment : ' please come back in an eon or so . '
The response to natural climate change is long-sighted planning , intelligent preparation and common sense .
Do not build on flood plains .
Plant deciduous forests .
Shore up endangered coastlines .
We must balance our approach to climate change between change and adaptation , between man-made and natural , and use our funds appropriately so that they will be effective .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against global warming is not just Europe 's fight : it must become the whole planet 's battle .
Otherwise all our great plans will be meaningless and the Europeans alone will make enormous efforts for results that will remain a drop in the ocean .
In addition , we need to ensure European dynamism today .
Again , massive and unattainable goals lie ahead of us .
The European summit in March of this year stipulated that greenhouse gas emissions must be down 20 % by 2020 , with renewable energy meeting 20 % of the Union 's demand .
However , one of the major questions that remains is , naturally , who will pay for that ?
Companies and consumers would have to cough up about EUR 60 billion a year for the climate plan , which for my country , Belgium , would work out at EUR 2 billion a year , and globally at at least EUR 200per citizen .
This not only threatens an enormous tax increase , but is also a factor that threatens to force businesses to move abroad to countries where the environmental restrictions are less stringent .
We must therefore stick to ' treating the symptoms ' as long as some of the players on the world stage are not prepared to make the necessary efforts .
( ES ) Thank you , Mr President .
First and foremost , I would like to congratulate Mr Sacconi on his question , which gives us the opportunity to discuss climate change here today .
My colleagues will speak on more technical aspects , but I want to take this opportunity to thank the Commissioner and , above all , to express my support for everything he is doing in this regard : he was one of the forerunners and one of the first people to talk about climate change here in Brussels .
What I want , above all , is for consideration to be given to specific geographical characteristics , and one area in particular , which will of no surprise to you : the island regions .
The beautiful Greek islands - like the Balearics , which I represent - may be at risk in the future from any climate changes that occur .
In my view , the Commission cannot recognise solely the specific nature of the outermost regions ; it must also incorporate the insularity factor and , of course , mountainous and coastal regions .
The studies by the Spanish Oceanography Institute , and many others , highlight the fact that the Mediterranean Sea is undergoing an accelerated warming process and a rise in the water level .
This could have significant repercussions on the coastline , especially the beaches , which would be flooded , with the corresponding impact on tourism , our main source of income .
In the example I was talking about , the Balearics , temperatures have risen notably in recent years , which is cause for concern .
The Green Paper must also include a commitment to support the regions requiring substantial investment to counteract the effects of climate change .
I want to end by outlining my personal ambition , and that of the European People 's Party , which is for the European Union to take the lead in the area of carbon-free or low-carbon technologies .
We firmly believe that a rapid and brave switch to more modern and efficient technologies will not only benefit our climate and provide the basis for a global solution , but will also be advantageous for the economy since it will make us much less dependent on imports of fossil fuels .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , adaptation to climate change needs more of our attention and soon , because whatever we do about climate change we also need to invest in adapting societies to cope with rising sea and river levels , or conversely less water and drought .
All these have consequences for security , water consumption , the soil , agriculture , but also , clearly , for public health .
Some areas must prepare themselves for severe drought and higher temperatures .
Irrigation systems and clean desalination units are the solution in this case .
Other areas must deal with water as an inconvenience and must invest in dyke reinforcement .
It is for the Member States themselves to make plans , to analyse the impact of climate change and to get ready .
There are , however , three important points .
First of all , solidarity is very necessary : some countries are carried along by others while some have more strength than others .
It goes without saying that the European Union also has a common responsibility .
Secondly , there must thus also be a common source of financing .
We must look for sources of financing and the obvious thing is to look at the Structural Funds but also at the revenue from ETS auctions .
Thirdly , solidarity must of course also apply to the developing countries .
Many African and Asian countries have themselves hardly contributed to climate change but are still negatively affected by it .
Sound and solid sources of financing must be found , and here to the obvious thing is to look at the ETS revenue .
( SV ) In this report we ask for measures to make agriculture face up to its climate responsibility .
Agriculture includes the livestock industry , which accounts for 18 % of world emissions of greenhouse gases .
Eighteen per cent !
This is stated by the FAO in its report ' Livestock 's long shadow ' of 2006 .
What can we do to bring down this 18 % share of emissions ?
When IPCC Chairman , Rajendra Pachauri , spoke to us in the Temporary Committee on Climate Change , he called for a reduction in meat consumption .
He is quite right .
Never before in the history of the world have we eaten as much meat as we do today .
Since the 1950s , world production of meat has increased more than fivefold .
This is not sustainable .
I would like to ask Commissioner Dimas : do you agree with Rajendra Pachauri that we should eat less meat ?
I call on the Commission to develop a plan for the reduction of meat consumption .
Finally , some suggestions : an information campaign on vegetarian eating , a call on the Member States to introduce meat taxes so that meat becomes dearer and vegetarian food cheaper , promotion of green eating in our own EU institutions ; for example , a vegetarian week in the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council would be a good , modern and green start for a more sustainable Union .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I say ' yes ' to the climate package because Europe must send a strong signal to the world on the eve of the launch of Copenhagen 's international negotiations .
I must tell you that employees and employers in my constituency are extremely concerned about the proposal to do away with free CO2 emission quotas and allow them to be auctioned off .
With this proposal , Europe would inflict a double hardship on businesses , which would have to pay for CO2 emission abuses over and above the quota , but also for any CO2 emissions from the first tonne produced .
European businesses would thus face an unprecedented rise in costs .
If this standard were to be applied worldwide , that would be fine : everyone would thus be in the same boat .
However , if this constraint is only applied to European companies , they would be penalised financially and there would be a serious risk of jobs relocating outside the Union .
Should we then abandon this idea of paying CO2 emissions from the first tonne produced ?
I do not think so because the ultimate goal is commendable .
Nevertheless , in this case Europe must have available a fair mechanism that consists of taxing imports from third countries that do not make the same environmental efforts as European companies .
Yes , let us create a ' carbon ' tax : far from being a cautious protectionist instrument , it is an instrument designed to ensure fair and undistorted trade at global level , which is a fundamental objective of the European Union and the WTO .
As for the rest , I welcome the Commission 's various proposals .
It is a positive move to ensure that as many economic sectors as possible are included in the mechanisms - ETS or others - to combat climate change .
I note , in particular , that the transport sector , at which we often point the finger , is preparing to make its contribution and that is something I welcome .
In conclusion , I hope that we will be able to reach an agreement quickly , i.e. before the end of the year , and that this climate package can thus be implemented as soon as possible .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , climate change is on the way ; that is a scientifically proven fact .
The IPCC 's Fourth Assessment Report states quite clearly that no region of Europe will be spared its effects .
It is important to keep increases in temperature under 2 ° C. However , even global warming of less than 2 ° C would have negative economic and environmental consequences for certain regions of Europe .
That is why Europe must act now .
We must initiate adaptation measures now , and in many policy fields .
However , climate change also presents opportunities ; one of these opportunities is for us to prepare ourselves for climate change by means of adaptation measures .
As we think about adaptation measures , we should also adapt the Lisbon process to the demands of climate change .
This offers an opportunity to create an environmentally driven industrial policy : an economic and industrial policy which decouples economic growth from CO2 and greenhouse gas emissions .
This will be the key to success .
Let me pose a question to the Commissioner here : to what extent is the Commission discussing the Lisbon process in the context of climate change ?
The second point is this : it is also important to ensure that local and regional decision-makers are informed about the effects of climate change on their areas .
How will climate change affect the individual regions ?
This will be very important in terms of development planning , for example , which is why I support the proposal in the motion for a resolution which calls for the establishment of a European database that is accessible to regional decision-makers as a guide for their development planning .
Mr President , could I suggest that we stop beating ourselves up over climate change and blaming each sector as if one is more guilty than the other ?
In particular this impression comes through about the contribution made by agriculture .
Europe is powerless on its own to do anything about climate change , but it can provide much-needed leadership .
We need global coordinated action , and that is recognised .
Let me deal specifically with the debate around agriculture .
It contributes to climate change but it is also affected by it : that has been stated already .
However , it is important to remember that agriculture produces food and without food we are not going very far .
If you look at global demand for food it is set to increase by 50 % in 20 years , but agriculture can , through carbon sequestration , anaerobic digestion , forestry planting - and I think that is the key - and wind energy , contribute to this debate .
In terms of the Irish situation we have actually reduced our emissions from agriculture by 3 % since 1990 , but look at what has happened to transport , where emissions are up by 163 % .
For industry the figure is 23 % , and for energy 32 % .
The danger of targeting agriculture is that we will reduce cattle numbers and reduce emissions in Europe , but we will transfer production elsewhere and make absolutely no difference .
So we do need to be careful on this .
Traditional practices , like digging your garden in the autumn and leaving it over winter , are now a no-no .
Well , I am guilty because I still do it .
Let us be sensible in this debate .
Let us do the research and development so that we do not go backwards , but go forward with positive solutions .
Look at India .
It has 17 % of the world population but only contributes to 4 % of global greenhouse emissions .
It has got to develop to look after its poor people .
It will contribute to the debate on climate change but it can only do it in a way that recognises its real present situation .
Finally , can I say that the Lisbon Treaty , for the first time , gives us some hope for a global action on climate change , with Europe providing leadership .
On that basis I hope that the Irish population turn out and vote overwhelmingly ' yes ' to the Treaty of Lisbon .


( ES ) Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , Mr Sacconi , for all your work .
We have a problem .
Therefore , public and private investment in research and development to combat climate change is vital to ensure that the adaptation and mitigation actions are as effective as possible in relation to the limits and consequences of climate change .
We have an enormous task ahead of us , Commissioner .
We must implement measures in the field of energy efficiency , promotion of renewable energies , efficient cogeneration , efficient use of fuels in motor vehicles , energy-saving public transport and lighting , better administration of farming and pasture land and reduction of deforestation , not forgetting better water use , given its scarcity .
However , I want to take this opportunity to make two requests .
The first is to you , Commissioner : I ask you to revise urgently the policy on biofuels , both first and second generation .
The second is addressed to the Council : in spite of the fact that the rise in temperatures and changes in rainfall patterns caused by climate change will affect the land , no agreement has yet been reached on an adequate European framework for the protection of the land .
A firm commitment must be made without delay .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Sacconi , ladies and gentlemen , as the PPE-DE 's coordinator for regional policy , I want to stress that some very important points are made in this resolution .
A relationship is established between cohesion policy and risk management and there is the idea of the integral and explicit components of future regional policy in Europe .
In addition , the regions ' position within the Union is altered by climate change .
There will be drought on the one hand , and too much water on the other hand , with rising sea levels .
The latter development is something that I must highlight as a representative of the Netherlands .
Half of our land is below sea level .
Marine dykes must be higher , but there are also many more technological challenges to consider .
That applies even more to other parts of the world .
It is also positive that we are looking to coordinate with the UN 's Strategy for Disaster Reduction .
Cohesion - and I would refer to the Lisbon Treaty in this respect - has a new territorial dimension , which we must develop and which must be included in our financial programming .
This is something that is close to the people , in the regions and in the cities , and Europe has a role to play in this regard .
Mr President , the PPE-DE does not support the first part of paragraph 13 , because at this time we are in favour of redistributing funds rather than reprioritising : it is already happening in fact .
More than EUR 15 billion are currently being allocated from the Structural Funds to , for example , bio fuels , etc .
We want to keep going down this route .
We will thus once again be revising the Structural Funds Regulation in order to achieve more energy efficiency .
That is the PPE-DE 's approach and we will take part in the debates on the long-term financial perspective - referred to in part two of paragraph 13 - and take the lead in possible reallocation or reprioritisation , but not at this time : that can be done more successfully by committing budgets and sectors than by redistributing at the moment .

( LT ) I must commend Mr Sacconi regarding the significant additions to the Commission 's timely Green Paper on the issue of climate change .
Some countries , mainly Nordic , have already developed a long-term strategy for dealing with climate change without any encouragement from Brussels , foreseeing actions to be taken in reaction to climate change : protecting coastal areas , taking measures against coastal flooding , building specially designed houses .
The adoption of the White Paper will encourage other countries to follow their example .
The EU countries with sea and ocean borders - and there are 22 of them - should meanwhile study the experience of the Netherlands in resisting the sea .
Half of the country 's territory is below sea level .
The ongoing efforts of the Dutch people to resist assaults from the sea and the enormous resources they are directing towards protection against them have not prevented them from creating one of the world 's strongest and most flourishing states .
Therefore , it proves that the possibility to adapt does exist .
At the recent meeting of the EU Council it was declared that the issue of climate change would be of the greatest importance in the preparation of the EU 's prevention and protection policy .
Conflicts and wars to gain areas still suitable to live in as well as those providing water and food should be prevented before it is too late .
This particularly concerns the poorest countries of the world , which have contributed the least to climate change .
Those that have progressed at the expense of others should pay back their debt without delay .
In future the EU should continue to provide leadership to other continents and states in setting an example of how to adopt measures to prevent climate change , adapt to new conditions and transform the habits and practices of their citizens .
Mr President , well , we are supposed to stay cool when following a debate , but this debate has got out of hand and it has literally gone with the wind , and with it has gone honesty and rationalism .
We are supposed to be honest , but painting a gloomy picture has always been politically very good .
It has always paid off .
But we are supposed to be serious and we have to look at the figures and remain rational and honest .
People can live in Helsinki , with its average annual temperature of 6 ° C , or they can live in Dakar in 30 ° C. Two thousand years ago , Julius Caesar was walking on the Rhine because it was frozen over .
One thousand years ago , the Vikings were in Greenland - that is why it is called Greenland .
Therefore , temperature is not an end in itself , but the prosperity of people is an end in itself and that is what we forget .
Why do we have emissions ?
That is the result of prosperity , and two thirds of people in the world still live in poverty .
The human family is arranged as in a staircase : we , the privileged ones , are at the top , and there are four billion people below us who , literally , want to come into the daylight , because two billion people do not even have electricity .
So what is our answer ?
Our answer is to improve our technology .
For that we need money and we need our economy to grow .
We cannot have money if we are wasting and damaging our economy by applying measures that are counterproductive and very costly .
The Commissioner did not even mention the key word ' nuclear ' in his opening remarks .
If we are not honest in this debate , then we are not serious leaders .
To sum up , we are a little bit like the man whose roof is leaking , but instead of fixing it he starts to wallpaper his cellar .
Well , that is not how to build our future .
( ES ) Thank you , Mr President .
I think that the role of , and document on , adaptation are important .
Nevertheless , the problem of climate change is a work in progress : we are constantly learning and understanding what is happening and what the possible solutions are .
I think that it is vital to ensure that the policy as a whole does not take a top-down approach .
If we want to take the lead in this field , we have to ensure that others follow us ; otherwise , the leader will stand alone .
There is the risk that if Europe advances too rapidly , if it causes a crisis in industry , if it only implements policies - I should say ' metapolicies ' - from the top down , it will not work .
We must use all means of action on the ground , get society enthusiastically involved , and adapt to our own society 's capacity for adaptation , because we must not let our welfare suffer .
In this respect , I would also stress that this document makes very little mention of adaptation on the ground , and it is something we need to talk about .
Particularly when talking about the topic of water , which is crucial and which is going to be the aspect most affected by climate change , if it is not already , it is important to remember to focus on formulas and actions on the ground - which are often very simple - with regard to soil permeability , reforestation , water harvesting , using existing reservoirs to harvest water surpluses , and properly distributing the few resources we have left rather than letting the water run out to sea and be lost .
To achieve this , sometimes we need to look to the past , to the existing traditions , and sometimes we need to lose our prejudices against solutions such as aquifer recharges and other essential measures .
I am therefore calling for integrated policies , all-encompassing policies that we can adapt to society , which must listen to our recommendations and comply with them .
If society is not behind us and is not enthusiastic , we will achieve nothing .
Therefore , we need to strive for a consensus and listen to everyone .
( SK ) The motion for a resolution prepared in response to the oral question by the Temporary Committee on Climate Change appears to be consistent , but in my view it does not pay enough attention to water , which can mitigate micro and macro-climatic issues caused by land drainage and thus contribute to a healthier climate .
Parliament 's suggestions are in line with an outdated paradigm based on effective management of existing water resources .
The new water paradigm advocates renewal of water resources in the countryside .
It advocates improving the water cycle with a view to gradually ensuring that there is sufficient water for all .
The goal of the paradigm is to adapt the current situation concerning the drainage of large areas as a result of deforestation , agriculture or sewerage .
Land drainage reduces evaporation , changes solar heat into metabolic heat and transforms enormous energy flows within it .
Even the slightest 1 mm reduction through evaporation in an area the size of Slovakia corresponds on a sunny day to a release of metabolic heat equivalent to the yearly output of all the power stations in Slovakia .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Sacconi and Commissioner Dimas for their efforts .
I hope I have succeeded in drawing your attention to these new ideas .
Mr President , firstly I would like to point out that some colleagues and I originally tabled a number of amendments to this dossier specifically addressing key issues such as the effect of climate change on biodiversity and the havoc it is already wreaking in the developing world , both of which are issues which must be dealt with without further hesitation .
The EU 's credibility on climate change policies and our claims of being at the heart of any international agreement on emissions trading post-2012 will depend on our political willingness to put our money where our collective mouth is when it comes to earmarking the revenues from the auctioning of emission allowances , and this could be up to EUR 40 billion per annum .
Generous funding for technology transfer , adaptation and mitigation measures and others will be a measure of our acceptance of our historic responsibility towards third countries , those most likely to bear the brunt of climate change , including adverse weather , desertification , coastal flooding and serious water shortages .
On this point , the legislation on the EU Emissions Trading Scheme , for which I am rapporteur , must include some political direction on auction revenues , which will test the European Council 's commitment , resolve and understanding on the 2 ° C target and , might I say , its understanding of the serious global impact of climate change , as we strive to create low-carbon economies throughout the EU , as our contribution to a global deal in Copenhagen .
( FR ) Mr President , last week I was in Argentina with the Mercosur delegation .
I noted that none of our political representatives was concerned about climate change .
There was more discussion of increasing the amount of land available for soya production and deforestation to gain more cultivable land ; even our delegation had not paid much attention to the topic .
I would therefore ask the following question : are we in the process of devising a twin-speed policy in Europe ?
Would it not be better to coordinate our position everywhere , in the knowledge that the climate change policy is a policy on the redistribution of resources ?
It is a fundamental justice policy that must be applied at global level .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me touch on an issue connected with climate change .
In today 's debate no-one has mentioned the European Commission 's recent Communication on Reinforcing the Union 's Disaster Response Capacity .
Attached to the Communication is a special annex entitled ' Forest Fires ' ; this refers to the great , catastrophic fires that struck southern Europe , and Greece in particular , last summer .
These fires are linked to climate change .
I believe there is an urgent need to take preventive measures throughout Europe and especially in the south , which , according to the IPCC , is more prone to fires and is already facing frequent bouts of extreme weather conditions .
For this reason , Commissioner , there is a compelling need for the EU to take both medium-term and immediate measures in order to ensure that events like those of last year are not repeated next summer .
( CS ) However utterly new and unique this era might appear , it is also true that the past witnessed great climate changes and cycles .
I believe that studies in historical climatology will be among the most important tools for responding to this challenge .
We have at our disposal works such as A Green History of the World by Clive Ponting or the writings of the French historian Emmanuel le Roy Ladurie .
In my opinion , we must realise that in the past people were able to cope with the changes in the natural environment .
For example , in my native Czech Republic , one of the most harmonious natural environments is to be found in the Southern Bohemian basin .
Few people realise that it is an artificial landscape .
This area , which was created by men , used to be bog land , whereas today it has a lake and is a popular tourist destination .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the speakers for their very important and interesting contributions , and when we finalise our white paper on adaptation we shall take into account what has been expressed today and what the resolution of the European Parliament is recommending .
I would like to underline that , without the continued support of the European Parliament , most of our policies that are in place today would not have been adopted , and the leading role of the European Union in the world would not provide the hope that an international agreement will be achieved in Copenhagen in 2009 .
It is our main objective to have an international agreement to fight climate change , and to adapt to changing climatic conditions , in which all the countries of the world will participate and especially the United States and other big emitters , because then the fight against climate change will be effective .
Of course , the European Union 's efforts will not be enough , but we cannot hope to have an international agreement if we do not take active leadership regarding this .
I heard again today some doubts about science .
I think this issue has more or less been dealt with .
There is almost a consensus in science that climate change is anthropogenic : it is caused by human activities .
There are a small number of scientists who think differently .
Some people still think that the world is flat , but even in the United States that is not taken seriously any more .
Last week a report from the World Health Organisation underlined the impact on health caused by climatic conditions and changes in climate , and NASA warned us that climate change is happening faster than we thought .
Therefore , relying on what science is telling us , we have to act .
Concerning cost : if we act later , we shall pay more ; if we act now , we shall pay much less and we shall also avoid the irreversible impact of climate change on our planet .
We have a duty to ourselves and to the next generations to leave the world in at least the same condition as we inherited it .
We also have a moral duty , which many Members stressed , towards those who have not contributed to the formation of the greenhouse phenomenon - the least-developed countries in the world , which not only have a very low income per capita but also have contributed only a very small fraction to the formation of this phenomenon .
Therefore adaptation , along with efforts for mitigation , is absolutely necessary , and we have to do that by helping the least-developed countries and also by taking the right measures in the European Union .
I heard various examples of what is happening right now , for example in the important issue of water .
We have legislation - the Water Framework Directive - which deals with this very precious and scarce resource , but we also adopted very recently a communication on water scarcity and droughts , because this is becoming a very important and urgent problem that we have to deal with .
Again concerning the cost , a few speakers mentioned the question of auctioning and how this will affect our energy-intensive industries or other sectors of the economy .
I should like to clear up one misunderstanding to defuse this issue .
The revenue that will be generated by auctioning will not go to the European Union 's or any other coffers , but will go to the ministries of finance of the Member States which will auction the allowances .
This should be clearly understood .
This money could be between EUR 30 billion and EUR 50 billion every year , and we have recommended - and I hope that the European Parliament will agree - that part of it should go to adaptation policies .
So we have the funding ready if we have the political will to go ahead with accepting this principle that we earmark a certain amount of this EUR 30-50 billion per year to go to adaptation policies .
I would like to speak for longer , because this is a very big issue and many questions were asked , but I would like to thank you again for your contributions .
We will continue to cooperate closely with you and the Temporary Committee on Climate Change in formulating our policies and working hard , especially during these two years , to achieve an international agreement in Copenhagen .
To wind up the debate , one motion for a resolution has been tabled pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( GA ) It should be perfectly clear to all by now that we need to prepare for climate change .
Our society and economy must change as our climate changes .
As a supranational organisation , the European Union has a special role in allowing the relevant preparation and coordination of its Members .
Acts done at EU level should be ambitious and in keeping with the scientific reality of our times .
Forward planning can help us deal with the most adverse effects of climate change .
The EU should be generous in its external relations when dealing with developing countries and help them adapt to climate change - a phenomenon for which they are not responsible , but one from which they will suffer disproportionately .
Future trade measures concluded with the developing world should take this into account if they are to be in any way fair .
in writing . - ( HU ) The fact that the European Commission 's green paper summarises all the tools we have at our disposal for mitigating the adverse consequences of climate change is to be welcomed .
However forward-looking the European Union 's proposals driven by the desire to combat climate change may be , we are already having to live with the impact of climate change .
The available data show that some countries are affected to a greater extent than others by the gathering pace of global warming .
One of these countries is Hungary , where the extent of the change over recent decades has far outstripped the average .
The fact that this is not simply an abstract phenomenon has been felt by the population of Hungary themselves : the number of droughts has increased , while the amount of rainfall has decreased , with a major impact on agricultural production .
The most spectacular manifestation of extreme climatic events is probably the record-level floods that have occurred in the Carpathian Basin over the past decade .
We firmly believe that flood protection is one of the areas where prompt and vigorous action is needed .
The European Union and the Member States need to pay more attention to ensuring that the increasingly infrequent but all the more torrential rains do not place a strain on our rivers all at once .
With this in mind , possibilities for natural water storage must be explored in areas of flat , open countryside , while at the same time reducing flood risk by planting forests in hilly areas .
Let us hope that the decision-makers do not wait until the next time we hear appalling news of floods before opting to take action .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , climate change is a fact of life .
Few doubt the findings of the panel of scientists .
The row is over how we assess the impact and the conclusions drawn .
The conservationists are right up there with national leaders and a long line of experts , company directors and investors .
Environmental expertise and ecobusiness have a decisive role to play in overcoming environmental challenges .
We in Finland have a tendency now to think that investing in wood , pellets , biofuels , and wind and solar power is just a daydream .
It is like going back to primitive times .
In California , tapping solar , wind and bioenergy is serious business .
There , all prudent investors and speculators only invest in renewables when it comes to energy technology .
Ecobusiness is an important international growth sector and a major employer .
Companies have never before had a better opportunity to earn money by doing good .
The global market in eco-business is worth EUR 600 billion .
The market is growing by 10 % a year .
The fastest growing market is in clean technologies .
For example , the growth in solar and wind power technologies is 30 % per annum .
Clean technology companies create products and services with a less harmful environmental impact than before .
Clean technology together with renewable forms of energy makes for a healthier environment , with fewer risks to health .
The air quality in Beijing is so poor that scientists have calculated that it shortens the life expectancy of the inhabitants of that city by seven years .
The poor air quality in Brussels shortens life expectancy by seven months .
A poor environment is therefore a health risk .
Climate change is also a chance to create new jobs - new green Nokias .
The IT sector is moving its jobs to Asia ; green technology can create new employment for the Finnish people .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is clear to all of us that climate change is a major challenge .
Many parts of the world are already struggling to cope with the negative impacts of the rising global average temperature , and this trend will continue in the coming years .
People in Europe , too , will feel the threatening effects of climate change on their environment , economy and everyday life .
A coherent strategy to combat climate change is therefore desirable .
We must try to tackle climate change on two fronts simultaneously ; that is essential .
Europe must not only drastically reduce its greenhouse gas emissions ; it must also adapt to global warming .
This is the only way for us to curb the impact of climate change in future .
More efficient use of energy and our already scarce water resources is one of the measures which must be taken .
I think it is important that Member States which have already done more than others to combat climate change are not put at a disadvantage .
All states should be compelled to make an appropriate contribution to mitigating climate change .
The price of inaction would simply be too high .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Ending street homelessness ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
1 .
Animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movements of pet animals (
2 .
European Migration Network (
3 .
Amendment of regulation on a standard financial regulation for executive agencies ( Rule 131 ) ( vote )
4 .
Framework Financial Regulation for the bodies referred to in Article 185 of Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 (
5 .
Rights-based management tools in fisheries (
6 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (
7 .
2009 budget guidelines , other sections (
8 .
Eurostars (
- Before the vote on Amendments 15 and 30
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like the word ' Luxembourg ' to be included in this proposal .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
9 .
Research Fund for Coal and Steel (
10 .
Fishing activities of Community and third-country fishing vessels (
11 .
Situation in Tibet ( vote )
The House was almost unanimous in expressing its views on this important issue and I hope that those to whom this vote is addressed will heed its message .
12 .
Croatia : 2007 progress report (
- Before the vote on Amendment 4
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , as I understand it , the PPE-DE has withdrawn Amendment 4 , but would like to vote on paragraph 8 in two parts , which I fully support .
The first part would go as far as ' on public opinion in Croatia ' and the second part would begin with ' urges the Croatian Government ' .
As I say , the withdrawal of Amendment 4 would mean that we would take the vote in the two parts mentioned .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 12
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is simply a matter of replacing the word ' envisages ' with ' envisaged ' .
Time has moved on , so it needs to be put in the past tense .
- Before the vote on Amendment 15
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , after yesterday 's debate in the House , it has become apparent that a large majority would actually be in favour of our replacing the word ' could ' with the phrase ' should in any case ' .
That could produce a broad consensus in the House after all , which would be very important in this instance .

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say that if this oral amendment were adopted , my group would vote in favour of Mr Swoboda 's motion instead of against .
You will not know until after the vote , though , whether it has been accepted or not .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
13 .
2007 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (
- Before the vote
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , forgive me for rising too early a moment ago .
I will be brief .
We fully agree with the basic thrust of Mr Meijer 's report ; he has done a very good job .
There is one sensitive issue and that is the question of the name .
We want to make it easier for Macedonia to navigate through these rocky waters , which is why , between now and the next Strasbourg part-session , we want to work with the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteur to find a solution so that we can take a vote during the next Strasbourg part-session .
That means postponing the vote today .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr Swoboda , this is laughable !
Everyone knows that we cannot find a solution within a week .
This row has been going on for years , and the decision has to be taken : Macedonia is called Macedonia is called Macedonia .
Greece has to accept that and then we will take a vote .
It will make no difference whether we do so today or leave it for a week ; Macedonia will still be called Macedonia .
( Applause )


( DE ) Mr President , I would like to vote in favour of Mr Swoboda 's proposal , even if Mr Cohn-Bendit cannot imagine this working , perhaps because it does not sit easily with his style of political work .
It is possible to achieve compromises within a matter of days , if you take time to seek these compromises , and that is precisely the purpose of Mr Swoboda 's proposal .
Yes , we can vote in the next part-session , but in the intervening period , we could find some kind of compromise for our resolution , given that we seem to be well on the way to doing so here in the House .
We should take the time to do that , even if Mr Cohn-Bendit feels under pressure .

rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , although I do not fundamentally disagree with Mr Cohn-Bendit regarding the name , I think that Mr Swoboda 's proposal should be adopted .
I think it would be wise for Parliament to look into this further and to find a solution , and the negotiations , the contacts between Macedonia and Greece , are important in the coming days .
I think therefore that it is indeed wise to postpone this vote until Strasbourg .
( Parliament adopted the motion .
The vote was postponed )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
( DE ) Mr President , I announced yesterday , and notified the parliamentary services accordingly , that I wished to table a motion requesting a postponement of the vote on FYROM , in other words , on the Macedonia report .
It is not that we take issue with the line pursued by the rapporteur , but on such a sensitive matter we do not want to add fuel to the fire .
We would prefer to find a formula which is capable of securing the widest possible support in this House .
I therefore request that we vote to postpone this vote until Strasbourg : not beyond that , only until Strasbourg .
Mr Swoboda , we would have come to that when we got to that item on the agenda .
The procedure is this : when we come to the Meijer report in the order of business , we will deal with it then .
Thank you anyway .
You will then have the opportunity to take the floor again .
It has not been overlooked .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be able to inform you that a delegation from Australia 's House of Representatives and Senate has taken its place in the public gallery .
I wish a very warm welcome to you all .
( Applause )
It is taking part in the 31st EP-Australia interparliamentary meeting , which is being held here in the European Parliament on 9 and 10 April .
The delegation consists of Members of the Senate and the House of Representatives , and is led by Senator Alan Ferguson , President of the Australian Senate .
The European Parliament and the Australian Parliament began their direct and wide-ranging political dialogue in 1981 .
We very much look forward to strengthening and expanding this cooperation even further .
I wish the delegation every success for the remainder of its stay and a safe journey home when the time comes .
( Applause )
1 .
Combating cancer in the enlarged European Union ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 2
Mr President , cancer may cause chronic illness and can possibly lead to disability , therefore in order to make new paragraph 34a more accurate and more credible I propose an oral amendment to include the words ' may include ' and ' possibly ' in the appropriate areas in that subparagraph .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
2 .
Mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme (
- Before the vote on Amendment 14
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , as I see it , the Greens wanted to table an amendment to this , but the aim of this amendment is to include the last part of Amendment 8 in this amendment .
In other words , it would not disappear from the text .
The voting list also has Amendment 8 replaced with Amendment 14 .
The intention is not to replace it but for the last part , which starts ' in addition to the short-term development costs ' , to be included in this report .
Did everyone understand ?
I am afraid I did not , either .
Madam colleague , what do we do now ?
Did the Greens have something in mind ?
It seems not , just this once !
Could you please repeat what you said , Mrs Myller ?
Rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , the voting list also has Amendment 8 replaced with Amendment 14 .
The intention is not to replace it but for the last part , which starts ' in addition to the short-term development costs ' , to be included in this report .
I have just been told that is not the case .
Shall we vote on Amendment 14 , then ?
I have just been told by Paul Dunstan , who really is an expert on all these points of detail , that that is not possible .
He recommends that we simply take the vote now .
- Before the vote on Amendment 15
Mr President , I propose as an oral amendment that Amendment 15 should not replace the original paragraph 51 , but be added to that paragraph .
I understand that the rapporteur agrees with this oral amendment .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
3 .
Cultural industries in Europe (
4 .
Culture in a globalising world (
5 .
Adapting to climate change in Europe - options for EU action ( vote )
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , 2009 will bring many changes and challenges for the European Parliament .
Not only will elections be held and a new parliamentary term begin , but also , most importantly , the challenges relating to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty will have to be dealt with .
Life does not stand still , and I am not referring exclusively to political life .
There comes a time when changes are needed , along with new plans and approaches to action .
Generally speaking , greater financial input is required for changes to be effective .
Nonetheless , the budgetary resources should be administered more efficiently and any unnecessary bureaucracy eliminated .
( SK ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Paul Rübig , because Eurostars is , in my view , an important initiative of the European Commission to support research and development performing SMEs .
In spite of the fact that SMEs account for almost 70 % of the EU 's GDP , their potential in the area of research and development has not yet been sufficiently exploited .
I would like to underscore the rapporteur 's effort to enable the highest possible number of SMEs to participate in this programme .
According to the original proposal , many SMEs would be excluded from the process since they would have to contribute at least 50 % towards the cost of the projects .
Following the agreement between the European Parliament and the Council , SMEs will be able to participate in , and collaborate on , proposals for projects in the field of research and development .
I am pleased that Slovakia is among the 29 participating countries that have already expressed support for this programme .
It is paramount that Slovak SME entrepreneurs receive information on how to access funding for research and development under this programme , and that the research potential grows in Slovakia and in other underdeveloped regions of Europe .
The European research and innovation database , in which the Commission will publish the results of the projects carried out under this programme , will be a useful point of reference for SMEs .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall not speak for a second more , maybe for a second less .
I merely want to say that it was an honour for me to vote in favour of the report by my friend Paul Rübig , outlining this proposal for a decision aimed at supporting SMEs .
What I should like , above all else - and this gives me many sleepless nights - is for there to be projects taking into account the experience , capacities and memories of older people , who can teach younger people a great deal in SMEs and so benefit all of the EU countries and the European Union itself .
Mr President , as you see I still have five seconds left to wish ' buon appetito ' to all of my colleagues who have been kind enough to stay behind to listen to my statement .
( PL ) Mr President , any initiatives aimed at supporting and stimulating coal extraction and steel production deserve the European Parliament 's support .
The aforementioned activities are particularly important , because no rapidly developing economy can prosper without these sectors of production .
It is also worth bearing in mind that the largest producers of these raw materials are located outside the European Union and that in comparison , the position of the Member States is very poor indeed .
There can be no doubt that the demand for coal and steel will continue to rise , driven by the rapidly developing Asian economies .
Despite the need to progressively replace coal with renewable and more environmentally-friendly fuels , coal will remain a key source of energy and wealth for many regions of the European Union long into the future .

Mr President , I voted for Amendment 3 , tabled by Mr Szymański , which is a stronger form of our general attitude to avoiding the presence of high-level state leaders at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics .
Mr Szymański finds a connection between the presence of state leaders and possibly supporting the internal policies of the Chinese authorities .
I think it might be a warning signal to the Chinese authorities to make this connection more clear .
That is why I voted for Amendment 3 .
( CS ) The European Parliament has once again proved itself to be a standard bearer for the protection of human rights .
This is because we have achieved a broad political consensus on the condemnation of the human rights violations in China , which , contrary to all expectations , is toughening rather than relaxing the totalitarian regime in the run-up to the Olympics .
The Olympic Committee is turning a blind eye by asserting that sports and human rights are unrelated .
I am shocked by this pragmatic approach , which is far from the original ideals of the Olympic Games .
I call on all Members to appeal in writing to the prime ministers of their governments , as I did , to announce urgently a boycott of the opening ceremony unless China agrees to the dialogue with the Tibetan people and ratifies the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
In my view , the fact that the heads of state of the Member States have not yet resolved to take a common approach can be considered at best misguided , at worst a failure .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union must speak with one voice on such important matters as freedom , democracy and human rights .
That was why it was so necessary to adopt an unequivocal stance regarding the situation in Tibet and to take decisive measures aimed at persuading China to respect those values .
It is our moral duty to remind China of the promises it made to global public opinion on the subject of human rights when it was seeking to organise the Olympic Games .
To date , China has failed to keep any of those promises .
China is now an economic power that cannot be disregarded .
It is very wrong , however , for politicians to give priority to achieving specific economic aims and favourable trade agreements over the protection of fundamental values .
We must put an end to the policy of separating economic issues from human rights in our dealings with China .
This need not , however , mean being sidelined economically .
Indeed , the opposite is the case .
China must be persuaded to commit to international standards and to respect them .
( PL ) Mr President , I work very closely with colleagues from the Croatian Parliament on behalf of the European Parliament , hence my intervention .
At the very moment it declared independence , Croatia decided that the European Union was the key to its future .
We should credit the Croatian authorities for all the action they have taken to resolve crucial issues .
I am referring , for example , to the reform of the public sector and the judicial system , and to the actions aimed at combating corruption .
Croatia is cooperating closely with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague .
It is to be commended for the provision included in its Constitution on the integration of national minorities into social and political life .
Croatia needs the European Union , and the European Union needs Croatia , amongst other reasons because of its geostrategic location .
Croatia 's accession will help to stabilise the Western Balkans and to ensure that democracy develops fully in the region .

( SL ) Mr President , although I hope that Croatia will conclude its negotiations with the European Union as soon as possible , earlier today I withheld my support for Mr Swoboda 's report for one particular reason : the amendment , which was endorsed with a majority vote , in my opinion poses a serious concern , because it represents a precedent regarding the European Parliament 's decisions , since it speculates about the dates when the negotiations will be concluded .
Specifically , the rapporteur , Mr Swoboda , proposed that the word ' could ' be replaced with ' should in any case ' , which means that he proposes that , in any event , regardless of any benchmarks , the negotiations between Croatia and the European Union ought to be concluded in the year 2009 .
I believe that the European Union has always insisted that the benchmarks ought to be respected , and that this is then a proviso for any negotiations to be concluded .
However , in his report today , Hannes Swoboda and the European Parliament have declared that irrespective of everything , in any event , the Commission must conclude the negotiations with Croatia by the end of 2009 .
I find this unacceptable .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lega Nord is voting against the Swoboda report on Croatia , in protest at the rejection of the amendments we tabled in defence of the sacrosanct rights of our Italian , Venetian , minority .
In the unredeemed lands of Istria and Dalmatia , the people of Fiume and Pola are demanding their rights , rights still being trampled underfoot more than 60 years after the end of the war .
It is a wound that needs healing .
Croatia cannot go on being deaf to the cries of anguish of our compatriots , who ask for nothing other than respect for their history , their suffering and their rights .
It is incredible that our colleagues on the left accuse the Lega Nord , in our country , of lacking a sense of Italian identity and provoke us by saying that our ministers should sing ' Fratelli d 'Italia ' , then in this House , in Strasbourg , when we are discussing the rights of our Italian and Venetian compatriots - persecuted even now and deprived of their fundamental rights - they vote with the heirs of the Titoist persecutors and perpetrators of the Foibe massacres .
Perhaps what our compatriots are guilty of is being anti-Communist and patriotic , just as we members of the Lega Nord are anti-Communist and patriotic .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on combating cancer in the enlarged Europe because this is a particularly serious problem .
It affects millions of Europeans , notably in the new Member States .
Monitoring tests and screening need to be cofinanced or even fully financed at Union level .
These measures should become a priority for the European Union and should be compulsory for all our citizens .
The European Commission should prepare a pan-European awareness-raising campaign , providing information on preventive measures , early detection and diagnosis of cancer and its treatment .
Cancer can only be overcome if we stand shoulder to shoulder and coordinate our efforts .
The fight against cancer is a difficult challenge , but one to which Europe and the world must rise .
( PL ) Mr President , literature , theatre , architecture , the visual arts , crafts , the cinema and television demonstrate Europe 's cultural diversity .
They are all part of Europe 's common cultural heritage even though they belong to specific countries or regions within Europe .
One of the European Union 's aims is to preserve and support this diversity and make it accessible to all .
This was laid down , for example , in the Maastricht Treaty , in which the cultural dimension of European integration was expressed formally for the first time .
The European Social Fund supports the Arturo Toscanini Foundation in Italy .
The Foundation has been running training courses for unemployed musicians since the mid-1990s .
The Culture Programme is one of the European Union 's flagship programmes and runs between 2007 and 2013 .
It has a budget of around EUR 400 million for that period .
It is a programme for cultural actions that are not of an audio-visual nature .
I trust we shall persevere in our support for artists and for all actions promoting culture .
After all , culture is just as important as economic or industrial activity .
It is for that very reason that I voted in favour of this report .
Mr President , I have voted in support of the Graça Moura report , as we spend too little time and money on supporting culture .
We focus on the economy , markets , labour and trade , but where would Europe be without painters , musicians and literary artists ?
Last night , Commissioner Figeľ told us that culture is more important than business .
I can only add that culture generates business or , in the words of one historian , ' there would be no mailmen without writers ' .
On the 200th anniversary of the birth of Fryderyk Chopin , the Polish composer , let us show the world that great music and culture was born on this continent .
( SK ) I voted in support of the European agenda for culture in a globalising world , because culture is , in my view , the soul of Europe , and a fundamental source of enrichment for our nations .
What other continent can claim so many musical geniuses , outstanding painters , sculptors , architects and other internationally renowned artists ?
Never was culture so prominent in the EU as it is now .
The effect of the European regions ' cultural maturity is illustrated , for example , by the European Capital of Culture scheme for the years 2007 to 2019 .
I have been following with awe the tough contest for the title of European Capital of Culture 2013 between the four Slovak candidates of Košice , Martin , Nitra and Prešov .
The panel , which will select the winner in September 2008 , will have a very difficult task .
Beautiful and meaningful projects full of cultural treasures will offer sublime experiences to all those who visit these towns .
You are a wonderful singer , Mrs Pleštinská .
I have been fortunate enough to hear you sing on several occasions .
( PT ) Mr President , I want to congratulate Mrs Moura on the report adopted today .
I also want to welcome and draw particular attention to paragraph 26 , which was approved overwhelmingly , with 560 votes in favour in the roll-call vote .
This paragraph highlights the interaction of European languages with other continents , with countries throughout the world , and the fact that it is vital for the European Union to know how to specifically promote these languages and the cultural interaction generated and conveyed by these languages in their extra-European dimensions .
This is the case with English , Spanish and Portuguese and , to a lesser extent , French .
I am sure that Commissioner Orban will be able to use this paragraph , together with the Joan i Marí report on which we voted two years ago , to draw up definitive guidelines for the European policy of multilingualism .
Specific support for the spread of these languages , which are global European languages , is clearly important in the globalised world in which we live .
( PL ) Mr President , climate change represents a challenge for many sectors of the economy .
It is also a threat to Europe 's biodiversity and has a negative impact on social development .
The only way to counteract the effects of climate change is by limiting greenhouse gas emissions at regional and local level , in every sector of the economy and every area of our lives .
The European Union should form alliances at global level , notably with developing countries .
The latter also bear an ever-increasing responsibility for the undue emission of greenhouse gases .
A further important issue involves improving society 's awareness of the adaptation measures by involving the mass media and the citizens in environmental issues .
Action in this regard should be conducted at global , regional and local level , and should transcend all barriers , political or otherwise .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report on the animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movements of pet animals , bearing in mind health problems and their possible effects on public health .
For example , Regulation ( EC ) No 998 / 2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council harmonises the rules for non-commercial movements of pet animals between Member States or after their entry or re-entry into the Community from third countries .
This Regulation introduced , inter alia , the pet passport for movements of cats , dogs and ferrets from one Member State to another .
This proves that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies .
However , the Regulation provides for temporary derogations which some Member States can apply until 3 July 2008 ( Article 6 ( 1 ) and Article 16 ) .
Article 6 ( 3 ) provides for the possibility of extending this transitional period by way of legislation , based on a report to be submitted to the European Parliament and the Council by the Commission before 1 February 2007 .
This did not happen .
That is why there is now agreement to extend the transitional period in order to allow time for the new regime to be defined .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Ouský report in order that decisions taken regarding the movement of pets be taken only after full consideration of the scientific assessments .
in writing . - ( SK ) This report concerns the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Regulation on the animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movements of pet animals as regards the extension of the transitional period .
I am pleased that Regulation ( EC ) No 998 / 2003 harmonises the rules for non-commercial movements of pet animals between Member States or after their entry or re-entry into the Community from third countries .
It is very positive that , in addition to other measures , the pet passport for cats , dogs and ferrets has been introduced , which proves that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies .
I supported this report because the original transitional period may not be sufficient , especially as there is still no proposal on the table and the European Parliament will be dissolved for the 2009 elections .
I also believe that it is important for Malta to be included in the list of countries applying special requirements concerning ticks , as Malta already has a special regime in place regarding anti-tick treatment .
This proposal will facilitate pet owners in that it will make travelling with pet animals a less stressful experience .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my Italian colleague , Luciana Sbarbati , which is part of the consultation procedure on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a European Migration Network .
The need to observe migratory flows dates back to the Commission 's first communication in 1994 and led in 2003 to the experimental creation of the European Migration Network ( EMN ) .
In order to maintain this essential tool , it was becoming evident that a legal instrument needed to be established .
In fact , despite the enormous volume of information produced on numerous aspects of international migration , these data are not easy to access .
In addition , there is not enough reliable , comparable and up-to-date information or analyses of the development of the legal and political situation of immigration and asylum at both national and EU level .
I support the initiatives aimed at widening this mechanism to include asylum and providing for an extension of the network 's mandate .
in writing . - British Conservatives abstained on this report since , whilst we disagree with its contents , the proposal acknowledges that the United Kingdom is exempt from the provisions .
It is our long-standing policy not to take a position on issues which do not affect the United Kingdom and from which we have secured an opt-out .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the common European policies on migration and asylum have been constantly developing .
In this context , it is vital that we can rely on objective , reliable and comparable information and data at national and European level so that we can better understand and analyse the migration phenomena and draw up policies or take decisions based on better information .
However , the existing data is disparate and in many cases is not reliable , comparable or even up to date .
The Thessaloniki European Council approved the establishment of a European Migration Network , which started to operate as a pilot project and was then followed by a preparatory action .
I therefore support this proposal , which aims to consolidate the existing structure , making it permanent and giving it an appropriate legal basis by defining its objectives , functions , structure and methods of financing .
I agree with the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , in particular the inclusion of asylum in the Network 's name and the extension of its mandate .
I particularly agree that the Council 's proposal to only give Parliament a role as observer , without any right to vote , is unacceptable .
in writing . - ( FR ) The proposed report is nothing more than a record of the failure of the various European policies implemented and bodies created to date .
What exactly is its purpose ?
Its purpose is to create yet another European structure , responsible for collecting , exchanging and using up-to-date data on migratory developments .
It seems that a central information source is lacking .
However , what about the activities of the dozens of other national , international and intergovernmental bodies , the European migration agency , the International Organisation for Migration and the Fundamental Rights Agency , which are responsible , in particular , for collecting information on migration ?
What about Eurostat , Europol , the RAXEN network , Cirefi , etc . ?
Are they ineffective , obsolete ?
If the answer is ' yes ' , why do they get bigger budgets every year ?
The rapporteur is rightly concerned about the risk of the European Migration Network duplicating the existing structures .
He should , above all , be concerned about the dangerous drift of the European institutions , which , rather than solving the problems linked to immigration , is only masking the sad reality through a limitless increase in comitology practices and the creation of all sorts of bodies .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Migration Network cannot continue operating without a clear legal basis .
As a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I fully support the report by Mrs Sbarbati proposing acceptance of the Commission 's proposal and the general agreement reached in the Council on the subject .
I believe that the Council 's decision will provide an appropriate legal basis , on condition that it takes full account of the opinion of the European Parliament .
The rapporteur 's proposal not to establish a new European monitoring centre for migratory flows is particularly worthy of support .
The rapporteur suggests instead strengthening the existing system based on a network of National Contact Points .
I also support the suggestion to increase the network 's competence to cover not only migration but also asylum .
I believe the network 's information and research remit should be broadened to cover the production of studies , analyses and assessments concerning the application and implementation of directives .
I consider that all of the network 's activity should be more useful so that the bodies involved in the decision-making process can make practical use of its work .
It is good that the network will also be responsible for collecting and exchanging information on immigration and asylum .
This will allow for the exchange and comparison of information , and make it possible to develop common criteria and indicators at European level in the future .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament has today adopted a proposal for a Council decision establishing a European Migration Network .
The European Migration Network , which started as a pilot project in 2002 , is based on a series of National Contact Points .
Its main objective is to provide ' objective , reliable and comparable information ' on the migration and asylum situation in the various Member States .
This proposal aims to consolidate the existing structure , in the form of a network , without creating , at least for the time being , a new agency or a new observatory at EU level .
There is no doubt that the measures aimed at improving knowledge of the true migration ( and asylum ) situation in the various EU countries will be positive .
However , we do not agree with the fact that this proposal is being used to promote or further the ' Communitisation ' of migration and asylum policies , which the Treaty , now known as the ' Lisbon Treaty ' , aims to encourage and ensure .
We reject the establishment of common migration and asylum policies at EU level which are security-based , restrictive and profoundly inhuman and which remove such basic responsibilities from the sovereignty of the Member States ( and their national parliaments ) .
in writing . - ( FR ) Cooperation between Member States and the exchange of information are certainly necessary when it comes to immigration policies .
This is particularly important since the Schengen Agreement doing away with all controls at the Union 's internal borders means that the decisions taken in one Member State , especially those concerning the regularisation of illegal immigrants , have consequences for , and in , neighbouring countries .
If there is one area in which Europe excels , it is in the creation of agencies , bodies and all kinds of structures , provided with staff and a budget , which justify the Union 's action and give the appearance of wanting to resolve the problems .
That is not the case at all , however .
This is particularly true when it comes migration , for which the plethora of existing structures , be they governmental , non-governmental or intergovernmental , sit side by side without any conclusive results .
Research centres , professional bodies , the European migration observatory , Eurostat , Europol , the Fundamental Rights Agency , the Centre for Information , Discussion and Exchange on the Crossing of Frontiers and Immigration ( Cirefi ) , and so on : the list is never-ending .
This report seeks to add an umpteenth : a European Migration Network , the supposed first stage before the creation of a new European observatory or agency .
It is time to curb this Europe of excess and pretence .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed German colleague and friend Ingeborg Grässle , which is part of the consultation procedure on the draft Commission regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1653 / 2004 on a standard financial regulation for the executive agencies pursuant to Council Regulation ( EC ) No 58 / 2003 laying down the statute for executive agencies to be entrusted with certain tasks in the management of Community programmes .

I support the rapporteur 's proposals aimed at harmonising the deadlines for the discharge procedure and bringing the text of the standard financial regulation for the executive agencies into line with the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities .
I also support the proposal aimed at clarifying the data to be contained in the establishment plan with regard to temporary and contract staff as well as seconded national experts so that the budgetary authority has a clear insight into the changes in each agency 's ' personnel ' budget .
The proposal to formalise the requirement for the authorising officer , i.e. the director of the agency , to be ultimately responsible is also valid .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed German colleague and friend Ingeborg Grässle , which is part of the consultation procedure on the draft Commission regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1653 / 2004 on a standard financial regulation for the executive agencies pursuant to Council Regulation ( EC ) No 58 / 2003 laying down the statute for executive agencies to be entrusted with certain tasks in the management of Community programmes .

I agree that we need to harmonise the discharge deadlines and clarify that the Community agencies that actually receive contributions from the budget under Article 185 ( 1 ) of the general Financial Regulation are all the Community bodies that receive direct subsidies from the budget and all the other Community bodies that receive financial support from the budget .
It is also important to indicate the data that need to be contained in the establishment plan , in terms of both temporary and contract staff and seconded national experts , so that the budgetary authority has a clear insight into the changes in each agency 's ' personnel ' budget , and to improve and strengthen the responsibility of the authorising officer .
in writing . - ( PT ) The bodies referred to in Article 185 of Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 - in other words , Community agencies - have multiplied in recent years ( with the creation of many others being predicted ) , becoming increasingly supranational and performing functions which are the responsibility of each Member State .
This report makes some improvements to the text proposed by the European Commission , particularly by including in the financial regulation of these bodies the obligation to make available on their Internet sites information on the beneficiaries of funds deriving from their budgets .
This information shall be ' easily accessible to third parties , transparent and comprehensive ' .
This is something that the current Regulation does not contemplate .
However , despite also demanding more detailed information on the staff , budget and work carried out by these agencies , the Commission 's proposal agrees to give these agencies greater room for manoeuvre in terms of transfers of appropriations which must be duly monitored .
in writing . - ( PT ) The economic difficulties faced by the fishing industry are the result of an unclear and inefficient system , which is based , inter alia , on the system of TACs ( Total Allowable Catch ) , quotas and management of fishing effort .
The Commission communication on ' improving the economic situation in the fishing industry ' mentions the difficulties faced by the industry and identifies some new approaches for fisheries management .
These include management of ' fishing rights ' .
This debate is extremely important to the Community fishing industry as it opens the door to greater biological sustainability of resources and more opportunity for those responsible for the industry to intervene in the market .
There is a wide variety of fishing rights and transaction systems that are not always totally transparent .
We must therefore engage in serious debate so that ways of managing these rights , which are capable of ensuring transparency , legal certainty and economic efficiency for fishermen , can be assessed .
As fishing rights form the backbone of fisheries management in the leading countries in terms of fishing potential ( US , New Zealand , Norway , etc . ) , it is totally appropriate to discuss this possibility in the Community 's fisheries management .
Due to all the above , the Members of the Portuguese Social Democratic Party support the Attwooll report .
in writing . - ( PT ) The speech by Commissioner Borg was illuminating in terms of the Commission 's intentions for the future of the common fisheries policy : namely , alteration of its management system by introducing , in stages , a Community system based on fishing rights .
We could almost have predicted its intentions : initially to extend the application of this system , although only to part of the fleet , in a large number of Member States , and then , subsequently , to create a single EU market in fishing rights , possibly with their transaction on a stock exchange .
The objectives indicated by the European Commission ' ... may lead to large-scale buying of rights , resulting in concentration of ownership of quotas , geographical distribution of fishing activity and fleet composition ' , where ' ... any mechanisms established to limit the negative effects ... should be compatible with Community single market and competition rules ' .
This is an extremely important issue which goes to the heart of the Member States ' sovereignty and also the ownership and management of the right to exploit a natural resource , in other words the transfer to private interests of rights to exploit a public asset .
We can but categorically reject this intention !
in writing . - I abstained on the Attwooll report because , whilst I could agree with much of it , it failed to address the fundamental problem with our current fisheries management system : the fact that Europe 's waters are governed centrally in the form of the CFP .
The report states that marine biological resources are a ' common public good ' , but fails to recognise that these resources are best managed by Europe 's fishing nations .
The report states that ' fishing right management mechanisms should be adopted at Community level ' , when the reality shows that Community management of fisheries has been an unmitigated disaster .
Different management tools should be studied with a view to ensuring the long-term viability of Europe 's fishing communities , but the key decisions relating to these tools should be the responsibility of the fishing nations , not the European institutions .
in writing . - ( EL ) The debate on the exchange between Member States and the Commission of knowledge and experience about the management systems of each state will not provide special data enabling common management measures to be taken .
Such management systems come under the jurisdiction of the Member States , and rightly so : they concern the history , society , economy , geography and hydrology of each country .
It is right to point out that marine biology resources are a common public good and that such rights ought not to be interpreted as property rights .
However , the idea of finding successful management systems based on fishing rights within the framework of the Common Fisheries Policy at EU level is utopian and self-deluding , because the system itself , with its unbalanced development , does not permit the attainment of such a goal .
The fisheries sector is not independent of the wider economic situation of each Member State , nor do the working methods of professionally active fishermen remain unaffected by social and political developments , both locally and internationally .
Research and debate will simply demonstrate that we cannot possibly expect any improvement in the economic situation of fishermen and , more broadly , the development of local communities reliant on fishing while we are pursuing a Common Fisheries Policy in order to merge fishing enterprises into business groups and , more generally , to pool capital .
in writing . - The idea of launching a discussion on the future of rights-based management systems within the common fisheries policy is one I support .
Ms Attwooll 's report on rights-based management tools in fisheries should therefore be welcomed .
The issues raised by such discussions will make for lively and constructive debate in seeking simplification of the CFP .
I voted in favour of Ms Attwooll 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed German colleague Reimer Böge on the proposal for a decision on the mobilisation , in the framework of the general budget of the European Union for 2008 , of a sum of EUR 3 106 882 in commitment and payment appropriations under the auspices of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This decision must take account of the fact that on 12 September 2007 Malta submitted an application for mobilisation of the Fund for 675 redundancies in the textile sector , specifically for workers made redundant by VF ( Malta ) Ltd and Bortex Clothing Ind .
Co Ltd .
The Maltese authorities requested a contribution of EUR 681 207 in order to cover a part of costs of the support measures , estimated at some EUR 1.36 million .
In addition , on 9 October 2007 Portugal submitted a request for mobilisation of the Fund for 1 546 redundancies in the automobile sector , specifically for workers made redundant by Opel in Azambuja , Alcoa Fujikura in Seixal and Johnson Controls in Portalegre .
The Portuguese authorities requested EUR 2 425 675 to cover a part of the costs of the support measures , estimated at some EUR 4.85 million .
in writing . - ( PT ) Following the redundancies in 2007 of 1 549 workers from Opel Portugal in Azambuja , from Alcoa Fujikura in Seixal and from Johnson Controls in Portalegre , the Portuguese Government submitted an application for the mobilisation of this Fund ( EUR 2 425 675 ) to cofinance actions such as ' vocational training and skills certification ' and wage compensation to ' encourage ' workers to accept lower wages .
Undoubtedly , given the serious consequences for workers , their families and the regions in which these companies are based , any measure which aims to minimise these consequences is urgent and necessary .
However , this does not solve the basic problem of the creation and guarantee of jobs with rights for workers and the assurance of socio-economic development in these regions .
This is only possible through a proper investment policy which takes advantage of the potential in each region and which prevents multinationals from relocating or closing down in search of more people and places to exploit after receiving millions of euros in ' aid ' .
Regrettably , Parliament has adopted a resolution which , as regards the Portuguese application , stresses its ' concern ' about the nature of the measures financed and asks the Commission ' in cooperation with the Portuguese authorities , to closely monitor the situation ' .
This has not happened with previous applications , such as those of France or Germany .
in writing . - I welcome the first mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the 2008 budgetary year .
The Party of European Socialists was very active in setting up this fund and it is an essential contribution to efforts aimed at alleviating the effects of globalisation on workers .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) In 2006 I fought hard for the establishment of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
When it was approved , I made a speech to the House in which I said that this decision had a political angle : for the first time , the three European institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - had acknowledged the existence of the negative aspects of globalisation , which was why workers affected by company closures due to globalisation should be financially supported .
I believed that this was a way for the European Union to show its presence on the ground among those suffering from redundancies due to the closure of companies , as has happened in Portugal with Opel , Johnson and Alcoa Fujikara .
These are often dramatic situations , which is why the European Parliament 's decision to make available to these workers nearly EUR 2.5 million may help to alleviate their current anxieties .
When people are worried and fearful , it is difficult to accept change .
These payments decided today and destined for these Portuguese workers are not a miracle solution but are definitely a way of helping them to have more confidence in themselves so that , with this support from the European Union , they can find reasons to smile again .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my excellent Polish colleague Janusz Lewandowski on the 2009 budget guidelines for the ' other sections ' , namely the European Parliament , but also the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Ombudsman and the European Data Protection Supervisor .
This document outlines the major challenges that will be on Parliament 's agenda between now and 2009 , notably the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Every effort must be made to ensure that Parliament 's enhanced responsibilities following the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty are taken into account in the budget .
Measures must be taken to improve communication with the citizens , especially at local level and on three projects : the Visitors ' Centre , the Audiovisual Centre and the Web TV project .
Finally , I wonder whether , prior to the budgetary procedures , we should perhaps carry out an audit of the human resources allocated to European parliamentary activities .
The European Parliament 's political responsibilities are constantly increasing and it is crucial that the Members have the means to work completely independently .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report marks the start of the debate on the 2009 budget procedure with regard to the budget of the European Parliament and other institutions , but not including that of the European Commission , which is by far the largest budget .
Among other aspects that we could highlight , consideration must be given to the guidelines now proposed on staff policy .
This is because in recent years we have witnessed constant pressure to reduce staff costs , with the use of forms of precarious contracting , such as contracting via the provision of outside services , particularly through temporary employment agencies , to the detriment of permanent employment contracts and the rights of these workers .
We must of course categorically reject this approach .
Another recurring aspect is the need to ensure the diversity and availability of all the official and working languages of the EU .
During the 2008 budget procedure , a small appropriation was placed in the reserve ' to encourage the administration to give priority to more efficient linguistic support for Members during official meetings ' .
However , we do not know what measures were actually taken in this respect , particularly as situations continue to arise in which this right is not respected , for example in the EU-ACP Joint Parliamentary Assemblies .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed Austrian colleague Paul Rübig , which is part of the codecision procedure on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation by the Community in a research and development programme aimed at supporting research and development performing SMEs undertaken by several Member States .
I welcome this initiative aimed at adding EUR 100 million over six years to the EUR 300 million of appropriations under the EUROSTARS Joint Programme for numerous Member States and other members of the European Economic Area for innovative SMEs in order to catch up in this area .
It is very interesting to note that 82 % of the large US companies set up after 1980 were created from nothing while in the EU the same figure is only 37 % .
It is therefore clear that small and medium-sized enterprises , particularly those that are innovative , offer considerable hope for economic growth and social progress in our internal market .
in writing.- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting in favour of this report , which makes a further important contribution to developing research and innovation , and hence the competitiveness of products made in Europe .
I welcome the fact that funding is to be allocated to SMEs , which represent the vital connective tissue of the Italian and European economies and were in need of more substantial financial support geared to the creation of original , high-quality products capable of standing up to competition from emerging economies .
The EU 's creative potential must be supported and boosted so as to facilitate innovation in our internal market , without , however , running the risk in the near future of facing charges related to intellectual property rights which could be claimed by non-European countries .
New competitors , such as China , Japan and India , are making a grand entrance on the international economic stage , compelling the world market to confront the challenge of fresh competition based on innovation .
EU cofinancing of the Eurostars programme in favour of SMEs therefore constitutes an essential step towards ensuring that the EU Member States remain competitive in the medium and long term .
Furthermore , I am pleased with the success achieved in the negotiations on the compromise package , which , by improving the access criteria for SMEs , will enable them to innovate in a way that will contribute to the success and the very survival of European SMEs .
in writing . - ( PT ) In theory this is an important programme , given that it aims to support research and development performing SMEs , as it is in enterprises , particularly the smaller ones , where investments in R & D have the greatest multiplying effect and which , at the same time , have the greatest need .
However , we do not feel that the programme can effectively deliver because :
The programme has been allocated absolutely derisory and even ridiculous funds - EUR 400 million of which only EUR 100 million originate from the EU - which means that this proposal is pure propaganda .
However , at the same time , the fact that only a very small number of enterprises will benefit from this programme in the future has been concealed .
The proposal will only benefit the most powerful and skilled medium-sized enterprises , in other words those with more than 250 workers , so that over 80 % of European enterprises , mainly composed of micro and small enterprises , will be excluded .
As Portugal is one of the European countries where there is a dramatic lack of investment in R & D in enterprises , we feel that if the Eurostars programme were to come to our country its effects would be totally irrelevant and residual .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Rubig 's proposals to support research and development performing SMEs .
The plan to inject EUR 400 million into encouraging such SMEs to conduct market-orientated research in transnational projects should be supported and I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I want to express my support for the Rübig report , which seeks to increase the number of SMEs that are eligible for support for their R & D projects under the Eurostars research and development programme implemented by several Member States and associate countries .
It also aims to facilitate the participation of our SMEs , which are the real catalysts of the European economy , in this programme .
I welcome , too , the fact that in the future Luxembourg will also participate in the Eurostars programme , which will help us to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( PT ) I support the content of this report as I consider that its proposals are intended to encourage research and development in SMEs , which represent over 99 % of all enterprises in Europe and which employ over 60 % of the working population .
The report adds that the number of SMEs engaged in research and development activities is very limited and we must therefore encourage , through all available means , this type of initiative , which will become increasingly decisive in consolidating their competitiveness .
In this respect , the most decisive aspect is not covered by this report .
It is vital that multiplying effects are created , which , through modern forms of business management , may lead to processes that can create value through incorporated innovation and efficiency .
This creation of value must benefit not only the enterprises where this is developed , but also the whole business fabric , both upstream and downstream .
The adoption of this report must not make us forget the need to reinforce the financial support mechanisms for start-ups , an area where many difficulties still exist , particularly for young entrepreneurs who want to start a business experiment .
I would stress that red tape must be removed from these processes so that SMEs do not shy away from a commitment to research and development .
in writing . - ( SK ) By voting for Paul Rübig 's report , the European Parliament is sending a clear signal to small and medium-sized enterprises in the Member States .
Small and medium-sized enterprises can often be effective participants in research and development but they have to put up with less favourable conditions than those that apply to large international corporations .
From now on , SME associations performing research and development can avail of financial support from Europe and operate within a European network together with other small and medium-sized enterprises .
Slovak SMEs will thus be able to contribute their knowledge and capacities to the European research and development sector .
In Slovakia many small and medium-sized enterprises are located in rural areas with less developed infrastructure , which hampers their development .
Many women are employed in research and development performing SMEs , whether directly or indirectly .
European funds are useful because they give SMEs a start , thus allowing their professional capacities to serve the common interest .
The Eurostars programme is a programme for researching and developing new products and services at European Union level .
SMEs play a key role in Eurostars projects .
It is a real pity that the Slovak Republic , an EU Member State , does not participate in this programme .
Slovakia 's small and medium-sized enterprises consequently have no access to the significant financial support available for the effective development of new products , techniques and services .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council decision on the multiannual technical guidelines for the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel - C6-0248 / 2007 - .

I support the view presented by Mr Gierek , who argued that in the light of the Fund 's role in ensuring proper development of the European Union 's economy , especially in the new Member States , the Fund should continue to operate .
Steel is still one of the key raw materials for the machinery and construction industries .
It is also the case that the technical possibilities of improving its quality and the efficiency of its manufacture are far from having been exhausted .
As has been rightly emphasised , greater competitiveness of coal on the energy market depends on efficient exploitation of regional resources .
This will make a tremendous contribution to increasing energy security for the territory of the European Union .
in writing . - I voted in support of Mr Gierek 's report on the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
The report 's proposals will allow for a greater focus on environmental concerns and will enable the coal and steel sector to investigate ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this report and I think it is important that we take the opportunity to look in more detail at the use of coal as part of our energy needs .
For too long coal has been seen as a dirty fuel and scant regard has been given to the possibility of cleaning up coal by use of new technologies .
My own region of the North-West of England still sits on huge reserves of quality coal that is deemed too expensive to extract , and whilst it is true that coal in its purest form is not an environmentally-friendly fuel , new , clean coal technology now exists that would enable coal to play a key role in our energy supply whilst not destroying the environment in the process .
We need to use our coal reserves better .
We need to find more research money to make coal more environmentally friendly and more economically competitive .
We need to do more to revive our coal-mining communities .
I believe clean coal does have a future and I thank the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for its report which at least starts this discussion going .
in writing . - Both coal and steel have been very important industries to communities in the south-east of England , especially in Kent .
I welcome this report which promotes a research fund to develop elements of these industries inside the EU , as we need answers to our future energy needs .
In particular , making coal an environmentally more accepted fuel could help secure our energy needs in the future when Europe could be under greatest stress from uncertain supply conditions .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of the report by Mr Gierek on the Research Fund for Coal and Steel .
Pursuant to the Council 's guidelines , after operating for five years the Research Fund for Coal and Steel was reviewed this year .
The review focused on efficient use of energy materials and environmental protection .
It should be emphasised that one of the Fund 's great advantages is that it can be used as a source of supplementary finance for research not covered by the Seventh Framework Programme .
In addition , pursuant also to the European Commission 's stance , the Fund should continue to operate , because steel is still one of the principal raw materials for the machinery and construction industries , and these sectors require constant investment in research .
The Fund will also facilitate better use of coal on the energy market , which will make a significant contribution to the European Union 's energy security .
It should , however , be remembered that extraction of this raw material requires ongoing exploratory surveys .
Another important issue is the introduction of the principle of gender equality into the research teams .
This will make a positive contribution to increasing the involvement of women in the area .
in writing . - ( PT ) According to information provided by the Commission , 40 % of the total EU fleet in terms of vessel tonnage operate on the high seas or in the waters of third countries .
Likewise , vessels from other countries also fish in EU waters , notably under the terms of the so-called ' northern agreements ' .
It is thus very important for the EU to have a clear system for authorising both types of activity .
The legislative proposal and Parliament 's report are part of the EU 's efforts to ' simplify ' the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) by laying down general rules and conditions for applying for , and issuing , licences to fish , both inside and outside EU waters .
The Commission proposal clarifies the responsibilities of the Commission and Member States and specifies the reporting requirements of fishing activities .
The amendments made by Parliament 's report make the document fairer in certain respects .
An example of this is the greater flexibility introduced with regard to the eligibility criteria in Article 7 .
The Members of the Portuguese Social Democratic Party therefore support the Morillon report .
in writing . - ( PT ) At the moment , authorisations for fishing activities to be granted to Community fishing vessels or third country vessels are managed through various bilateral agreements or Regional Fisheries Management Organisations .
This proposal for a regulation aims to establish a single procedure for managing all fishing authorisations , clearly indicating the role of the European Commission in granting or suspending these authorisations , instead of the Member States .
Among many important aspects that deserve comment or criticism , we would highlight that , despite this report clarifying certain aspects of the proposal for a regulation , such as regarding as serious infringements only those infringements which have been effectively confirmed as such in accordance with the relevant national legislation - which we regard as positive - it still does not safeguard the sovereignty of each Member State in terms of the management of fishing activities in their EEZs ( Exclusive Economic Zones ) , with which we disagree .
That is why we tabled an amendment which argued for the Member States , as interested parties , to be active participants in the procedures , in particular decision-making procedures for the granting of authorisations in this area .
Regrettably the amendment was rejected by a majority of this House .
in writing . - I voted against the Morillon report , because a number of amendments which I co-signed were voted down .
In particular , amendments relating to the reallocation of fishing opportunities were defeated .
My own hostility to the disastrous CFP has been well documented in this House and I believe that fisheries management should be returned to Europe 's fishing nations .
However , for as long as we have a common policy , the principle of relative stability must remain inviolable and all of Europe 's fishing communities must be assured that their historic fishing rights will remain their own .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council regulation concerning authorisations for fishing activities of Community fishing vessels outside Community waters and the access of third country vessels to Community waters - C6-0236 / 2007 - .
Mr Morillon rightly emphasised that it is very important for the European Union to have a clear system for authorising both types of activities , with a view to achieving the maximum level of compliance with Union provisions in the area of fisheries and also to provide greater transparency for the activities of EU vessels in the waters of third countries .
Furthermore , there can be no doubt that the priority given by the Commission and the European Union to combating IUU fishing , and the significant reduction of fish stocks of developing countries caused by vessels engaged in IUU fishing merits our highest attention .
in writing . - The goal of Mr Morillon 's report should have been to simplify the common fisheries policy .
I am not convinced that the report 's initial proposals met this requirement .
The inclusion of agreements that fall under Article 63 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea would produce great practical difficulties for the Scottish fishing industry .
Provisions pertaining to utilisation appear to already form part of existing third-country fisheries partnership agreements and the report 's recommendations only serve to further complicate matters in this area .
My vote reflected these concerns .
in writing . - On behalf of the European Parliamentary Labour Party , I am writing to explain why we tabled and supported amendments 20-23 on the Morillon report , and , when the amendments , fell , voted against the amended report and legislative resolution .
Amendments 20 , 21 , and 22 relate to the scope of the regulation .
It is important to maintain the distinction between agreements that are covered by article 63 rather than 62 of UNCLOS .
Only the latter should be the subject of this proposal .
Amendment 23 deletes the power given to the Commission to re-allocate fishing opportunities as proposed in Article 13 , preserving the principle of relative stability and historic fishing rights in a context of responsible fishing .
Today 's vote should be a wake-up call to all those who are concerned about the conservation of vulnerable fishing stocks .
It shows that the European Parliament is in favour of the European Commission reallocating fishing quotas , which would result in a free-for-all in the North Sea .
This goes against the principle of relative stability and is detrimental to Scottish fishing interests .
We had no other option but to vote against this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats support the European Parliament 's wish in 2008 , the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , to invite a number of the world 's religious leaders for a dialogue with MEPs .
We want to stress , however , that this dialogue should take the form of discussions and exchanges of view in the committees , or it should take place in specially arranged meetings .
One-sided speeches to Members sitting in plenary , without any possibility for dialogue and questions , are not the right medium for communication and intercultural exchanges .
in writing . - The original compromise resolution was in my opinion not entirely balanced .
The initial disturbances in Lhasa and elsewhere were orchestrated attacks on people and premises with arson , injury and murder of Han Chinese and the Muslim minority .
In my own country this would , if it had been white youth against our migrant community , have been described as race riots .
Nevertheless on balance I could have supported it .
China still fails to fully respect human rights across its territory , with respect to independent trade unions , internal migrants and the practice of minority religions .
However , the amendments from the right that have passed pushed this text beyond the fringe .
The rejection of the EU 's ' one China policy ' , the demands for a dialogue ' without preconditions ' made it impossible for me to support the resolution even with my agreement on the human rights elements contained within the resolution , as I indicated by my roll-call votes .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption of a joint resolution by all the political groups on Tibet .
This text condemns the recent repression in Tibet and follows on from this Parliament 's previous resolutions calling on both parties to engage in dialogue .
We also call on the Chinese Government and the supporters of the Dalai Lama to end all violence .
The Chinese Government must not misuse the 2008 Olympic Games by arresting dissidents , journalists and human rights activists .
We call on the EU Presidency-in-Office to strive to find a common EU position with regard to the attendance of the heads of state or government and the EU High Representative at the Olympic Games opening ceremony , with the option of non-attendance in the event that there is no resumption of dialogue between the Chinese authorities and His Holiness the Dalai Lama .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Olympic torch continues its journey round the globe and demonstrations all over the world have shown what people feel about this summer 's Olympic Games .
It is a question in which many are interested , and it is important that the Member States be left to decide for themselves whether to participate in or boycott the Olympic Games in China .
The fight for human rights is crucial and should be supported , but the work must take place through the UN in order to acquire the necessary legitimacy .
Unfortunately the European Parliament is exploiting the current situation in Tibet in order to advance its foreign policy positions .
The situation must be resolved between China and Tibet without interference from the European Parliament , which has no powers in this area .
in writing . - ( PT ) While expressing our sympathy for the victims , our desire that the conflicts should be peacefully resolved and our principles of the defence of democracy , human rights and international law , we feel that once again a resolution on the situation in Tibet contains elements that do not strictly correspond to the situation as it is actually developing .
It is increasingly evident that what is actually in hand is an operation against the Beijing Olympic Games ; this is the real motivation behind the escalation in provocation and much of the hypocritical indignation expressed .
Once again , arguments are being manipulated to justify current and future interference and infringements of international law , with attempts to impose strategic and economic interests against China .
It is significant that we are still talking about Tibet as a territory occupied by China when the powers instigating and supporting the separatist movements which are at the root of the violent actions are not challenging the integrity of the territory of the People 's Republic of China , including Tibet as an Autonomous Region .
Finally , what morals can this House have in adopting such a resolution when , less than a month ago , it adopted a report on Iraq without a single mention of the aggression and occupation by the US ?
in writing . - ( FR ) Given the gravity of the situation in Tibet , the European Parliament could stay silent no longer .
I therefore supported this resolution , which strongly condemns the brutal repression in this region by the Chinese security forces .
The violence that has taken place in the streets of Lhasa and Dharamsala and the censorship of foreign media are intolerable and our institution must , together with the international community , use all of its influence to ensure that it stops and that China respects its international commitments in the field of human rights and minorities .
Through my vote I also wished to express my solidarity with the people of Tibet , most of whom are not demanding independence but greater political autonomy and respect for their cultural and linguistic heritage .
I am not in favour of a complete boycott of the Beijing Olympics because , in my view , dialogue is always preferable to closure .
I believe , however , that these Games are an opportunity to encourage the Chinese authorities to make progress on the road to democracy , and I hope , as stated in the resolution , that the EU heads of state or government will adopt a consistent common position in relation to this event .
in writing . - I condemn the Chinese armed forces ' repression of Tibetan protestors .
Indeed , this issue underlines the need for a common EU approach to China .
It is only through such a coherent approach that cooperation can constructively move forward .
The Beijing Olympics are a prime opportunity to push for progress on issues such as human rights and media freedoms in China .
Any attempts by the Chinese Government to hinder protests or reporting for these ends would be regrettable .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( DE ) It was entirely predictable that China would react to demonstrations by deploying the military and the police .
China is of course not a democracy , but the response of the Chinese security forces to the demonstrators is naturally to be condemned .
A boycott of the Olympic Games , in whatever form , would in all probability simply be viewed as an insult by the Chinese majority population and would certainly not improve - and , in the worst case scenario , might actually exacerbate - the situation of minorities in that country .
Given the EU 's weight in the international arena , ' go-it-alone ' approaches by the EU are highly unlikely to have any effect .
If the EU presses ahead and makes itself a laughing stock in the eyes of the world , that would help no one , especially not the Tibetans .
Even if the situation calms down , new and perhaps even more violent unrest can be predicted .
Together with allies , however , the EU can make efforts to improve the life of the minorities in China on a progressive basis and gradually bring about a change in attitude in the government and the majority population .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the firm stance our House took today in relation to a situation that has existed in Tibet for decades but deteriorated significantly a month ago .
Defending our values - both European and universal - means that silence is out of the question : I thus fully support the condemnations of the ' brutal repression visited by the Chinese security forces on Tibetan demonstrators ' as well as ' all acts of violence from whichever source ' that have taken place in recent days .
Parliament also makes a number of requests to the Chinese authorities , calling on them , in particular , to authorise an independent international inquiry into the violence in Tibet , to open a constructive dialogue without preconditions with the Tibetans , to release immediately the peaceful demonstrators and all dissidents arrested in China , and to honour the human rights commitments it made to the IOC and to the world in 2001 .
Finally , the resolution calls on the EU heads of state or government to adopt a common position on their participation in the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games .
in writing . - As Head of the Romanian Socialist Delegation , I would like to explain the Delegation 's negative vote on the Resolution on Tibet .
In fact , the resolution is not defending human rights and we cannot accept that human rights fall hostage to geopolitical agendas and interests .
It is lenient with respect to human rights and hypocritical , because it is forceful in proposing political solutions that do not take into account the realities in China .
Through this resolution , the EU is losing its credibility , promoting in reality , behind its statements of support for human rights , a dangerous agenda of " political autonomy " and independence for Tibet , in clear contradiction to the " One-China policy " principle .
At the same time , the EU is losing its encouraging influence on China in the process of opening .
Consequently , the resolution stands for the partition of China and not for the support and promotion of human rights , which are being used as a pretext for pushing forward different geopolitical agendas .
in writing . - I completely support Tibet in this situation .
However , I could not support this motion for a resolution , as an amendment to respect the ' one China ' policy principle was passed by the majority of my colleagues .
I do not support this particular amendment , as the ' one China ' policy threatens Taiwan as well as Tibet .
I have in the past called for a boycott of the Beijing Olympics on the basis of human rights .
in writing . - ( PL ) I was part of the delegation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs that visited Zagreb at the beginning of this year .
I agree with the rapporteur on the issues detailed in the report discussed yesterday , and therefore voted in favour of adoption of Mr Swoboda 's report today .
I should like to congratulate the Croatian authorities on the positive results they have achieved so far in preparation for membership of the European Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although I voted in favour of the progress report on Croatia 's potential accession , I must stress that no future accessions can take place in the near future .
The Union of 27 must firstly organise itself on the basis of the Lisbon Treaty .
New accessions will only be possible after consolidation of the EU in its current configuration .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan considers that the enlargement of the EU is a fundamental aspect of the work to achieve peace and stability in Europe .
We therefore support EU membership for Croatia when the country meets the Copenhagen criteria .
We have therefore voted in favour of the report .
However , it is absurd for the European Parliament to demand that the media take steps to maintain popular support for the role of the International Criminal Tribunal .
This kind of utterance can be interpreted quite simply as interference with press freedom .
We are also critical of formulations to the effect that the European Parliament should call on Croatia to conduct an awareness-raising campaign aimed at focusing public attention on the environment .
This question is of course important in itself , but it falls outside the powers of the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( PT ) It will be said that the effects of the recent NATO Summit in Bucharest made themselves felt in the vote of this House today .
In other words , Croatia has seen the adoption of the report on its ' progress ' towards accession to the EU - with it even being explicitly stated that the negotiations shall ( ! ) be concluded before the 2009 elections - whereas the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) has seen the vote on its progress report postponed .
It will be recalled that the NATO Summit decided to invite Croatia to begin accession talks , whilst those with the FYROM were postponed .
If there is one aspect that this situation once again highlights , it is that the enlargement of the EU and NATO occurs in harmony .
Among other important aspects that should be highlighted in this explanation of vote ( such as the current border disputes between countries in the region , including Italy ) , it is noted that progress towards accession to the EU means , according to the European Commission , that the ' economic criteria ' , in other words ' a budgetary consolidation and stability policy ' , ' structural reform of public finances ' , ' privatisation ' and ' improving the quality of business environments ' , and land reform ( which means access to land ownership , particularly by foreigners ) , must be achieved .
Two examples of the EU at its best ...
in writing . - Mr Swoboda 's report on Croatia is a well-balanced report that outlines an optimistic view of Croatia 's efforts towards EU accession .
It is nevertheless realistic and does point to the need for continued effort by the Croatian Government on judicial and border issues .
I welcome the country 's efforts towards accession and hope for these to continue .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this motion for a resolution given the current situation and the estimates of the International Agency for Research on Cancer .
These indicate that one in three Europeans is diagnosed with cancer during their lifetime and one in four Europeans dies from the disease .
In 2006 there were nearly 2.3 million new cancer cases and over 1 million cancer deaths within the EU .
Cancer is caused by many factors in multiple stages and therefore requires more prevention that addresses lifestyle causes and occupational and environmental causes on an equal footing .
According to a recent study by the trade unions , at least 8 % of annual cancer deaths are directly caused by exposure to carcinogens in the workplace and this exposure could be prevented by substitution of carcinogens with less harmful substances .
It is well known that there are startling differences in the quality of cancer treatment facilities , screening programmes , evidence-based best practice guidelines , facilities for radiotherapy and access to new anti-cancer drugs , which also explains the big differences in the five-year survival rate from most cancers across Europe .
in writing . - ( SV ) Are EU measures in the urgent fight against cancer more effective than corresponding measures in the context of existing international organisations with broad expertise , such as the WHO ?
Do the EU institutions have more extensive competence than the Member States in methods of combating cancer ?
Our answer to these questions is ' no ' .
The Resolution calls , among other things , for an interinstitutional EU Cancer Task Force , EU-sponsored information and education campaigns on cancer , an advisory committee on cancer prevention to be set up by the Commission , legislative action by the EU to encourage and support initiatives concerned with the lack of sun protection , action by the Commission to create smoke-free environments , nationwide provision by the Member States for multidisciplinary oncology teams and recognition of oncology as a medical speciality .
The idea behind these views and demands is certainly laudable .
The fundamental question , however , is : what value added is there in having the EU regulate all these things ?
Where is trust in the Member States ?
What happened to the subsidiarity principle ?
Does EU regulatory action really benefit those who are in need of qualitative legislation and well-considered measures , namely cancer patients ?
Where is the realisation that cancer is a global problem , which should be approached at a global level ?
On the basis of the above arguments , Junilistan voted against the report in question in the final vote .
in writing . - I fully support the motion for a resolution brought before Parliament by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety relating to combating cancer .
The EU has an important role to play in coordinating the fight against a disease which one in three Europeans will be diagnosed with in the course of their lifetimes .
Member States also clearly have a key role in cancer prevention , diagnosis and treatment amongst their citizens and must learn from each other in order to combat the disease .
Just this week , the Scottish Government announced a national programme to immunise schoolgirls against Human Papilloma Virus , the cause of the majority of cervical cancer cases , and it is programmes such as this which the EU should encourage all Member States to adopt .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of the resolution on combating cancer as diseases of this type wreak havoc the world over , including the countries of the European Union and my home country , Poland .
Widespread and regular preventive checks enable this disease to be detected in its initial stages , which significantly increases the chance of recovery .
A less restrictive exchange of experiences between oncology centres is needed so that the knowledge gained most recently on the subject can be applied extensively .
Much concern has been expressed recently about the increase in the number of cases of breast cancer .
It is therefore essential to spread awareness of the danger and provide universal access to professional mammogram testing .
It is also especially important to limit people 's contact with carcinogenic products .
In particular , consideration should be given to the preservatives used in the food industry and to the inappropriate use of artificial fertilisers and plant protection products .
Asbestos also merits attention because until recently it was used in the construction industry and in water supply pipes .
Anti-nicotine preventive measures must form part of this action , too .
in writing . - ( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , today none of us can say that the fight against cancer does not concern us .
I am not a medical expert in oncology , but having lost both my parents and a young brother to cancer I have witnessed the aggressiveness of this disease .
I have witnessed the difficult fate endured by people and their families at the hands of this disease , which could not fail to touch even the hardest of hearts .
I am grateful to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Security for putting a question on this topic to the Commission , which instigated this important debate .
I thank all the authors of the resolution , including my Slovak colleague Irena Belohorská , for their efforts , without which we would have not found the answers to serious issues related to this aggressive disease .
I am convinced that every step , even the smallest one , every investment that contributes to early cancer detection and diagnosis and supports new treatment will offer great hope to cancer patients .
in writing . - With one in three Europeans diagnosed with cancer during their lifetime and one in four Europeans dying from the disease , cooperation to share best practice and to call for more resources for research is important in the EU .
The concept of an interinstitutional EU Cancer Task Force with the aim to increase by 50 % by 2018 the number of EU citizens participating in a cancer screening programme should be welcomed .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , which laid the foundations for Europe 's policy on climate , biodiversity , the environment , health and natural resources , has been very successful .
However , as Commissioner Dimas himself mentioned , the EU has fallen a long way behind its schedule for reaching the environmental protection targets it originally set , especially on atmospheric pollution , with all the associated problems : the greenhouse effect , health impairment and acid rain .
The cut in funding for Natura 2000 and the LIFE + programme , moreover , is giving great cause for concern to small local authorities , which will suffer a corresponding reduction in their scope for action as regards effective environmental policies to protect their own area .
I therefore cannot fail to fully agree with Mrs Myller , who , in this report calls on the Commission to include clearer , more specific quantitative and qualitative deadlines and targets in the text .
Indeed , although the climate and energy package , the revision of the Waste Directive and the revision of the IPPC should help us to ensure a sustainable future for Europe , we have a pressing need and a responsibility to revise the Sixth Programme in order to fine-tune EU environmental action over the coming decades .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Myller report on the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , given the importance of achieving the objectives thus defined , particularly with regard to the thematic strategies , protection of biodiversity and enforcement of Community legislation , and not forgetting issues such as ecological taxation or the problem of environmentally harmful subsidies .
Efforts should be redoubled in order to provide a timely response to the environmental problems targeted by the Programme .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report stems from an assessment that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety requested in order to determine how well the European Union has so far honoured its commitments under the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme , which was approved in 2002 and runs until 2012 .
This assessment revealed that the implementation of the Action Programme is either very behind schedule or extremely behind schedule in the case of a number of priority objectives .
In the light of the measures carried out so far , it does not seem that the priority environmental objectives of the Programme will be achieved by 2012 .
Accordingly , the assessment does not support the claim by the Commission in its own mid-term review that , on the whole , the EU is on schedule with the implementation of the measures planned in the Action Programme .
According to the assessment commissioned by Parliament , it may be concluded that the Commission 's decision to make specific proposals through the thematic strategies has not , on the whole , produced the desired result .
However , despite having generally voted in favour of the report , we disagree with some of its points .
in writing . - The mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme does not offer anything new , such as a change in the course already set .
The review merely expresses concern that progress is not being made as quickly as envisaged in the timetables .
Nevertheless , although the major environmental issues have been acknowledged , the review does not point out the reason for the worsening situation , i.e. the ruthless exploitation by multinationals for their own profit .
They use the environment as a reservoir , which they plunder rashly for raw materials and exploit without control for the sake of profit .
Indeed , the Sixth Environment Programme turns the very exploiters of nature into environmental protectors , as it expressly states that effective action , business opportunities and the market will provide a solution .
In fact , the environment provides a new opportunity to accumulate capital and profit .
This exploitation is even supported by Community resources - that is , citizens ' money .
The liberalisation of sectors of strategic importance and the commercialisation of environmental protection promote the green economy as one of the larger investment outlets for monopolistic capital .
At the same time , increased awareness is being exploited worldwide .
This conceals the fact that dangerous climate changes and global warming are the result of industrial development based on capitalist profit and the commercialisation of earth , air , energy , water , etc .
in writing . - I welcome the Myller report on the mid-term review of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme .
I share its concerns over the increase in transport emissions and slow-moving efforts towards energy efficiency .
More concerted effort needs to be made in these areas .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report by my Finnish colleague in the Socialist Group Riitta Myller .
At the mid-term stage this text paints a worrying picture of the state of progress of the Sixth Community Environment Action Programme ( 2002-2012 ) .
The implementation of the vital measures to combat climate change is hugely delayed .
Similarly , the EU has made extremely limited progress on the preservation of air quality , implementation and enforcement of Community legislation , protection of biodiversity , reform of environmentally harmful subsidies , and promotion of sustainable production / consumption models .
The analysis provided in the report is alarming , to say the least , because at present , contrary to the Commission 's statements , it seems highly unlikely that we will stick to the timetable set out six years ago and meet the priority environmental targets in 2012 .
By voting in favour of this text , I am joining with the majority of Parliament to urge the European Commission and the Member States to make a crucial final effort .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted for the amendment which calls upon the Commission and the Member States to refrain from blocking access to the Internet .
However , we would point out that our support for the amendment is mainly concerned with the issue of file sharing for private use .
For certain types of crime , for example child pornography offences and systematic infringements of copyright for commercial reasons , blocking access to the Internet should be one possible method along with others of combating criminal activity .
in writing . - ( FR ) The report by Guy Bono on cultural industries in Europe reaffirms the importance of the cultural dimension in the implementation of the Lisbon objectives .
It underlines the potential of cultural industries as regards employment and growth and the need to strengthen EU support and action in this sector .
The report also highlights the opportunities offered today by the Internet in terms of accessing , promoting and disseminating culture .
In this digital environment , it is nevertheless important to reconcile free access to the Internet and individuals ' rights and freedoms .
Internet use must comply with the major principles on which our democratic societies are built , including respect for intellectual property rights .
To cope with the widespread and ongoing illegal downloads that affect the audiovisual and music sectors in particular , suitable and proportionate measures must be proposed in conjunction with the various stakeholders .
Temporary suspension of Internet access , as part of a graduated response and with respect for individual freedoms , would be an appropriate solution that would also prevent the application of criminal sanctions , the limits of which are clear nowadays .
I am sorry that Parliament rejected that possibility today .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are well aware of the importance of culture and its dissemination in terms of cultural diversity and the rights of artists and people in every EU Member State .
This report makes some positive suggestions which we support , such as the idea of promoting mobility for the people , goods and services in the creative sector , due regard for the rules and principles laid down in the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Diversity , and the call made to the Commission to look into the possibility of setting up a programme similar to the MEDIA programme .
Likewise , we support the call made to the Commission to complete the procedures for implementing the initiative for the European digital library , to stimulate and support the music , theatre and publishing industries in order to facilitate the transnational distribution of works and , as a preliminary step , to set up a mechanism under the Culture Programme allowing non-audiovisual cultural industries to have access to Community funding to promote books , music and professional training .
However , we do not agree with other proposals which aim to defend purely business interests rather than education , culture , artists ' rights and the population in general .
in writing . - ( PL ) The contribution that culture makes to economic growth and its impact on employment was confirmed as a result of research published by the European Commission at the end of 2006 .
This research showed that in 2003 the cultural sector contributed around 2.6 % of the European Union 's GDP and that more than 5 million individuals were working in the sector .
Increased awareness of culture 's economic dimension and of its role in job creation is gradually spreading .
There is greater understanding , too , of culture 's part in rural and urban development .
In addition to its direct input into the economy , the creative and cultural sector has an indirect impact on the European socio-economic environment .
It also promotes the development of ICT .
Cultural industries play an important role at local , regional and urban level , and contribute significantly to competitiveness in the European Union .
We should therefore welcome the fact that both the Council and the Commission intend to recognise the role of culture and creativity as key factors for rural development , promoting European citizenship and achieving the aims of the Lisbon Strategy .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan considers that cultural matters in general fall under the political responsibility of the Member States .
We have therefore voted against this report in its entirety .
The report falls outside the legislative procedure and is nothing more than an attempt by the Federalist majority in the European Parliament to give the EU even greater involvement in the field of cultural affairs .
We have voted in favour of the amendment which opposes action to deny citizens access to the Internet since we are opposed to the proposal of France that it should be possible to exclude file sharers throughout the EU from the Internet .
Basically , however , we consider that the question of file sharing is a matter for the Member States to legislate on .
in writing . - Along with the majority of my group , I supported both parts of this amendment .
Forced removal of a customer 's Internet connection , without judicial oversight , is not the right solution to combating piracy .
Furthermore , Internet connections are often not personal .
Forcing the disconnection of one person 's Internet connection would have an unintended and disproportionate impact on other innocent users of the same connection .
I strongly support measures to protect those who work in the cultural industries by protecting intellectual property .
However , access to the Internet is becoming increasingly important for civil participation , media pluralism , freedom of expression and interaction with government services .
We should avoid disconnection wherever possible in favour of other , more effective measures to combat piracy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Bono report which recognises the huge importance of cultural industries in Europe .
In my own country , Scotland , the creative industries generate over £ 5 billion annually thereby contributing both to the economy and our society as a whole .
The EU must work with the nations of Europe to ensure that we adopt a coherent strategy to promote the industries attached to our rich and culturally diverse continent .
in writing . - ( EL ) The commercialisation of culture masquerades as supposed respect for diversity .
The intellectual rights of creators are deemed to be property to be taken away and bought like a commodity .
The need to respect the UNESCO conditions by means of purportedly dignified compromises is continuously and gradually adjusting to the WTO 's requirements and terms .
What is in fact taking place is a monopolistic centralisation and ownership of all the terms of cultural existence and cultural production of each country , under the umbrella of the measures and rules of the unpopular Lisbon strategy .
This is designed to enrich capital ; it hides behind fanciful blandishments , admonitions , exhortations and homilies about the respect for diversity .
Unfortunately , all human values are used to fuel profit .
The natural environment is being exploited for profit , and we are already experiencing the devastating effects of this policy .
None other than the ruthless laws of the market are crushing , degrading and homogenising every cultural , aesthetic , artistic and moral value .
These values have to be converted into capitalist profit , owing to internal and international imperialist competition .
In EU policy , the internal contradiction between the quality of culture and of profit is resolved only if the ruthless needs for profit are answered .
For this reason , we intend to vote against the report .
in writing . - Mr Bono 's report on the cultural industries in Europe calls for greater recognition of the industries ' contribution to the European economy .
The cultural sector should also be considered when formulating EU policy more generally .
Policies affecting the internal market , competition , trade and research and development , among others , all concern the cultural sector in various ways , and the proposals found in the report recognise this .
I therefore voted in support of Mr Bono 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report tabled by my Socialist colleague Guy Bono on cultural industries in Europe .
What are cultural industries ?
The term may be unusual but although culture cannot be summed up as its economic dimension , it would be just as harmful to obscure this aspect of the matter : culture is now a powerful catalyst for growth and employment and in 2003 it accounted for 2.6 % of GDP and 3.1 % of jobs in the EU .
This text recommends re-launching the European record industry ( through a reduced rate of VAT or a European fund to support music ) and tackles the issue of piracy , taking into account the need to make access to culture more democratic but also the need to respect intellectual property .
In this respect , I supported in particular one amendment - adopted by a margin of 17 votes - contradicting the repressive strategy of a ' graduated response ' proposed in France in the report presented by Denis Olivennes to the President of the Republic .
In my view , it would be not only impracticable but dangerous to entrust service providers - private companies - with the role of monitoring and suspending the Internet connections of people suspected of illegal downloading .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report on cultural industries in Europe opens with a frightening paragraph in the spirit of EU nationalism on the role of culture in the development of the European project .
Despite this I am voting for the report since , in the most important parts , Parliament says that non-commercial file sharing should not be criminalised and , if Amendments 1 or 2 go through , there will be no recourse to such measures as blocking access to the Internet because they violate fundamental freedoms and human rights and are contrary to the principles of proportionate response , effectiveness and deterrent value .
in writing . - ( SV ) In the European Parliament we have a name for reports which contain endless political wish lists , regardless whether we have powers in the field or not - they are called Christmas trees .
Guy Bono 's report is one of those .
Yet there was an important bright spot in Christofer Fjellner 's excellent Amendment 1 , which stated a clear political position pointing out that attempts to deny Internet access to individuals who illegally copy material online should not be recommended .
Since it has been leaked that President Nicolas Sarkozy wanted to transfer the French experiment to the EU , there is every reason to support a statement to the effect that this , to put it mildly , would not be appreciated .
As the amendment was adopted , I voted in favour of a report which I would otherwise have tried to vote down .
in writing . - On part 2 of Amendment 22 , I believe that people that act illegally on the Internet should have that service withdrawn .
This is why I voted against part 2 .
in writing . - ( PT ) I applaud the excellent report by my colleague Mr Graça Moura on a European agenda for culture in a globalising world , in which a vast programme is proposed to enable a strategy to be pursued both within the EU and in the EU 's relations with third countries .
Since at least March 2005 , Mr Graça Moura has stressed that the Lisbon Strategy can never fully achieve its fundamental aims unless culture is treated as one of its essential dimensions .
The Commission communication subscribes to this idea and makes culture a key point in the European political agenda .
I agree with the rapporteur when he says that ' the fact that the world is globalising is what , to our mind , is implying an ever more pressing and urgent need to assert and strengthen the European identity , without detracting from the diversity of the cultures existing among the peoples of Europe ' .
I also congratulate the European Commission on this communication and I call for the task force for culture already announced by President Barroso to be set up , rather than delaying its creation and work .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report contains some highly contradictory aspects .
On the one hand , there is a constant attempt to hide the true situation in Europe .
There is no single ' European cultural heritage ' , particularly as a reference for ' humanism , tolerance , democracy ' and so on .
The whole cultural history of Europe , just like its history in general , is not built solely on diversity , admirable creative energy and progress , but also on violent conflict , intolerance and many lines and contexts of cultural domination .
A single heritage is a fiction , fed previously by cultural Eurocentrism ( Europe as a ' vanguard ' and other aspects mentioned ) and fed nowadays by the oft-repeated myth of a ' European ' cultural identity .
On the other hand , however , the political intention to assert a European identity contains positive elements .
This is because this assertion of identity is not just intended to assert a ' European ' cultural identity , but to guarantee resistance to the pressure exerted by the dominant cultural industries of the US ( defence of linguistic and cultural diversity ; consideration of cultural industries as a ' protected space with regard to trade rules ' ; finding that the ' EU 's trade balance in cultural goods and services is unfavourable ' ) .
We therefore abstained in the end .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Graça Moura report which rightly highlighted the key role played by local , regional and national authorities in fostering and protecting cultural heritage .
Europe 's cultural diversity is one of our great treasures and my group , the European Free Alliance , is committed to safeguarding this diversity .
Similarly , my party is committed to a culturally cosmopolitan Scotland and in government is taking steps to enhance Scotland 's rich cultural tapestry , be that in our own linguistic diversity or our country 's ability to take key decisions in relation to broadcasting .
Europe can look forward to a culturally rich Scotland taking an independent place in the EU .
in writing . - ( PL ) I supported the report on the European agenda for culture in a globalising world , as it emphasises that the Union 's cultural policy focuses on European integration , whilst respecting the national and regional diversity of Member States .
The Community may only act in the area of cultural policy when its resources supplement and support the actions of individual countries , but do not replace them .
It is a matter of great satisfaction for me to be able to refer to the European Parliament 's adoption of the amendment tabled by two Polish Members who are part of the Committee on Culture : Mrs Tomaszewska and Mr Podkański .
Their amendment concerns declaring 2010 a year devoted to the memory of Frederic Chopin .
It is worth recalling that 2010 will be the 200th anniversary of the birth of that gifted composer in Żelazowa Wola in Poland .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Graça Moura 's report as a step in the right direction for promoting and preserving Europe 's cultural heritage .
However , the call for schools to promote European identity , I feel , is contrary to the basic role of education in our society .
Much more needs to be done , especially to ensure that this cultural heritage is shared as widely as possible .
The report requires strengthening and my vote reflected this view .
in writing . - ( DE ) Europe 's cultural heritage is one of our great treasures which must be preserved .
Thinking about how artists can be given not only financial but also legal support is one aspect of this , but it is also important to ensure that infringements which occur in the private sphere without any intention to make a profit are not penalised under criminal law .
It is even more important , however , to ensure that our Christian-occidental roots are not gradually and irrevocably lost .
The integration which we hear so much about must not consist of our dispensing with Christmas , East