Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 29 November 2007 .
Statement by the President
On 1 December two members of the Spanish security forces were shot by the terrorist organisation ETA in Capbreton in France .
A young , 24-year-old Spanish police officer , Raúl Centeno , died instantly and a second police officer , Fernando Trapero , aged 23 , was seriously injured and died last Wednesday .
Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of you all I should like to convey our sincere sympathy to the members of the victims ' families .
I should also like to send a message of solidarity to the Spanish people , the Spanish authorities , the country 's democratic institutions and the security forces in particular .
The European Parliament denounces every kind of violence as a means to an end .
Terrorism is an assault on freedom and democracy .
Terrorism must be fought and eliminated using every means available under the rule of law .
There can be no justification for terror .
We must not show any weakness when fighting terrorism .
The terrorist threat will therefore never succeed in bringing democracy to its knees !
I am sure that we are all in agreement on these principles . Thank you .
( Applause )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament
The 35 Romanian Members will be the voice of the Romanian people , representing their interests in the European Parliament .
As President of the European Parliament , I wish our new fellow Members - many of whom we already know from their work to date - every success in the forthcoming 18 months of their mandate .
On this occasion I should also like once again to thank all the members of the Romanian Parliament , who have been observers since September 2005 and Members of the European Parliament since 1 January this year .
I thank you for you tireless work and your commitment to European unity .
( Applause )
A total of 13 of the first MEPs were re-elected and I hope that they will assist their new fellow Members in their full and very quick integration into the work of Parliament so that together they contribute to the success of the European unification project for the benefit of their electors .
A list of these Members is published in the Minutes of today 's sitting .
Once again , a very warm welcome to our fellow Members from Romania .
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Referral back to committee for reconsideration of amendments tabled in plenary ( Rule 156 ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Request for urgent procedure : see Minutes
Fight against terrorism ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Order of business : see Minutes
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , fellow Members , as you know , negotiations are in progress between the Union and South Korea on the creation of a free trade area .
Within the scope of the parliamentary scrutiny , I drew the Commission 's attention to an issue which is of great importance for the economy of certain parts of Greece and other regions as well .
I am referring to the extremely high import duties imposed by South Korea on canned fruit .
We know the limits to the role that the European Parliament can play in shaping foreign trade policy .
However , the secrecy of the Commission 's negotiations should not result in a lack of transparency and democratic accountability , at least within the EU system .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Russian elections held on 2 December may fill us with fear .
The OSCE and European Council observers , if they were able to obtain visas at all , reported grave abuses .
Prior to the election , the government forces did everything they could to make things impossible for the political movements opposing them .
Their efforts have denied Russian society the most important pillar of democracy , the freedom of suffrage .
We are convinced that , where anti-democratic processes are concerned , Europe cannot bury its head in the sand .
Under no circumstances can an emphasis on stability of government justify restricting freedom of expression and suffrage .
We cannot forget that the state that applies the policy of force within its borders will not be deterred from applying such a policy in international relations too .
We feel that there is no alternative to deeper cooperation between the European Union and Russia .
At the same time , the bilateral relationship must in any event be based on maintaining respect for human rights and real reciprocity . Thank you .
He was the beneficiary of an error of mine .
I had mistakenly read PPE-DE instead of PSE , which is not acceptable , of course .
Two representatives from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament therefore now have the floor .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you for your words at the start of the sitting about the terrorism suffered by two young Spaniards , which speak for the whole House .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
I would like to remind you that on 16 May two Spaniards , Miguel Ángel López and Edén Galván were detained in Riga , along with five Portuguese , for taking some Latvian flags that were hanging from street lamps .
They did not mean any offence ; they did not have any legal assistance until the preliminary hearing , where they did not have an interpreter , and they only had a few seconds with a lawyer .
They were beaten by the police , and they remained in isolation .
One of them was left for a week without medication for his illness .
Some spent 13 days in prison before being released without charge .
Miguel Ángel and Edén Galván spent 19 days in prison .
This nightmare ended with a fine of EUR 4 000 each in November .
I know that there have been other cases of disproportionate treatment for alleged offences against Latvian symbols , which I think is extremely serious .
On this Human Rights Day I ask the President , who is sensitive to human rights , to write to the Latvian President expressing our great concern .
( ES ) Mr President , I would also like to join in thanking you for your words regarding the murder of two Civil Guard officers in Capbreton .
I would also like to make a complaint about the disappointing spectacle in this House during the visit of the President of the Spanish Government , José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero .
As a Spaniard and as a representative of European citizens in Parliament , it is difficult for me to understand how our institution could invite the Spanish President and then not do everything possible to ensure a dignified visit .
This was particularly noted among the ranks of the majority political group , as there almost appeared to have been an order given to the group , and this was commented on in the media in my country .
I think that we have wasted a wonderful opportunity to improve the visibility of the pro-European links that exist between Parliament and the Spanish people , who were represented here on that day by the President of their Government .
This institution did not provide the level of hospitality that Spanish and European citizens might have expected .
Fortunately , with generosity of spirit and a strong pro-parliamentary attitude , the Spanish President preferred to comment on the standard and richness of the debate and on the excellent welcome from the rest of the groups , along with the large numbers of Spanish citizens that welcomed him at Council premises .
I trust that your considerable experience , Mr President , and your current responsibility as President of this House will tell you what you need to do in order to erase this unfortunate impression and to ensure that it does not happen again .
The President is always pleased when the plenary is full and particularly for reasons such as these .
- ( PL ) Mr President , pesticides abuse and inappropriate waste management have led to a deterioration in soil quality and have given rise to a threat to our citizens .
Providing them and future generations with the potential to produce healthy foods should be one of our priority tasks .
The solutions put forward in Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines 's report , which include drawing up a list of contaminated areas in each Member State and a strategy for improving these areas , are undoubtedly a step in the right direction , and I hope that there will be more such steps to come .
Chemical contamination and the elimination of its consequences are not the whole story , though .
A new and more alarming problem has arisen alongside this , concerning the increased production of genetically modified foods , and that is biological contamination .
I can assure you all that GMO are significantly more alarming than chemical contamination .
While we combat chemical contamination , then , we must also combat biological contamination .
The EU must say a decisive ' no ' to the introduction of genetically modified organisms into foods .
( DE ) Mr President , the Duma elections on 2 December once again demonstrated that no surprises are to be expected in Russia .
The approaches have provided for the targeted breakdown and intimidation of the opposition , by massive changes in election legislation , the imprisonment and elimination of potential opponents such as Khodorkovsky and the repeated arrests of Garry Kasparov .
We are not impressed by the result of the United Russia campaign .
Putin 's party wins , democracy loses .
This questionable success is reinforced by the fact that no party critical of the government entered into Parliament .
These elections are no indication of a common basis for relations between Europe and Russia built on democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
This discouraging final rehearsal does not bode well at all for the Presidential elections in March 2008 and at the same time shows us the importance of our understanding of values .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you for your statement on behalf of our institution condemning the ETA murders .
Moving on to my question , I would like to say that last week I had the opportunity to meet with Mrs Yolanda Pulecio , the mother of Ingrid Betancourt , who as you know has been held as a hostage by FARC since 2001 .
She conveyed to me , as I am now conveying to you , to Parliament and the Commission , to the European institutions , the need for the Union to play a fundamental role in supporting the mediation by both Hugo Chávez , the President of Venezuela , and of President Sarkozy of France .
On 9 October , the European institutions , through the Portuguese Presidency , also supported this mediation .
This is very important , because a way is opening up for mediation , to put an end to the torment of many hostages that have been held for a long time and to begin to restore normality in the conflict in Colombia .
I therefore ask the European institutions not to let this call from Mrs Yolanda Pulecio , the mother of Ingrid Betancourt , fall on deaf ears .
( Applause )
Mr President , 23 November saw the first anniversary of the murder of my constituent , Alexander Litvinenko , in what was an act of state-sponsored nuclear terrorism .
The substance used to kill him , polonium-210 , is strictly controlled and is easily traceable back to its source in Russia , even down to the original batch from whence it came .
The crime could only have been authorised at the highest level in the Russian political establishment .
The British authorities have requested the extradition of only one person , Andrei Lugovoi , but the murder was not the act of an individual : a team of trained operatives were involved .
The British Government has ensured that Mr Lugovoi appears to carry sole responsibility , in order to divert attention from where guilt ultimately lies .
The finger of suspicion points straight back to the Kremlin .
If President Putin did not order the deed , he certainly knows who did .
( RO ) Mr. President , at the end of the year , the European Commission draws up the report regarding the barriers imposed on access to the labour market .
In my opinion , this report should necessarily emphasize the following two issues : the restrictions imposed on the new Member States are not justified , since their accession has not caused any imbalances on the markets of the other European Union countries ; secondly , these restrictions should not exceed the first two years specified by the European labour legislation .
The 2 + 3 + 2 formula tends to be used in the Member States as a response to certain current political requirements .
This is why I consider that a firm position of the European institutions from the first two years is necessary in order to stop the unjustified blocking of the labour force movement .
I also want to reaffirm the Community preference principle in the context in which the Parliament discusses the European Blue Card , which will create the possibility to import a labour force of over 20 million people from outside the European Union .
In virtue of this principle , it is abnormal to treat workers from the recently acceded European Union Member States more strictly than those of third countries .

Mr President , the enlargement of the Schengen area is a magnificent Christmas present for 21st-century Europeans , yet a new European curtain is being drawn for our neighbours Ukraine , Russia , Moldova and Belarus : a financial and bureaucratic one in place of the very old iron one .
Before , our neighbours could obtain free or reduced-price visas to travel to many new Schengen countries .
Now they must pay between EUR 35 and 60 .
This is a third of a monthly salary in some of these countries .
The financial gain from visa taxes is backfiring on the EU itself .
For ordinary neighbours the EU is becoming a distant land .
After all , the more people who visit the EU , the better they can see how we live , and , at the same time , our tourism industry will profit from it .
Also , financially , it is better to permit than to restrain .
We do not need the fortress of Europe .
I turn to my colleagues and to the President of this House and ask them to exert pressure on the Council to review the visa tax conditions for our eastern neighbours .

Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to a document that this House is about to work on : the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1228 / 2003 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity .
It concerns me that the proposal from the Commission does not contain articles that would allow Member States to limit the import of electricity from third countries if environmental regulations there are weaker than the ones applied here in the European Union .
The European Union should not make any concessions to energy suppliers that produce electricity at a low price but with a disastrous impact on the environment .
This would be spineless disloyalty to our values , as well as unfair to European energy suppliers that comply with the necessary standards .
( PL ) Mr President , referring back to two speeches by my fellow Members , I would like to comment on the elections in Russia .
It reminded me of the old joke about how every American has a choice of car as long as it is a black Ford .
I have the impression , though , that many European politicians gave a sigh of relief that there was some continuity , and that there was still someone in Russia they could talk to .
Of course , I understand the economic interests of individual EU Member States , especially the large ones , and of individual lobby groups and individual industries , but our silent consent to the failure to observe human rights in Russia , our European Union blindness and deafness , can only encourage the Russian authorities to keep on arresting more and more Kasparovs .
The quieter we are in the EU about what is going on in Russia , the less we say about it , the greater the policy of repression in that country - it is that simple ; I therefore propose that we speak out about what is happening in Russia , and bad things are happening .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to the situation of the Bulgarian art historian Martina Baleva and her German colleague from the Free University of Berlin , Ulf Brunnbauer .
Both have been subjected to death threats and hate campaigns in connection with , and as a result of , scientific work on a painting , specifically by the television station Skat TV and the radical Ataka Party .
More recently , at the end of Ataka 's European election campaign , a billboard displayed a banner stating : ' Baleva on the scaffold - the German Jew tied to the stake ! '
The complaint has not been processed by the Bulgarian public prosecutor 's office since June owing to public incitement to murder .
For safety reasons Mrs Baleva is now staying in Germany ; the TV station has offered a reward for information on her whereabouts .
The Bulgarian Government is not reacting and this is unworthy of a Member State and unacceptable !
( EL ) Mr President , the EU-Africa Summit has taken place in Lisbon .
In the joint statement which was agreed , great emphasis was placed on cooperation agreements between the Union and the countries of Africa .
According to the Commissioners concerned , Mr Mandelson and Mr Michel , these agreements will give impetus to Africa 's development .
Leaving aside the fact that for years we have been ignoring political assistance in favour of economic assistance , it is worth considering what more we can offer the countries of Africa , when we know , for example , that over the past 15 years , EU exports to the continent of Africa have increased by 84 % , which has forced poor countries to use 57 % of their GDP to import food which they could have produced locally .
The only ones to profit from all this cooperation are the big European companies .
Let us not delude ourselves , and let us be honest : we are giving money which we are taking right back .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Four MEPs of Hungarian nationality were given a mandate in the Romanian elections to the European Parliament : Magor Csibi , Csaba Sógor , László Tőkés and Iuliu Winkler .
This is an outstanding result and a wonderful chance for the Hungarian community to fight for the same autonomy proven in practice throughout Europe , mother-tongue education and an independent Hungarian-language university .
I would especially like to mention Bishop László Tőkés , since all of us have been enriched by an honest , genuine Member who is committed to democracy and human rights .
He was elected as an independent , individual candidate , without any kind of party list , for which there are few precedents .
The fact that his campaign was honest and based on values relating to fundamental human rights played a great role in his electoral success .
Bishop Tőkés has become a sort of legend in Hungarian politics through his activities up to now , his role in the Romanian transition to democracy , and his persistent fight for the largest national minority native to Europe , the Hungarian community living in Romania .
On behalf of the delegation from the Hungarian People 's Party , I feel a duty to welcome our compatriots as elected representatives of the Hungarian community living on the territory of Romania . Thank you .
( EL ) Mr President , today I would like to put the question of Olympic Airlines to the Plenary .
I believe that the Greek government has abandoned all attempts to negotiate on the future of Olympic Airlines , making the European Court 's impending decision a foregone conclusion .
There is no justification for this unacceptable stance when it is known that as part of its regional policy the European Union has already recognised the need to strengthen the airline with modern equipment , to ensure daily connections with the isolated island parts of the country .
It is clear that the Greek Government , on the basis of a pre-judged decision , has thrown away every right and every opportunity to negotiate to save jobs , thereby creating an enormous social problem .
At the same time , all the requirements which would prevent the dispersal of Olympic Airlines ' intangible assets , which are of considerable economic value , are being quietly dropped .
In this way , the Greek Government and the European Commission , in the name of competition , are making Greece a second-class destination .
This will be opposed by all the forces committed to the country 's future as a serious tourist destination .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Yet again we have cause for concern about ethnic diversity in the Vojvodina region of Northern Serbia , since in many decisions the European Parliament has declared this to be a value to be protected .
In the sense of the Readmission Agreement that was otherwise unfairly forced on Serbia by the European Union , some estimates indicate that many tens of thousands of people who are staying illegally in the integrated Member States will have to be sent back to Serbia .
Since the Serbian Government has no strategy for socially and geographically reintegrating this mass , the Serbian Constitution in vain prohibits on paper any changes to the proportions of ethnic groups through settlement if those who are readmitted do not go back to the settlements from which they originally came but to Vojvodina , which is a more developed region .
It is no accident that even empty flats here are put on the police list .
In addition to this , the locals are rightly fearful of a wave of refugees from Kosovo .
The tensions are increased by the military censuses of the recent past , for which the Hungarians of Vojvodina qualify as loyal Serbian citizens but which are regarded as unjustified by a country that is a partner for peace in NATO and that is striving for a peaceful settlement in Kosovo . Thank you , Mr President .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to mention a brutal attack on an ethnic Greek journalist , which took place on 5 December in Istanbul .
The journalist in question is Andreas Robopoulos , correspondent of the Greek television channel MEGA and editor of the Greek-language newspaper ECHO .
He was clubbed on the back by purportedly unknown assailants , who may be known to the authorities , and as a result he suffered multiple fractures to his arms and head injuries requiring stitches .
This incident happened outside the ECHO offices in the Pera district .
The perpetrators left their victim lying on the ground , covered in blood .
This comes on the heels of many other incidents , such as the murder of the ethnic Armenian journalist Hrant Dink on 19 January in Istanbul , and the events of 13 December , when bulldozers from the Turkish forestry department destroyed the Monastery of the Transfiguration on the island of Heybeliada ( Halki ) .
I call on the European Parliament , which is the highest political expression of democracy in the European Union , to conduct a thorough investigation and respond vigorously , with a condemnation of such crimes on the part of a country which , while aspiring to join the European Union , attacks its own citizens .
Mr President , it is Human Rights Day today , and the world is plagued by a plethora of examples of human rights violations .
Amongst these examples is that of my tiny home country , Cyprus .
For 33 years , Turkish forces have occupied part of the island and kept 200 000 refugees away from their homes .
For 33 years , the Turkish army has held the uninhabited town of Famagusta and uses it to blackmail the Greek Cypriot community .
For 33 years , Turkish soldiers have imposed a Berlin-like division of the capital , Nicosia .
And all this because the Turkish military seem to dictate Turkish policy on Cyprus .

Let us hope that Mr Erdoğan 's new government , realising how unjustifiable it is to have an EU Member State occupied by its forces , will order his Turkish Chief of Staff , Mr Büyükanıt , to withdraw his forces from the island as soon as possible .
( PL ) Mr President , it is difficult to describe the parliamentary elections in Russia that have just ended as anything other than a bad joke at the expense of democracy .
The results from the area of Chechnya , where there was 99 % turnout and support for United Russia , are particularly disturbing .
The example of the Chechens is symptomatic .
People living in that country have no reason to vote for Putin 's team .
The immensity of the suffering they have experienced from that team has been mentioned on numerous occasions .
Virtually 100 % turnout and support for a governing group does not happen in any democratic country .
On the other hand it does vividly remind us of elections in totalitarian states .
There are further similarities .
The elections revealed that there is no longer any place for an opposition in Russia .
Freedom of speech is restricted and the media are controlled by the state .
The category of political prisoners is making a return .
This category is made up of those who have the courage to speak out openly against the regime , and democracy is becoming a facade behind which that pure-as-the-driven-snow democrat Putin can do exactly as he likes .
Mr President , in the run-up to Christmas , we would normally be in good humour .
But I have to say that , in Ireland at the moment , the country is quite shocked by young people who are dying from taking cocaine .
Just today a young girl is being buried , and it is the talk of the country because she was high-profile .
But I think it raises a very serious issue , not just for Ireland but for many Member States and their young people , and how drug-taking is now part of recreation .
The European Union , and Member States individually , need to tackle this head-on in two directions .
Obviously , we need to cut off the supply , but that may be extremely difficult .
It has got to be done by better policing and better work between Member States .
But we need to cut off demand and we need young people - indeed , all of us - to realise the dangers of drugs .
And those who promote legalising them should take note .
Finally , I would just urge those who are currently dabbling to please stop , and I would express my sympathies to the families in Ireland who have lost loved ones .
( SK ) Mr President , during the totalitarian regimes the people of Eastern Europe often feared customs controls and membership of the EU is for many closely associated with the end of these controls .
Euro-regions , which through their activities supported cooperation in border areas , significantly facilitated the removal of barrier at border areas .
These cross-border associations encouraged us , the Members of Parliament , to put pressure on the parties concerned to stick to the original deadline for the expansion of the Schengen area .
I am happy that their expectations in that regard were fulfilled and that at midnight on 20 December the last remnants of the Iron Curtain will fall and the borderless Euro-regions will become a reality .
With the Slovak Republic 's accession to the Schengen area and the opening of the borders with the Czech Republic , Poland , Hungary and Austria , a new area for close cooperation will be created .
I hope that all the associations , villages and towns in the border areas will respond to the invitation of the Tatry region and on 21 December will celebrate at border crossings the greatest success of European integration , namely the elimination of the borders that used to divide them .
Mr President , I just want to rise ahead of Christmas to say ' thank you ' , for once , to the European Commission for having announced the aid of over EUR 170 million out of the European Solidarity Fund to help towards the clean-up operations after the floods in my country , and especially in my region , this summer .
I understand that , if it is confirmed , this will be the second-highest amount ever paid out of the European Solidarity Fund .
As MEP for one of the regions most affected , I can say that every contribution is welcome .
This gesture of solidarity from the rest of Europe will be most welcome in my constituency .
Normally the President does not comment on what speakers have said , but on my list it says ' EUR 170 ' and not ' EUR 170 million ' , so I am happy that the United Kingdom has nothing to criticise in this case !
( Laughter )
( SL ) I would like to inform you of certain events on the Croatian-Slovenian border .
The Croatian side is once again engaging in the practice of faits accomplis as a way of settling unresolved border issues with Slovenia .
The Croats first started selling land in the disputed territory on the left bank of the Dragonja River and then built a bridge at Hotiza .
Recently they have very slowly moved the border in the Snežniški Woods and their foresters have started felling trees .
In Razkrižje they have quietly marked out a new border control building without the Croatian Ministry of Foreign Affairs giving the Slovenian side advance notice of its intentions , even though it is required to do so under the agreements that it has entered into .
Nor has notice been given to the Slovenian owners of the plots of land on which it is intended to erect the crossing .
In spite of Slovenia 's support in principle for Croatia 's entry into the EU , Croatia should comply with the agreements that it has entered into with other countries if it wishes to justify its status as a credible candidate for EU membership .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , on this day in 1948 the UN General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , so today we can celebrate Human Rights Day .
I would like to ask , with all due respect , do we really have cause for celebration ?
There is no doubt that the values formulated in the document still form the basis for the Union and for our Europeanness today .
But just because we are celebrating , we cannot ignore the phenomenon in many Member States of the Union , from Hungary to Greece and from Slovakia to the Netherlands - I could list the examples - where there are still in existence and on the increase political groups which hide in uniforms and which cast doubt on precisely these values , marching with the symbols of fallen dictatorships .
I entreat all responsible European politicians : let 's make the celebration nicer ; let 's act together against extremist groups !
Hopefully my group will manage to propose a Parliamentary Decision to protest against manifestations of extremism .
There cannot be a better time for collaboration than on the international Human Rights Day . Thank you very much .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to remind you that 5 December was the anniversary of the birth of a great Pole and European - Polish Head of State Marshal Józef Piłsudski .
This charismatic figure was not only an excellent and heroic commanding officer , but also , above all , an authentic statesman who made a major contribution to the rebirth of the Polish state .
Under his leadership in 1920 the Polish army halted the march of the Bolsheviks , who were intent on subduing the whole of Europe .
He spoke out in favour of living in peace and harmony with neighbours , with respect for full sovereignty .
He also said that Poland was faced with a big question : should it stand on equal terms with other great world powers , or should it be a minor state that needed the protection of the powerful ?
Poland has not yet come up with an answer to this question ; it has still to sit that examination of its strengths .
A major effort lies ahead of us in that regard , and we , the current generation , will have to gird ourselves up for it .
These words remain relevant today , with Poland being one of the 27 Member States of the European Union .
( SK ) Mr President , on 19 November 2007 the A6 motorway connecting Bratislava and Vienna was inaugurated .
I regard it as a historic event , which will significantly simplify the motorway links between the Slovak Republic and Austria .
After three years of intensive works on the A6 , and once the Slovak Republic has joined the Schengen area , the contacts between the two countries will no doubt become even more productive .
I would like to thank Austria for having successfully completed the project , in collaboration with the Slovak Republic .
The opening of the A6 heralds the first time that the Slovak Republic has been connected to the trans-European transport corridors .
This will bring relief to the other transport routes that are already heavily used .
( DE ) Mr President , last Friday more than 70 000 signatures in favour of tighter legislation on the transport of livestock were handed over to the President of the Austrian Parliament , Barbara Prammer .
A citizens ' initiative was created by a small group of people , coordinated by one of my fellow countrymen , Helmut Schaupensteiner , and backed by a highly committed journalist , Maggie Entenfeller .
They managed to find these 70 000 signatures in the shortest possible time .
This initiative has my full backing and 70 000 signatures show that the population is no longer willing either to allow these tragic circumstances to pass without comment .
As a Member of the European Parliament I therefore regard it as my duty to inform you , ladies and gentlemen , about this splendid application of the initiative against the transport of livestock and to ask us all to finally do something here so that these things that are currently taking place on European roads will no longer be able to take place in future .
( SK ) Mr President , on 4 December 2007 the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic deemed that the legislation on termination of pregnancy , which permits induced abortions up to the 12th week of pregnancy without justification , and I repeat without any justification , does not infringe the Constitution of the Slovak Republic .
The Constitution of the Slovak Republic nevertheless speaks about the safeguarding of human life even before birth .
I am sorry to say that this day will be written in the history of the Slovak Republic with the blood of the children who will not get the chance to be born and live .
I regret that the majority of the judges were unable to summon up enough courage to confirm the supremacy of the higher principle of safeguarding human life .
Condoning abortions of unborn children on the grounds of so-called human rights , or rather women 's rights , which do not have anything in common with human nature and dignity , is regrettable and is to be condemned .
( EL ) Mr President , we heard earlier about the concerns of the Greek people over the question of Olympic Airlines .
We must ensure that Olympic stays airborne .
However , there is another problem which concerns the Greek people , and it was discussed in the Greek Parliament on the initiative of the Vice-President ( First Speaker ) , Mr Sourlas : the serious risk posed to young people by the use of technologies and computers .
Dependence on this new phenomenon causes illnesses in young people which make them unfit to participate in society , destroying their prospects for education or work .
At the same time , no safeguards are provided .
Our question , then , is : Why does free competition on the open market allow the production and import of video games from third countries , and the dissemination of such games , and the uncontrolled , 24-hour operation of Internet cafes ?
How can this market be controlled ?
What is the European subsidy for providing a safe internet for young people ?
What measures are being taken to treat the illnesses which young people suffer because of their addiction to computers and the Internet ?
And how are the competent law-enforcement authorities controlling electronic crime at European level ?
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Colleagues , On the eve of the launch of the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and the signing of the Chater of Fundamental Rights , I would like to draw your attention to Bulgaria and to the fact that , unfortunately , the Bulgarian Government , its administration and the reprsentatives of the ruling coalition in Parliament are still far away from the application of some of the underlying fundamental principles .
These are the principles of open governance , transparency and , above all , accountability in the decision-making process .
For the last few days , the Bulgagrian citizens have witnessed yet another attempt of the Government to apply obscure criteria so that to covertly re-dtsirbute the state budget surplus and enable the so-called " black coffers ” of the ruling parties to absorb funds in an unregulated manner .
This is one more example of the prevailing political practice over the recent years to come to and stay in power thanks to vote shopping rather than as a result of work well done .
Being a Member of the European Parliament and a representative of the biggest opposition party in Bulgaria and a right-wing political force sharing the values of the European People 's Party , I believe that the existing status quo of the political model in Bulgaria alienates citizens from the decision-making process and increases their perceptions of corruption .
In the public awareness campaign related to the Lisbon Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , we are prepared to promote the principles of the efficient and transparent governance and to persuade the citizens in the values enshrined in these two documents .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
This year , all 27 Member States of the Union have held a series of celebrations to commemorate the birth of the European Union and its 50th anniversary or birthday .
Most recently , at the beginning of December , I took part in such an event at Mosonmagyaróvár .
Mosonmagyaróvár is a town on the border of Slovakia , Austria and Hungary , so it is no surprise that there were very many mayors from all three countries .
The participating mayors cited an initiative that has been formulated for the European Parliament or for its President .
The essence of the initiative is that , following in the footsteps of the Ancient Greek traditions , the European Parliament should instigate a worldwide ceasefire for the first time in 2008 during the Olympic Games in Beijing .
Mr President , the motto for this invitation is ' 17 Days of Peace ' .
The mayors started collecting signatures on 1 December and they would like to give the petition to you , Mr President , here in Strasbourg in the spring .
They asked me to extend this invitation to you , which I have now done . Thank you .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , I have been approached by reprsentatives of the Bulgarian Confederation for Health Protection established by twelve patient organisations to defend the interests of one million Bulgarians with chronical diseases .
The pharmaceutical policy has been a source of serious concern in Bulgaria for the last few years .
Although the resources allocated for health care increase , less and less medicines can be purchased with them from year to year .
Unfortunately , their price includes also 20-percent VAT .
Bulgarian patients are worried that their reprsentatives are not allowed to participate in the monitoring and supervision of health care spending .
They insist on involvement in these processes so that to guarantee transparency .
Having tried to appeal to the Bulgarian Government for years on end , now they have decided to approach the European Commission and the European Parliament .
Over a million Bulgarians suffer from chronical diseases and they do not receive sufficient health protection .
Furthermore , the problems of the pharmaceutical policy affect the interests of more than 80 European pharmaceutical manufacturers who also seek greater transparency .
Therefore I appeal from this rostrum to the Bulgarian authorities and to the EU institutions to support the request of patient organisations for more transparency .
( SK ) Mr President , I would like to address the issue of minority radio broadcasting in the Slovak Republic , which is about to cease its activities .
The statutory radio of the Slovak Republic is bound by law to broadcast in national minority languages .
Last week , however , the management of the radio decided to stop broadcasting Rádio Pátria in minority languages on medium wave due to a lack of funds .
This would mean an end to broadcasting in Hungarian , Ruthenian and Ukrainian .
If the Slovak Parliament , in approving the budget for the coming year , has not allocate funds for medium wave broadcasting , broadcasting in minority languages will end on 1 January .
In Slovakia this broadcasting has an 80-year-old tradition .
It has also been decided that the broadcasting will continue via the Internet , although it has been estimated that only 1 % of listeners own a computer and use it to listen to the radio .
There are , however , alternative solutions ...
Mr President , this weekend the European Council will also discuss energy problems , which have become the issue of common security .
Against this background , let me address three wishes to the European Council .
First , I would like the Council to support the Commission 's proposals on ownership unbundling and restricting the majority hold of third countries ' capital on the electricity and gas markets .
This is a key issue in securing fair competition and avoiding opaque deals between state monopolies .
Second , I would like Member States to be able to restrict their electricity imports from third countries in cases where this could substantially endanger long-term supply security .
Third , may I remind the Council of the European Parliament resolution on energy security from September , which proposes the post of an external official for energy security ?
( PL ) Mr President , today , at the beginning of the third millennium , the world is faced with problems from the past that are still unresolved , and these are accompanied by new challenges .
We can be proud that the European Union is a creator of change and that our greatest values are human rights , freedom , democracy , tolerance , a free market , an improved standard of living and care for the natural environment .
If we are to act effectively to put these ideas and aims into effect , our Union must be businesslike and efficient .
We are coming to the end of one particular phase of work : we are accepting the Reform Treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is very fine , but life has sketched new challenges for us .
In implementing all the provisions of the Treaty , in upgrading the functioning of the EU and its institutions , we must talk about - and we want to talk about - the future , a better future for Europe , for our Member States ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to continue my Strasbourg tradition of naming and shaming Member States who fail to comply with the Lisbon directives .
In 2005 , all 27 Member States agreed to abide by the framework for the setting of eco-design requirements for energy-using products .
By August 2007 only six Member States had declared that they had fully transposed this directive into domestic law .
The Commission began infringement proceedings against 21 Member States and , to date , 15 Member States have still failed to comply with this law .
So the list of shame includes : Germany , Italy , Luxembourg ( once again ) , Portugal , Malta , Cyprus , Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Slovenia , Hungary , Finland , Denmark , Estonia and Greece .
In this week when the Bali conference is occurring , it is a scandal that Member States are failing to conform with measures that they have already agreed with and which could already have had a significant impact on tackling the issue of climate change .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , today is a turning point in the Western Balkans and also in the life of the whole European Union .
Today the UN deadline passes for the Serbs and Albanians to reach agreement .
We should have known in advance that the endeavours of the troika to achieve this were doomed to failure .
In all probability , Kosovo will declare its independence within two months , and it is still difficult to assess the consequences of this beyond the Western Balkan region .
Kosovo will be a protectorate of the Union .
The Kosovo settlement will be the definitive test of common foreign and security policy .
Will we be able to reach a unified position , or will we be the victims of bickering between America and Russia ?
If the Union is not unified , this will pose a serious danger for the alignment and European integration of the region , so it is very important that there is a good , fair settlement in Kosovo .
This is the Union 's responsibility .
( FR ) Mr President , on 6 December the Strasbourg industrial tribunal issued its decision in the case of the European Parliament versus some of its employees .
I quote : ' Notes that the assignment contract between Manpower and the European Parliament is invalid ; notes that the project contract between Manpower with the employees is invalid ; states and rules that the contractual relationship between the applicant employee and the European Parliament should be put on a permanent contract footing ' .
I applaud here the courage of the temporary officials , who ignored bullying and other provocation in order to have their rights recognised .
I dare to hope , Mr President , that the administration will very quickly be instructed to bring a definitive end to this case , since all it will have done is discredit our institution in the eyes of the employment world .
Mr President , today I intend to address the issue of the right balance between the fight against corruption and democracy .
The international image of corruption in some countries , Romania included , is so powerful that it has apparently generated the belief that , in order to fight it , even bending democracy is permitted .
Consequently , Brussels continuously calls for and salutes vocally the strengthening of the instruments to fight corruption , but usually keeps silent when those very instruments are abused , being primarily designed for internal political consumption .
Therefore , if the fight against corruption remains a priority - and it should stay so - the praise one gets from the keepers of democracy should be equally accompanied by criticism of exaggerations and breaking of fundamental citizens ' rights .
Otherwise , under the pretence of fighting corruption , democracy itself will be gradually undermined , and , frankly , I consider that equally , if not more , damaging .
( EL ) Mr President , 1 December was World AIDS Day , a day of remembrance for all the victims of the disease which remains the scourge of our planet .
The figures from the World Health Organisation 's latest research show that the percentage of carriers of the virus remains at the same level , whilst the number of new cases has fallen .
In spite of this , the numbers are still far too high .
In a question I put to the European Commission , I proposed that a set of postage stamps should be issued to raise public awareness of AIDS , and the idea was then encouraged by Markos Kyprianou , the Commissioner responsible for health matters .
Kostis Hatzidakis - our colleague until a few months ago , an MEP and now the Greek Minister for Transport and Communications - approved my proposal , and Greece printed and released a set of AIDS remembrance stamps ; proceeds from sales of the stamps will be used to buy drugs for those suffering from the virus .
The Commission encouraged all 27 Member States to take up the idea .
Greece has made a start !
That concludes the one-minute speeches .
Protection and conservation of the marine environment : Marine Strategy Directive ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy ( Marine Strategy Framework Directive ) [ 09388 / 2 / 2007 - C6-0261 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Marie-Noëlle Lienemann ) .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive that Parliament should adopt at its second reading is extremely important because it is the first directive that forces Member States to have an environmental strategy to restore the seas and oceans to a good ecological status .
When we looked at it , at its first reading , we stressed its importance given that recent scientific reports show that the survival of fish stocks and the biodiversity of the seas and oceans are under particular threat .
Some people are even saying that in fifty years ' time there will be no more fish .
Furthermore , the oceans play a fundamental role in regulating the climate and by polluting them we are in danger of diminishing this regulating function and accentuating the negative effects of climate change .
It was therefore urgent and necessary for the European Union , having adopted the water framework directive , particularly regarding freshwater , to swiftly address the issue of seawater .
At its first reading , we demonstrated our willingness to improve the existing text .
First I will go over the structural points of this directive and the existing texts .
The first aim is to restore our seas and oceans to a good ecological status .
The second is to define the necessary steps to be taken by each Member State : firstly , to collaborate within Marine Regions or Sub-Regions ; then to define the state of the water and of biodiversity in these seas ; then to define a good ecological status and some priority environmental objectives ; and finally to draw up a plan of action and some measures to be taken .
We were therefore positive about this directive , but felt it did not go far enough in the state it came to us from the Commission .
There are a number of points we have stressed .
The first is the need to make this directive tough .
Tough , both as regards resources and as regards results .
That has certainly been the most positive point of our collaboration with the Council and Commission : the directive is tough .
The second point is that we hope that good ecological status will be defined stringently , so that restoring this asset is not just all talk .
We have largely been satisfied in that the criteria for good ecological status have been extended to include pressure from all pollutants affecting an ecosystem and the need to evaluate them and reduce their impact with this aim of restoring good ecological status .
The third point is that Parliament is very keen on setting up protected marine areas , the types of reserve that should play a key role in restoring the diversity of this biotope and particularly in reconstituting fish stocks .
We would have liked a text that was more restrictive , more stringent , tougher about the need for these reserves , but the principle is still there ; at any rate , the need for them to be sufficiently large to play a role in restoring biodiversity is still there .
Finally , Parliament wanted the scope of the directive to be extended .
In particular we wanted coastal waters to be properly taken into account , and we did not want any uncertainty to remain about the need to take account of all tidal waters .
At any rate , for a lot of them this has been the case .
We would of course have liked a slightly better definition of the land covered by tidal waters , but the text we have is adequate .
I would like to stress the importance of the consistency of strategies by geographical area : we would have liked the text to be tougher , but the need for consistency is affirmed .
Finally , our fellow Members from the Baltic wanted the Baltic to be a sort of pilot project enabling us to move more quickly , in view of the urgency of the situation .
They were not completely satisfied because the tradition in our institutions is not to single out any particular area .
Nevertheless , the idea of a pilot area has been kept , and I am sure the Commission would choose the Baltic to be this area .
Lastly , there is the matter of timescale : the main thing for us was that the directive should be binding , even if it meant slightly lengthening the amount of time the Member States were given to achieve it .
This was the compromise that was settled on in the end .
The deadline is 2020 , but the Member States must not drag their feet because they need to have the directive transposed by 2010 .
Anyway I would invite them not to waste time because , under the water framework directive , the delay is mounting up and our seas cannot wait .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I take this point on behalf of my colleague Mr Stavros Dimas , whose presence in Bali at the Climate Change Conference has prevented him from being here this evening .
I would first like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Lienemann , for her excellent work on the Marine Strategy Directive , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for its positive and constructive contribution .
This directive marks the beginning of a new approach for protecting our seas and our oceans .
The next challenge will , of course , be its successful implementation .
The efforts of Parliament to enhance the ambition of this legislative initiative have borne fruit , and they have made sure that the agreed directive will be an effective instrument for protecting our seas and our oceans in an integrated manner .
The Commission is pleased that it was possible to reach an agreement at second reading .
I would like , in particular , to highlight the constructive role of the European Parliament in this process .
By preserving at all times its high political and environmental objectives , Parliament has played a helpful and constructive role to work towards this agreement .
The objective of the proposed directive is that Member States take the necessary measures to achieve good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest .
This will be done through the establishment and implementation of marine strategies in their marine waters .
Therefore , the directive contains a very demanding objective .
The Commission remains vigilant to ensure that all necessary measures are adopted to guarantee the effective protection of our marine environment .
On some important points , Parliament has succeeded in going beyond the original Commission proposal .
I would like in particular to underline three issues that have been central to the negotiations : ensuring an ambitious objective for the directive ; defining in a more precise way what is meant by good environmental status , including a set of specific descriptors , and requiring the establishment of marine protected areas in the context of this directive .
Parliament has insisted , throughout the negotiating process , on the need to ensure that the directive has a strong ambition on all the essential points .
This directive sets out a new framework for working , for the first time , together in an integrated manner to protect our seas and oceans .
We will continue to build on this policy initiative in order to allow this Marine Strategy Directive to concretely deliver the environmental pillar of the marine policy of the European Union .
Therefore , the Commission can accept a compromise package in order to reach an agreement on this directive at second reading .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , as rapporteur for my group , it is with pleasure that I can say that the directive on which we have reached a compromise is one of those pieces of EU environmental legislation whose fruits our future generations will come to enjoy in a very real way .
It is time at last to focus attention on our marine environment , whose deteriorating state has been sad to witness , the Baltic Sea being the most shocking example .
This directive brings new hope to this situation , with its aim of halting the pollution of the seas and reviving their biodiversity .
The work over these two years has not always been easy .
Although the aim was the same for everyone , the means the political groups employed often differed .
One example of how our opinions differed related to the future prospects for a technique for carbon capture and storage .
Mrs Lienemann 's opinion would in practice have prevented the development of such a technique .
We , on the other hand , thought that in the light of climate change it was necessary and that the Marine Strategy Directive should not therefore be laden with details which would render it impossible .
I believe that the compromise we have now reached is satisfactory to all parties .
It is ambitious in its targets , leaving the means of accomplishing them to the Member States , though obliging them to cooperate in each Marine Region for the best result .
The compromise text clearly describes what sort of good maritime environmental status we are looking for and what the possible threats to it are .
At the same time it will no longer specify in detail the various steps taken as being threats , since the list cannot be exhaustive , and it would accord the steps taken in the marine environment unequal status .
The wording now selected places an obligation on the parties but does not accuse , and prompts without unjustified coercive action .
The objectives are nevertheless clear , scientifically justifiable , and binding and so will also be effective .
I would like to thank my colleague , Mrs Lienemann , for her successful work .
She has been a good leader in the negotiations and has also listened to the other groups .
I am especially grateful that we managed to raise the profile of the serious situation in the Baltic Sea .
I am sure that the Marine Strategy Directive will be an excellent environmental pillar of a common EU maritime policy .
It brilliantly supports the aim of a common maritime policy to boost growth , employment and sustainable development , at the same time building on a firm knowledge base of maritime research .
This is the kind of legislation our Community needs .
Congratulations to the rapporteur on carrying out some important work .
I would like to state that I agree that a more strongly opinionated report would have been even more effective .
However , the strong opinions can wait until later ; meanwhile , we can enjoy the compromise that had been achieved .
For some time now the protection of the seas and oceans has not been given due attention .
Marine resources have been used relentlessly , the ecosystem is being exhausted , and we have been treating the marine environment as if we are sawing off the branch we are sitting on .
That is why the establishment of marine protected areas is of great importance in terms of preserving living waters for future generations .
As is commonly known , the European Union 's marine territory is larger than its land territory .
The wellbeing of all the EU regions and millions of EU citizens depends on the good environmental status and productivity of the surrounding seas and oceans .
Therefore , it is essential that in future the European Union considers environmental protection as a whole , knowing that it cannot be ' patched up ' by making separate insignificant decisions .
When we reduce soil pollution , marine pollution is reduced as well .
We need to allocate more funds for the construction of drainage , and it is no less important to develop this outside the EU as well .
I welcome the fact that the European Union is taking on the role of global leader once again and is committed to achieving good marine environmental status in 13 years time .
The issue of the Baltic Sea has already been mentioned .
This sea is especially sensitive - its water changes only every 25-30 years , so the effect of pollution is stronger than average .
We are still feeling the consequences of decades of irresponsible application of chemicals .
Before starting oil extraction and making plans for the construction of pipelines in the Baltic Sea , we should consider the environmental issues .
We should make sure that the wellbeing of our children and grandchildren is not adversely affected by our decisions .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank and congratulate Mrs Lienemann on her efforts and the way she conducted the negotiations with the Council and the Commission .
I shall focus on some of the main positive issues .
The directive as a whole will place sufficient emphasis on the necessary measures for compliance and for achieving good environmental status , any deterioration in which will be avoided .
Although the European Parliament had originally called for 2017 , the schedule for compliance by the Member States is now set to run until 2020 , a realistic date which is proposed by the Council in coordination with the national representatives .
The Member States will provide an initial assessment up to 2012 , defining good environmental status and declaring coherent environmental goals .
The European Parliament was able to obtain clear commitments from the Council for integrated policies and approaches which will encourage the Member States to cooperate in achieving EU-wide good environmental status .
This directive also takes account of the Common Fisheries Policy , providing for viable exploitation of fishery resources while at the same time respecting the integrity of ecosystems , so that they can be preserved or restored and , where necessary , egg-laying , shelter and feeding sites can be protected .
Lastly , as regards funding resources , implementation will apply to the existing funds within the scope of the financial resources and in line with economic prospects for 2007-2013 , and will be renegotiated for the next period , given that the overall duration of the directive is until 2020 .
( EL ) Mr President , I shall likewise begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann , on the excellent work she has done .
The directive aims to protect - as indeed it should - the marine environment .
However , as rapporteur for the Committee on Fisheries , there are a few things I would like to comment on .
The Committee on the Environment must put more emphasis on fishing and the problems facing it as a result of marine pollution .
Sailors and fishermen know the seas better than anyone .
They live on them and from them .
Their participation is needed in combating this problem .
I also wish to express my satisfaction at the enlargement of the protected marine areas .
To sum up , I shall say that success in safeguarding the marine strategy depends on four main factors : firstly , committing the parties to comply with the schedule laid down in the directive .
We cannot and must not allow postponements in our programme .
The targets must all be achieved by 2020 .
If we do not achieve them then , it will be too late to remedy things .
Secondly , cooperation with third countries : the seas have no borders .
We should get round the table together and discuss things with all our neighbours .
Let us not forget that there are 27 countries around the Mediterranean , and only seven of them are Member States .
We should therefore all sit down together and see what we can do .
Thirdly , there should be adequate funds allocated for this purpose .
Fourthly , we should get fishermen to participate in this effort .
This is our only hope of success .
To conclude and round off these comments , I shall repeat that the Directive on Marine Strategy , if correctly applied , will contribute to viable , sustainable fisheries and a healthy sea , so that we have clean seas whose beauty we can all enjoy .
( SV ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking Marie-Noëlle Lienemann for her good work on the Framework Directive .
As a Swede living in Stockholm by the Baltic , one of the world 's most polluted seas , I really welcome this Directive .
Forty per cent of Sweden 's population live less than five kilometres from the coast , and tourism provides 71 000 jobs in our country , including our islands .
Fishing accounts for an additional 4 000 jobs .
Thanks to our fishing industry we can enjoy fish , which is so important to us Swedes .
A damaged marine environment leads to impaired quality of life for many and is an unwelcome development .
There is a risk that commercial and leisure fishing in boats , sea-bathing and marine recreation may disappear unless we in the EU do something together , here and now .
A common marine environmental policy will serve to strengthen and protect the marine ecosystem and to set up databases for monitoring and knowledge acquisition .
We in the European Parliament have higher ambitions than the Commission and I am glad that we have set the deadline for achieving a good environmental status at 2017 and not 2021 .
I am also glad that the Member States are to present programmes of measures for the marine environment by 2015 .
I should like to thank Commissioner Frattini for coming on board .
As a citizen with an environmental commitment , I would like to make faster progress , but if all 27 Member States put on some speed we can do something and make a start now .
This is a prime example of an area in which cross-border cooperation is necessary .
I hope that the Baltic can become a pilot area , since eight out of nine countries around the Baltic Sea are EU Member States .
It is our problem and our responsibility .
It is also important that we who are committed to environmental foreign policy cooperate with Russia on the Baltic Sea and the marine environment .
We have before us decisions in the field of both environmental and energy policy .
Let us make the marine environment the main focus of attention now !
( EL ) Mr President , development under the Lisbon Strategy , guided by the principle of support for competitiveness , i.e. increasing the profitability of the monopoly business groups in the European Union , not only intensifies to the utmost the exploitation of the working class and of workers generally , but also severely aggravates environmental problems , by systematically destroying marine ecosystems and the biodiversity of the seas , and causing a steady deterioration in the quality of sea water .
In addition to the damage caused to sea water by pollution from ships , industrial pollution bears a huge share of the responsibility for the contamination of sea water .
It causes an incalculable level of contamination in the water table , and this is subsequently transferred to sea water .
Pollution from the ever increasing number of fish-farming units also places severe strain on the marine environment and the functioning of ecosystems .
The problems of the marine environment are seriously aggravated by the invasion of monopolies into a number of operations which were previously in public ownership , as a result of the privatisation of utilities and public infrastructures , and also by the commercialisation of public assets such as sea water .
Huge tourist complexes owned by monopoly groups are leading to a high-income model of tourist development , while public assets such as coastlines , beaches and sea water are being despoiled .
The pollution of sea water is no longer solely due to the discharge of waste and sewage from those tourist complexes into the sea , but also to the construction of industrial units to serve their business activities , including the installation of desalination units to irrigate golf courses and generally to serve their needs .
The consequences are dire for the residents of entire areas .
I would like to end , Mr President , by pointing out that the common position of the Council and the Commission report does not actually provide the solution which is needed , if we are to solve or at least mitigate serious problems relating to the environment .
( ET ) The seas are the least studied and least well-known part of the biosphere .
More importantly , the exploitation of the seas should be based on the known precautionary principles of environmental protection .
Fortunately the rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann shares that approach , and for that I thank her .
Hopefully at the second reading we will come to an agreement with the Council and a rapid start can be made to implementation of the marine strategy .
I also wish separately to emphasise my own support for Amendment 29 to the report , which seeks to establish the Baltic Sea Marine Region as a pilot area for implementing the European Union Marine Strategy .
Of all the seas surrounding Europe , the Baltic is undoubtedly the most vulnerable thanks to its shallow waters and the fact that there is little water exchange with the Atlantic Ocean .
As a result there is , for example , no construction of gas pipelines as there is in the North Sea or the Mediterranean .
If the Baltic Sea Marine Region were already a pilot area for implementing the European Union Marine Strategy , then it would probably not be part of the NordStream project .
Fortunately the European Union does not have to create the Baltic Sea programme of measures from scratch .
The Helsinki Convention , which established protection for the Baltic Sea , did the necessary groundwork to that end in the context of the Baltic Sea Action Plan .
As a result it is possible to use the Baltic Sea successfully as a pilot area for the marine strategy .
Another positive aspect is that , through HELCOM , Russia is also able to participate in the implementation of the Baltic Sea programme of measures ; without Russia 's involvement it is difficult to protect the Baltic and ensure good environmental status .
( RO ) Mr. President , first of all , I would like to thank and congratulate Madam Rapporteur .
A fundamental element of the European maritime strategy is the recognition of the negative effects of human activity on the ecosystem and the increase of efforts to fight such effects .
Human and tourism development along the coasts has a major impact on the sea environment following the intensification of fishing activities , maritime transportation and recreational tourism .
Climate changes , waste , fishing activities , acoustic , biological and chemical factors threaten maritime waters and this directive represents an important step toward improving the integrity of ecosystems and preserving biodiversity .
The oil and sulphur pollution in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov , which has occurred recently because of a storm and has caused the sinking of several commercial ships , will affect us for at least 10 years from now .
The disaster occurred due to a system deficiency , since the ships were designed for river and not maritime shipping , which points out the absence of any efforts to prevent and protect the maritime environment .
This serious accident complicates the process of ecological improvement of these waters , which are already classified among the most polluted maritime areas in the world .
The degradation of the Black Sea water affects both public health and marine biodiversity , and considerable efforts are necessary in order to recover the ecosystem 's integrity .
Moreover , maritime transport of hazardous cargo must meet the requirements of international conventions and ensure minimum safety in order to prevent any future similar disastrous accidents , which cause significant damage both to the marine life and to human life .
Through this directive , we will make sure that the European Union maritime environment is better protected and human activities and transportation will not affect the quality of water and biodiversity .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on the basis of the agreed texts , Member States will now have to establish marine strategies for their marine waters .
Such strategies will begin with an assessment of the status of marine waters and their existing impacts and pressures and will develop targets to find good environmental status .
The Member States will establish monitoring programmes and will then elaborate , as from 2015 , programmes and measures necessary to achieve the objectives .
This series of steps will be taken again every six years on a cyclical basis .
A number of key elements have been included in the overall compromise package that is now proposed .
Most importantly , the objective of the directive is now clear and ambitious , as Member States are required to take the necessary measures to achieve good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest .
The legislators have agreed on a definition of good environmental status , including a series of associated descriptors , which will have to be met .
A revised timetable has now been agreed , which in fact is more demanding than what was included in the Commission 's original proposal , but at the same time providing a sufficient time for taking appropriate action at each step .
Exceptions and derogations , including disproportionate costs , have been better qualified .
Member States will have to establish marine-protected areas to meet their objectives under this directive in accordance with the international commitments of the Community and the Member States .
Action will be required in the context of each marine region , and , therefore , to develop marine strategies will involve strong cooperation with and within regional sea conventions .
The implementation of this directive will , in fact , require this enhanced coordination .
In this context , I would like to recall the importance given by Parliament during all the negotiations to important regional processes .
I would particularly like to mention the Baltic Sea Action Plan , which was adopted in the context of the Helsinki Convention .
As highlighted by Parliament , this integrated action plan is a useful first example and a resource that will facilitate progress in the implementation of the directive .
Such an integrated approach must be an important component in all the actions that have been undertaken by the different regional sea conventions to protect the European seas - the Mediterranean , the North Atlantic , the Black Sea and the Baltic .
To conclude , the Commission is very pleased with the outcome of negotiations .
The Commission can accept the proposed compromise amendments in full .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) Under the terms of effective environmental protection , the world 's oceans , particularly the marine waters around Europe , must be given greater consideration in the policies of the EU .
The present Marine Strategy Framework Directive is a reaction to the challenges arising from climate change and provides for measures by both the EU and the Member States .
In order to take the appropriate steps at European level , it is vital in the first instance that the environmental status in the marine environment is charted by uniform criteria .
Furthermore , the Directive forces the Member States to achieve good environmental status in the marine environment by 2017 and to create the regulations necessary for this .
I would ask the Member States , in the context of the report , to take the necessary steps to verify and trace marine pollution so that the ' polluter pays ' principle can be applied .
The steps already taken by the EU with regard to the capture of CO2 in the seabed must be strengthened , since these are an innovative contribution to combating climate change .
Pilot projects already in existence , however , must be critically reviewed , mainly with regard to their efficiency and possible consequential damage .
In order to counter climate change effectively , we should not be shutting out innovations , but incorporating them into a broad EU environmental policy .
Air pollution : ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy ( Marine Strategy Framework Directive ) [ 09388 / 2 / 2007 - C6-0261 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Marie-Noëlle Lienemann ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the compromise on the Air Quality Directive is primarily the result of successful team work .
I wish to emphasise this at the outset .
My thanks especially to all my fellow Members who have taken an active part in defining the text of this Directive , particularly to the rapporteurs , Mrs Weisgerber of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and Mrs Corbey of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , as well as Mrs Hassi of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I should also like to thank the Commission for its valuable assistance and the Portuguese Council Presidency , which has made a vital contribution to this good result as an open and constructive negotiating partner .
The compromise puts the EU 's future air quality policy on a sound footing .
The new Directive maintains the balance between ambitious targets and limits and the necessary flexibility for implementation in the Member States .
In addition , the focus is directed more towards exposure and increased awareness of the need for measures at the sources of pollution .
Let me first outline the key elements of the compromise .
There has been decisive progress , which is the intention with the amendment of air quality legislation , in the regulation of the finest PM2.5 particulates .
In the opinion of all the experts , the finest particulates originating exclusively from human sources pose the greatest risks to human health .
Fine PM2.5 dust particulates less than 2.5 micrometres in diameter and therefore not visible to the naked eye can penetrate the lungs and lead to serious , long-term respiratory diseases .
Focussing on the smallest particles in European policy on air quality is therefore long overdue .
In the United States , there has been a strict PM2.5 limit since 1997 .
The United States is a good 10 years ahead of the EU with regard to legislation in this sector .
However , with all due respect for US air quality policy , I should like to state that we cannot simply copy what the United States has been doing for years .
We have completely different conditions in Europe , particularly with regard to population and traffic density .
The demand by environmental groups for the immediate introduction of a strict PM2.5 limit is unrealistic .
Data in Europe is not strong and measurement experience is inadequate - not good conditions for a hasty introduction of a limit .
The Council and Parliament have been in agreement since the outset on regulating PM2.5 in two phases .
Firstly , there should be a target from 2010 onwards and then a limit from 2015 onwards of 25 micrograms per cubic meter .
Parliament has constantly been lobbying the Commission as well as campaigning against the Council 's opposition for a stricter value for PM2.5.
It is therefore to Parliament 's credit that today we want to reduce the limit for PM2.5 to 20 micrograms per cubic meter in a second stage in 2020 .
In addition to a target and limit for PM2.5 , an exposure concentration obligation of 20 micrograms will be introduced for the Member States in 2015 .
This has the aim of reducing background concentration and will have a positive effect on the protection of human health particularly in urban conurbations .
The model proposed by the European Parliament for reducing concentrations of PM2.5 by 2020 has likewise been implemented .
There is a differentiation according to the Member States and greater account will be taken of inputs .
As regards PM10 , a majority in Parliament lobbied at first reading for an ambitious annual limit , which is also better correlated to the daily limit in force .
The position of the Council and the Commission not to touch the current limits at all has won recognition in the negotiations .
With a three-year extension to the deadline for PM10 , the deadline extension is guaranteed until 2012 after the new Directive comes into force for local authorities , which have not been able to keep to the limits owing to their geographical position or meteorological conditions , despite all demonstrable efforts .
Even though improving the quality of the ambient air will also be a major challenge for the EU in the future , I should like to raise three points that in my view should be noted when implementing this Directive and when revising the legislation in 2013 .
Firstly , the pollution of ambient air has fallen drastically in recent decades .
As a new study by the European Environment Agency shows , around 50 % of fine dust emissions were reduced in the period between 1990 and 2004 - therefore even before the introduction of the PM10 limits .
This has been achieved less through legislation than through technical progress .
Secondly , conditions in the European Union and between the Member States vary enormously .
I have already mentioned meteorological and geographical conditions .
However , it is principally the widely differing population , traffic and industry densities that have the greatest influence .
More consideration must be given to this when implementing future legislation .
Thirdly , in order to reduce air pollution even further , neither short-term actions such as road blocks and traffic bans , nor stricter , paper-based limits will lead to success .
Parliament greatly welcomes the Commission 's statement , to be published together with the new Directive in the Official Journal in 2008 , on the adoption of measures at source .
Air pollution can be reduced only in the long term and at EU level specifically by strengthening cross-border measures .
The policy on sources , which has been given little consideration to date , should be the main focus in future , particularly private combustion plants , the shipping industry and also agriculture .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am taking this file on behalf of my colleague , Commissioner Dimas , who is at the Bali Conference .
I wish to begin by thanking and congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , for his excellent work on the ambient air quality directive , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , in particular the shadow rapporteurs , for their positive contribution .
Bringing the proposal to this stage has not been an easy journey .
The European Parliament has played a constructive role in working towards an agreement on a sound and effective text .
I should like to express the Commission 's appreciation for this .
In the preparation of the Commission proposal , as well as during the negotiations , we have been clearly guided by the scientific evidence on the importance of the continuous effort to improve air quality , and specifically on the need to address the fine particles ( PM2.5 ) .
On average , the life expectancy of EU citizens is reduced by more than eight months due to air pollution .
This is unacceptable , and we need to do more .
Only limited improvements in air quality have been achieved in the past few years in the EU , and the attainability of the PM2.5 , as well as the existing standards , has been at the centre of the debate .
Further measures are clearly needed at Community , national , regional and local levels .
The Community measures addressing emissions at source have been outlined in the thematic strategy on air pollution .
We are well on track with the development and adoption of these measures .
The last progress update can also be found in the declaration adjoined to the compromise package .
The Commission and Parliament share a common understanding on the importance of these measures to achieve an effective reduction of emissions .
The main features of the directive are the following . The directive maintains the existing limit and target values , while allowing for some time to achieve full compliance in specific zones , provided that certain conditions are fulfilled .
The compromise text ensures that the postponement is limited and does not create incentives to delay the measures that need to be taken .
As air knows no borders , those measures will support the efforts to achieve compliance , also in the neighbouring regions and states .
As regards the PM10 annual limit value , I understand the ambition behind the committee 's proposal to threaten this .
The scientific evidence , however , states that , for chronic exposure , the fine PM2.5 sub-fraction of PM10 is the most important , so the Commission has proposed leaving the PM10 limit value unchanged and addressing this ambition through the new PM2.5 objectives .
PM10 standards will be fully reassessed at the review in 2013 to ensure that the latest scientific knowledge and the implementation experience are properly reflected in the standards .
Setting timely , realistic , yet ambitious objectives for PM2.5 has been the main challenge in the negotiation .
The compromise package sets out very clear commitments in the text of the review article , demonstrating that a more ambitious annual limit value will be considered as part of the mandatory review in 2013 and by setting the indicative limit value for PM2.5.
The significance of the introduction of a new , legally binding exposure concentration already in 2015 cannot be overstated .
While the new exposure-reduction approach already provides the flexibility for the Member States to most effectively maximise public health benefits of their abatement efforts , the new legal obligation and its relatively short time for implementation ensure that the Member States will take prompt action and seriously address the reduction of population exposure to fine particles .
I am very pleased to acknowledge the specific importance the committee attached to sensitive groups , including children .
The additions will support the appropriate consideration of sensitive groups in designing the abatement measures .
With this important piece of legislation , the European Union will stand ready to continue to effectively reduce and minimise the significant adverse effects of air pollution .
The Commission is actively supporting the process through the development of Community measures and through its continuous support to the implementation of the directives by the Member States by providing guidance and facilitating the exchange between the Member States .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , and the shadow rapporteurs for their effective cooperation .
Agreement with the Council at second reading is a success for the European Parliament .
This agreement is a major step towards better air quality in Europe .
However , we do need the assistance of all those involved .
The cities and towns have to draw up clean air plans and create environmental zones , for example , if they do not keep to the limits .
The Member States have to create the conditions for this - such as the enactment of the regulation on motor vehicle stickers in Germany , for example .
However , this is also called for in Europe .
Only about 20-30 % of air-borne soot particles come from inner-city traffic .
It is only here , however , that the local authorities are able ultimately to have any influence .
Local authorities have no chance of keeping to the limits if measures are not taken at European level to reduce emissions from sources other than transport .
The measurement of emissions alone does not improve air quality .
We need measures that combat the discharge of fine dust directly at source .
This will provide genuine health protection .
The Commission has now also committed itself politically to taking these steps .
It wants to make legislative proposals , such as the Euro 6 standard for lorries ( which ultimately also leads to the compulsory introduction of soot particle filters ) , emission standards for smaller industrial installations and new regulations for ship 's engines .
The local authorities ' measures must be flanked by these regulations in order to achieve a genuine improvement in air quality .
Firstly , there will be limits for the smallest dust particles .
These particles are more harmful to human health because they can be breathed in .
We therefore have to assess this .
Through ambitious , yet realistic values we are sending out another signal for health protection .
The legislator has demonstrated a sense of proportion here and at the same time ensured a high degree of health protection .
Since we as Parliament have been able to achieve a good result on the smallest dust particles , we have accepted the Council 's position not to change anything in the existing PM10 limits , including in daily limits .
This also means , however , that there is no tightening of the annual PM10 limits .
The text of the Directive makes it explicitly clear that the local authorities are not obliged to take ineffective short-term measures such as road blocks , for example .
The focus should be on long-term , sustainable measures such as environmental zones .
Local authorities are already doing a great deal here and they should continue to do so .
Cities and towns , however , can in future apply for an extension to the deadline for meeting the existing PM10 limits under strict conditions .
This means , however - and I deliberately wish to emphasise this - no free ticket for local authorities .
They cannot exceed the limits indefinitely and they can obtain a deadline extension only under two strict conditions : that they are suffering from unfavourable climatic conditions or unfavourable field conditions such as hot spots , for example , and they have taken all appropriate and reasonable measures at local level .
This flexibility for local authorities contributes to the Directive 's practicability , without disregarding the level of health protection .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have put forward a responsible package .
We have achieved progress on the health protection front .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , clean air is a basic necessity of life .
Air has become cleaner over the last 30 years , but is still far too polluted .
Compliance with the directives currently in force is inadequate .
The Directive on ambient air quality needs to be revised if we are to tackle pollution more effectively .
Last week , Parliament and the Council reached agreement on the new Directive .
I welcome the outcome and wish to thank Mr Krahmer , Mrs Weisgerber and the other shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation over the last two years .
I should like to highlight three points .
First of all , the stricter standards .
My group has been consistently committed to more ambitious standards for particulates and other pollutants harmful to humans and the environment , and so I am pleased that , thanks to us , there is to be a new standard for microparticulates .
Microparticulate pollution can neither be seen nor smelt , but is responsible for the most health damage , leading to hundreds of thousands of premature deaths among Europeans .
Large numbers of people suffer from asthma and other complaints .
The new standard will enable us to take a much more targeted approach to tackling this health damage .
This agreement is therefore good news for public health .
Parliament did not resign itself to the lukewarm ambition of the Commission and the Council ; we called for greater commitment , and obtained it .
The PM2.5 standard was to be reduced from 25 to 20 micrograms .
According to scientists , this will increase average life expectancy by a further four to five months .
However , even the new standards are not enough .
Further improvements are still required , including more attention being given to children .
Ultimately , we must arrive at a standard of no more than 10 micrograms of particulate matter per cubic metre of air .
This is the ceiling recommended by the World Health Organization , and guarantees genuinely clean air .
The present Directive is a step in the right direction .
The second point is that Europe must not only set sound standards , but also develop instruments to meet these objectives .
After all , Europe is often good at setting general policy objectives , but much less effective when it comes to creating the right instruments for actually meeting those objectives .
Without cleaner cars , ships , agriculture and industry the air-quality standards will remain a paper tiger .
We recently voted on Euro V and Euro VI : cleaner passenger cars from 2009 and even cleaner cars from 2014 .
This kind of legislation must be introduced quickly for heavy goods vehicles and buses .
Parliament has urged the Council and the Commission to hasten to make complementary policy to tackle the sources of pollution .
This has resulted in a Commission statement listing all the measures to be taken in coming years .
The statement will be annexed to the Directive , and will make reference to the Directive .
This is a clear political signal to the public that Europe is taking action and launching cleanup operations in all manner of sectors .
A third point of discussion has been the flexibility of the standards .
Twenty-four Member States cannot meet the standards laid down by the existing Directive .
That does not strike me as a good example of effective legislation .
My position has always been that it is quite acceptable for Member States who are taking a number of measures but are unable to meet the standards to be given extra time to tackle hotspots ; provided , however , that much stricter standards are introduced in the medium term .
It is very important that the legislation we produce here is workable and practicable .
Today we are showing that the European Parliament takes complaints from Member States about impracticable legislation seriously .
Experience has taught us that the air does not become any cleaner if we neglect the implementation of the Directive .
The new Directive on ambient air quality is an improvement on the old .
Better , stricter standards are good news for public health , local authorities and construction firms alike .
We can breathe again !

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , firstly I wish to congratulate Mr Krahmer for his excellent report on this difficult and most important subject .
At the same time I wish to congratulate the shadows and all those colleagues who have contributed suggestions , advice and amendments , which , at the end of the day , have formulated a piece of compromise legislation agreed to in negotiation , and which will attempt , if implemented , to have a better air quality directive and provide , to some degree , for cleaner and healthier air for Europe .
At a time when respiratory tract infections such as asthma , emphysema and lung cancer are on the increase in many areas of Europe , with those affected being mainly the most vulnerable , i.e. children and the elderly , we as legislators have a duty to ensure that we do our utmost to secure more healthy breathing for our citizens .
To this end , we were united in our determination not to give in to the unreasonable demands of the Council , which did not accept any changes to the provisions regarding the existing daily and yearly limit values of PM10 and rejected outright Parliament 's proposal to link any derogation with the adoption of additional EU measures on sources of pollution .
Although an agreement has been reached , the Council must nevertheless understand that this House gives greater priority to the health of its millions of citizens than to the wealth of a few European industrial giants .
Everybody must fully comprehend that Parliament is much more concerned with preventing people 's lungs from being destroyed by disease than helping the purses of greedy industrial barons become fatter .
I am confident that this House will have a future opportunity to have all its provisions successfully adopted in a less compromised piece of legislation that will truly and comprehensively protect citizens from major respiratory damage .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I would like to express our recognition of the quality of Mr Krahmer 's report .
We are continuing our work on the directive , which is of considerable importance for the entire ecosystem , including improvements to the state of health of residents of Europe and - taking a broader view - the world .
The economic aspect of these provisions should not be concealed either .
Our aim should therefore be to find a compromise that will genuinely enable Member States to implement the adopted parameters specifying the admissible emissions ceiling for particulates and gases that contaminate the atmosphere .
I am referring here to the concentration of PM2.5 and PM10 particulates , and of the gases carbon monoxide and dioxide , sulphur dioxide , oxides of nitrogen and ozone , benzene , volatile organic compounds and also lead .
This consequently means reliable and regular monitoring .
Major expenditure will be required for the radical upgrading of many enterprises , including those supplying energy , and especially heat .
Fundamental changes will be needed in the methods and organisation of overland , air and water transport .
These and other costs will have to be borne , it is true .
It is also true , though , that not all countries are in a position to take rigorous action in this matter in the relatively short time that has been suggested without suffering clear economic losses .
This particularly concerns the new Member States , including Poland , which is doing a great deal in this area .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that it is also important for actions undertaken by the EU to find followers elsewhere , especially in the United States , China , Russia , Japan and Brazil .
Air is , after all , common to all the world .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we remember the WHO appeal launched on 5 October 2006 , challenging the international community to improve air quality .
Very strict standards needed to be adopted for atmospheric pollution , and the target was to cut the number of deaths in polluted cities by 15 % .
The European Union , often at the forefront of environmental regulations , was a great disappointment at the first reading , to the point that our Environment Commissioner Mr Dimas was personally outraged at the position of the European Parliament , which was weakening legislation in force that already had few teeth .
At the second reading on 9 October 2007 , the Verts had alerted the Committee on the Environment to the counterproductive effects of administrative simplification and more specifically to the increase in the permitted number of days on which the maximum values could be exceeded and the extension of the exemptions of certain pollutants .
The recently negotiated compromise at the European Parliament 's second reading is a damage limitation exercise on the first reading .
Regarding PM2,5 in urban areas , a new limit value is proposed of 20 micrograms per cubic metre , which is to be reviewed by the European Commission in 2015 .
Of course , additional measures can be implemented to take account of the circumstances of sensitive populations such as children and the elderly .
Although it is an improvement on the initial situation , this compromise does not constitute a major step forward for the European Parliament .
It will not force Member States to take the restrictive measures necessary to improve the health of the European people .
The impact of atmospheric pollution is still being estimated at a nine-month reduction in life expectancy for our fellow citizens .
We therefore need to go further , integrating the restriction of particles in suspension earlier on using preventive instruments aimed at limiting emissions from various sectors , particularly transport , and those from industry .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , fellow Members , every year 370 000 people in Europe die prematurely from illnesses associated with air pollution .
According to the Commission 's official figures , life expectancy in some European countries has shown a decline of between eight months and two years as a result of exposure to dangerous airborne pollutants .
The great majority of deaths are due to fine airborne particulates .
My political group supports the final conciliation agreement and the hesitant , but at any rate positive steps which it takes in response to this situation .
However , I would like to focus on some serious weaknesses : the limits set by this conciliation for fine airborne particulates are more than double the relevant WHO recommendations .
The US Environmental Protection Agency sets stricter limits than the European Union .
No agreement has been reached on safer limits for fine airborne particulates ( PM10 ) .
Monitoring requirements have been reduced , although constant monitoring of critical pollutant loads is very important for improving the situation .
The compliance deadlines for benzene have been put back , leaving the big culprit , fuel quality , untouched .
Although everyone says we need improved fuels and cleaner cars , air quality and its monitoring in the workplace have been exempted .
Furthermore , the Member States are given considerable leeway not to enforce the existing legislation and not to monitor its correct enforcement .
We are making a positive step , then , but it is not enough , and for exactly this reason my political group is supporting the European Parliament 's conciliation agreement but at the same time asking the Council and Commission to take bolder steps .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am speaking here on behalf of my colleague Mr Blokland , who is currently attending the Climate Change Conference in Bali .
Following lengthy negotiations , an agreement on ambient air quality has been achieved at long last .
This is no mean feat , and is also very important , because ambient air quality has a direct impact on environmental and human health .
Therefore , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , most warmly for all the work he has done to achieve this .
This Directive makes a realistic contribution to improving health and the environment .
Ambient air quality has already significantly improved in recent years , and this Directive will bring further improvement in the future .
Nevertheless , a number of countries are still finding it difficult to comply with strict standards so soon .
For this reason , I am pleased that this agreement permits a postponement to enable Member States to bring their ambient air quality in line with these standards , provided they make sufficient efforts .
Another important aspect is that measurement is not required at locations to which the public does not have access and which are not permanently inhabited .
This flexibility is particularly important in port areas .
I also particularly welcome the fact that specific reference has been made to measures at the source .
In my view , such measures , for example the new Euro VI standard for heavy goods vehicles , are vital in order to achieve good ambient air quality .
In conclusion I can therefore say that I welcome the present agreement , and shall be voting in favour of it .
( DE ) Mr President , the increase in respiratory diseases currently being recorded - particularly among children , the elderly and the sick - as well as the rise in allergy-based breathing difficulties is directly related to a traffic avalanche rolling through our conurbations and along the major transport routes on a daily basis .
The failed EU policy on subsidies has been reflected in recent decades principally in intercity transport .
For particularly sensitive regions - such as the Alps - we have not as is generally known been able to bring ourselves hitherto to turn the fine words of the past into deeds by implementing the Alpine Convention , for instance .
The selling off of our public enterprises , however , which has led to a disastrously deficient public rapid transit network , is also now avenging itself .
To what extent actions such as traffic restrictions and the establishment of environmental zones or city tolls are still able to take hold here at all is highly debatable in my view .
First and foremost , the main culprits of pollutant emissions , such as commercial vehicles with ageing diesel engines , must therefore be replaced very quickly .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
More than 300 million people worldwide suffer from asthma , 30 million of them in Europe and 200 000 of them in Hungary .
Eighteen per cent of asthmatics in Western Europe are classified in the severe group .
The number of asthma patients in my home country of Hungary has increased by 250 % over the last ten years .
The number of new patients diagnosed each year has doubled over the same period .
First among the causes that trigger asthma and asthma attacks is air pollution .
I think that the data in the report before us speaks for itself and its fate , which we will decide tomorrow , is only partly about environmental protection and much more about quality of life and health protection .
One of the greatest problems in Union legislation today is its lack of implementation .
Unfortunately this is also true of legislation on air quality .
Therefore , our primary task now is not to vote for more rules that are even more stringent but to promote compliance with the existing rules .
The place where I live , Budapest , is a city of two million people , and with regard to air particles , for example , it exceeds the permitted limits even in the first four months of the year , and indeed excesses of 4-5 times are not uncommon .
Our task is therefore to develop the current legislation further in a sensible way and to prepare guidelines that do not stipulate additional tasks but refine the existing ones to really contribute to cleaner air for the population of the EU .
I think the Krahmer report fulfils this requirement .
Its virtue is that it wants to measure and capture air pollution primarily at the place of pollution , which is technically the right approach .
The compromise is therefore not ambitious but progressive .
I trust that the cities and Member States concerned will now be able to implement it more consistently and that we will perhaps be able to pass on a more habitable Europe to our children . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( LT ) My congratulations to the rapporteur .
I would like to begin by saying that it is always pleasant to have nice weather .
We are in no position to influence the weather , but we can and need to do something about its quality .
The levels of air pollution in the densely populated and industrial urban areas of the European Union are still unacceptable .
If you find yourself in the biggest cities of Europe , you can feel the threat of air pollution only too clearly .
It causes the premature death of tens of thousands of Europeans every year .
Pollution has an adverse effect not only on the length of human life , but also on its quality .
Recent years have seen a significant a reduction in harmful gas emissions in the EU countries .
However , this is only the beginning .
We have to tame the monsters who are spitting the gas into the air , the worst air polluters on the roads .
We need to take decisive measures to develop public transport , to encourage people to use private means of transport less often .
This is a key issue in the new Member States , where 20 or even 30-year-old cars in an appalling condition are continuing to pollute the environment .
The position of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and that of Parliament in general is very important to the countries that joined the EU in the 21st century , particularly as regards more stringent terms and objectives for reducing air pollution , the flexibility of implementation of these objectives and the coordination of long-term and short-term goals .
We must do everything in our power to achieve the smallest possible concentration of different sized airborne particulates in most parts of Europe by 2015 .
Countries that are taking active measures to reduce pollution but have not yet achieved the set objectives should be given a chance to do so .
It is important to cut down the derogation period from ' four plus two ' to ' three plus two ' years .
( PL ) Mr President , today the European Parliament is taking a second look at the draft directive on ambient air quality .
One of the aims of this directive is to restrict the quantity of suspended dust particles in the atmosphere in the next few years , particles that we inhale , ranging from 2.5 to 10 microns in size .
Scientists warn that the finest particles constitute a serious threat to human life , and it is these that the directive under discussion has in mind .
The compromise between Parliament and the Council has introduced concessions to the Council , which is in favour of less restrictive regulations .
I hope that the actions envisaged in this directive will not prove inadequate and that when this problem is reconsidered by the European Commission in 2013 more ambitious aims will be adopted , since we are talking here about the health of current and future generations .
Finally , may I thank the rapporteur for his good work and remind you that avoidance is better than dealing with the consequences .
( DE ) Mr President , the compromise found is better than expected , but celebrating it as a great success would be a sham because it was watered down .
Wherever it is measured against the revised provisions , it has been watered down because heavily polluted locations can now be factored out .
The negotiated compromise , however , is also damage limitation , because the planned period of grace should now be understood as nothing more than an invitation to do nothing .
In order that the exception does not become the rule , the Commission must monitor the action plans under consideration and compliance with the limits and sanction the failure to transpose them .
It should not therefore be celebrated as a great success because we indeed know that this Directive should in reality have been in force long ago .
Nor should it , however - and this is a positive aspect of the compromise - give German local authorities carte blanche to twiddle their thumbs .
The fresh invitation to do nothing has thereby prevented the local authorities and the federal states from having to produce action plans .
We must also stress , however , that the judgment of the Federal Administrative Court in Germany means and has emphasised for Germany that the local authorities are duty bound to act in any case .
We know that there are already good initiatives in the European Union such as , for example , environmental zones and vehicle fleet conversion .
It must also be quite clear now , though , that this is the last reprieve .
Actions really do have to follow words now to ensure that an ambitious clean air policy does not become absurd .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the monitoring of air pollution and efforts aimed at improving air quality are laudable activities .
The fact that certain parts of the proposal under discussion set quite high requirements whereas others somewhat simplify the reality is not a concern .
What is more serious is that whilst the focus of the debate on the monitoring and removing of fine particles has rightly moved from coarse to finer particles - PM10 to PM2.5 - it should also apply to particles even smaller than PM2.5.
These penetrate as far as the alveoli and because they have a broad surface area they can potentially absorb large amounts of harmful substances .
Because these particles are not deposited in the upper airways they are potentially very dangerous .
Notwithstanding these reservations , I support the proposal for a directive , as does the GUE / NGL Group , of which I am a member , and I trust that we will return to this topic in a more comprehensive manner in the near future .
( FR ) Mr President , we all recognise , and we have all said so , that our built-up areas , our cities are becoming increasingly polluted and that , unfortunately , deaths due to this pollution are becoming more and more common .
As chairwoman of an air quality monitoring network in my department that I set up more than sixteen years ago , I would like to remind you that reducing air pollution is seen by citizens as a priority action for the public authorities as regards environmental protection , and that it is even the biggest cause for concern of 54 % of French citizens .
This text therefore comes in response to the renewed outbreak of respiratory diseases such as asthma , bronchitis and emphysema , which affects young children most of all - all we talk about during the winter is bronchiolitis in young children - and lung cancer in older people .
That is why the introduction of new standards for the finest and most harmful particles , which have not been regulated until now , is a satisfactory measure .
However , we have a multitude of solutions at our fingertips for better air quality , such as action on fuels , on modes of transport and on vehicles .
We still need to apply the raft of EU legislation that we already have , which most Member States unfortunately do not comply with .
Under the terms of the texts we will be voting on tomorrow , Member States will have to set up sampling points in urban areas .
In fact , everyone will have to have ' particle plans ' .
We also have to provide the public with daily information , especially for those with particular sensitivities , on particulate matter in the air .
Finally , we should not forget air quality in enclosed spaces , where we can spend more than 80 % of our time .
Little interest is taken in studies of the environmental quality of homes , though its health impact is bound to be at least as great as that of the outdoor environment .
( RO ) Mr. President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr. Kramer .

The proposal for a directive on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe approaches the relation between air quality and human health and proposes Community actions to improve air quality in Europe .
Urban traffic generates 40 % of the carbon dioxide emissions and 70 % of the emissions of other pollutants generated by vehicles , and congestion , especially in metropolitan areas , costs the European Union approximately 1 % of the GDP .
In many European capitals , traffic is congested and pollution seriously affects their inhabitants .
Over 66 % of European citizens consider urban congestion and related pollution to be problems that seriously affect the quality of their lives and request the Union to act in a coherent and , especially , firm manner .
At the European Council of 8 and 9 March 2007 , the European Union firmly undertook to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20 % by 2020 as compared to 1990 .
The European Union and the Member States must focus their actions on crowded metropolitan and urban areas and approach the issue of air quality in urban agglomerations by complying with the principle of subsidiarity in a more ambitious manner , by implementing a strategy of cooperation and coordination at European level .
The Green Paper on urban mobility promotes the development of public passenger transport , but also approaches measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions due to road traffic .
Regarding amendment 31 , I would like to specify that some actions in the field of mandatory technical standards for reducing pollution generated by land vehicles , as well as by inland water ships , have already been taken in other pieces of legislation .
I believe it is extremely important for the Parliament to be informed every 5 years about the progress achieved by the Member States in improving air quality , but I consider it especially important for such actions to be financed from the Structural Funds as well .
( PL ) Mr President , the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on ambient air quality and cleaner air is of major significance for the health of European citizens , particularly since the substances emitted by industry , transport and power plants may be transported over great distances , such as particles and oxides of sulphur , nitrogen and lead .
The directive lays down limits for their emission and emphasises the importance of reducing contaminant emissions and their sources .
The conditions for meeting these requirements vary , however .
In zones and conurbations where many contaminant-emitting entities function , for example coal-fired furnaces and plants using old technologies , adaptation to meet the directive 's requirements will require time and considerable financial outlay .
In justified cases , therefore , pursuant to Amendment 2 , the date of introduction of the directive 's requirements should be postponed .
The directive is right to stress the need to monitor contaminant emissions , which is of great significance in restricting contaminants , including those of cross-border origin .
I congratulate Mr Krahmer , the rapporteur .
( DE ) Mr President , I am delighted that we have found agreement so quickly here in all the groups on this important dossier .
Air quality is central to our citizens ' health and wellbeing .
I am also delighted that we have set strict limits , particularly new limits in the PM2.5 sector , as these are particularly harmful to health .
Unfortunately , there has been no tightening up in many other sectors , which would have been desirable .
This concerns PM10 as well as the NOx sector , of course .
What alarms me more than the limits we have set , however , is the current air situation in the Member States .
As you all know , almost all the Member States are exceeding current limits .
The ball really is in our court now to implement this ambitious legislative package , as it is in that of the Commission to monitor it .
The Commission has so far not introduced any infringement procedures , although limits are continually being exceeded .
On the one hand implementation must therefore be clean , but on the other hand the Commission must also take practical action if Member States are still not able or willing to adhere to the limits .
It is also important that we have found consistent criteria for measurements .
Practice differs widely here in individual Member States .
With regard to transport - one of the primary causes of air pollution even in my homeland - it has to be said that the Commission is to some extent not prepared either to support initiatives here that countries are taking in order to adhere to air limits .
The Commission should really be asking for Member States to be supported and not obstructed here in their aims to keep the air clean .
We have seen some very significant increases in traffic passing through the Alps and here , too , something must be done with regard to the air .
( NL ) Mr President , today , the European Parliament is providing clarity in the long-running debate on the specification of the standards required for reasons of public health with regard to particulates : PM25 and PM10 .
Today , we are bringing about a substantial improvement for people sensitive to these : children and the elderly .
I support this policy wholeheartedly .
It is also clear that more customised measures are possible .
Zoning of our rather urbanised regions is to be possible , thus improving practicability without compromising our ultimate objectives .
It is also clear that the source policy is now being tackled seriously and that there is cross-border cooperation in Europe .
Mr President , what is not clear - at least not to me - is whether the blockade in Dutch legislation in respect of a number of projects on account of integrated authorisation for environment and physical planning has really been removed .
It is for the Netherlands , including the lower house of the Dutch Parliament and the legislation , to see whether this can be clarified in the Air Quality Cooperation Programme .
Today , Europe is providing a very clear framework for what is practicable , including in the Netherlands .
It is now for the Netherlands to manage the link between physical planning and environmental policy sensibly to avoid further unnecessary blockades .
That is the spirit in which I am happy to pledge support today to the agreement reached .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , a number of key elements have been included in the overall compromise package that is now proposed .
Most importantly , it contains the following elements :
the time extension option for PM10 is kept at the level of the common position ; there can be no delay in taking the measures and a single step approach will reduce the administrative burden ;
standards for particulate matter PM10 are unchanged in accordance with the original Commission proposal ;
a realistic and timely annual PM2.5 target and a limit value set at 25 µg per cubic metre to be achieved at 2010 and 2015 respectively ;
an indicative limit value for 2020 that adds to the ambitious PM2.5 agenda for the mandatory review in 2013 ;
a legally binding exposure concentration obligation in 2015 that complements the exposure reduction target in triggering prompt measures that are expected to provide the maximum public health benefit ; and
a Commission declaration on the progress in developing the Community measures at source .
The new recital 15 also strengthens the determination of the two co-legislators to consider as a matter of priority the legislative proposals put forward by the Commission to address emission at source at Community level .
I know that these elements were all-important to Parliament at first reading and in the committee this time round .
I believe that the proposed current compromise will satisfy Parliament as important ground was won on the key principle of the ambitious yet realistic ambient air quality standard setting , with a clear roadmap including the adoption of the necessary Community measures and a well-defined review in 2013 .
I am also particularly pleased to note the importance given by both Parliament and the Council to finding a compromise in this directive .
The resulting compromise , as well as the demonstrated resolve , enables the European Union to take the effective next steps in ensuring healthier air for its citizens .
To conclude , the Commission is very pleased with the outcome of the negotiations . It can accept the proposed compromise amendments in full .
I wish to thank and to congratulate , once more , the rapporteur , Mr Krahmer , for all his efforts to reach an agreement at second reading .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday 11 December 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) The importance of having good air around us needs neither explanation nor emphasis .
The current European policy priority which concentrates on the rapid and far-reaching introduction of cohesive and uniform legislation aimed at guaranteeing air quality is the right approach .
The proposal in the directive currently under debate combines and streamlines existing European law by creating a single , cohesive proposal .
Following analysis of the proposal that it currently contains , it may be stated with assurance that the compromise package approved by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , The Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe fully reflects the interests of all parties concerned that will be directly affected by the directive .
This is a balanced proposal for the Member States that will feel the weight of its provisions , with a simultaneous improvement in air quality in Europe and , in the longer term , a significant reduction in PM .
Besides the very detailed treatment of individual target values for PM10 and PM2,5 , I believe it is very important to concentrate on the provisions relating to flexibility in the attainment of admissible values for Member States .
It is worth pointing out that the Member States already have very considerable difficulties in complying with pre-existing provisions on air quality improvement .
It is also important to emphasise long-term air quality measures .
We know from experience that short-term measures are often not as effective as long-term ones .
Member States should be encouraged to apply long-term political strategies on air pollution on a voluntary basis .
in writing . - ( HU ) The right to clean air may also be interpreted as a human right , since the task of the Member States and the European Union is to ensure basic human living conditions ( clean water and air ) .
Fifty to a hundred years ago , the symbol of industrial society was a smoking factory chimney .
Our values have changed in the meantime and we value a clean and natural way of life , at least in words .
Unfortunately , the air in our cities only partly testifies to this .
With the collapse of heavy industry , or its relocation to the Third World , industrial pollution has fallen , but motorisation has multiplied .
Twenty-five years ago there were one million cars in Hungary , which has ten million people , and now there are three times as many , nearly a million of which pollute the air of Budapest , together with all the catastrophic health consequences that this entails .
Lung cancer has multiplied and the number of asthma cases has grown ninefold .
Young children who live beside main roads are essentially exposed to a continuous risk .
It has also emerged that pollution by microparticles originating from diesel vehicles is particularly harmful to human health .
Europe should be ashamed that in this respect the standards in the EU are lower than in the United States .
We should not just talk , but act .
We need to use defined instruments to restrict road traffic in populated settlements , and to create much more stringent emission rules than up to now for the vehicles that remain in use .
We must change from being a society of polluters to being the society of a healthy life !
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Directive on air quality will improve the health of European citizens and will contribute to increasing the standard of living in the urban environment .
Due to the binding nature of this piece of legislation , this will be achieved on the entire territory of the European Union .
A weak point of the Directive is the financing of measures to adjust to the objectives undertaken by the Member States until 2010 , or 2015 respectively .
As a first step , a considerable financial effort will have to be submitted in order to establish centres for sampling and measuring air pollution .
The structural funds already allocated to the Member States eligible for the environmental policy will also be accessible for achieving the objectives described by the directive , but this will reduce the initially estimated amounts .
I believe an additional budget line should be established when the directive becomes effective .
At the same time , I support the insertion of a flexibility clause that would allow transitional periods of up to two years to the Member States , provided that they can prove that they have made a considerable effort to achieve the targets of reducing air pollution .
in writing . - ( FI ) Today we are discussing at second reading two important directives on improving the quality of the environment .
One relates to the sea , the other to the air .
Protection of the air is one of the key and most traditional areas of environmental protection , because ambient air quality and human health are directly linked .
As the Commission has said , life expectancy has shortened in the EU by 8.5 months owing to air pollution .
The quality of life of hundreds of thousands of people is declining daily , and the natural environment is under threat , despite significant reductions in emissions in recent years .
The importance of the air quality directive probably cannot be stressed too much : it brings together a set of norms which were previously dispersed , and this is a better approach to the problem all round .
I wish first of all to thank the Council for meeting Parliament to discuss some important issues .
Almost half the amendments adopted at first reading were accepted overall .
The Council eventually showed its support for certain very crucial amendments by Parliament .
These related to replacing certain target values for particle concentrations with binding limit values , the deadlines for doing this and how they would be applied .
The limit value norm for PM2.5 particles , which are the most harmful to human health , is critically important .
We therefore need an extremely strict directive .
Mere limit values , however , are not enough in themselves .
Attention also needs to be paid to techniques which improve ambient air quality .
Population and housing censuses ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Juknevičienė , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on population and housing censuses - C6-0078 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , population and housing censuses are the central building block for all statistical reporting on the people that live in the European Union .
In almost every policy area in which the EU is active , be it economic , social or environmental , high-quality population data are required to help formulate operational objectives and to evaluate progress .
International , European and national institutions need census data to make valid comparisons between EU Member States .
Accurate data on the population are required to comply with important legislation .
Examples are the qualified majority voting within the Council , or the distribution of Structural Funds ( on the basis of ' GDP per head ' figures . )
The purpose of the present regulation is to provide a clear European framework to achieve comparability of the results of the censuses conducted in the EU Member States .
It clarifies the responsibilities and roles of the statistical bodies on the national and the European levels and sets common requirements concerning the quality and transparency of results , methods and the technology used .
This will be a major step forward to the harmonisation of demographic and social statistics .
Population censuses have a long tradition in the countries of today 's European Union , in some countries reaching back over centuries .
For the first time there will be a European legislative framework for the censuses .
The word ' historic ' might well be appropriate to describe this development .
The regulation will also be an important milestone for international cooperation in the area of population and housing censuses in which the European Commission , via Eurostat , has been active over many years .
There is a broad agreement across all the institutions involved - the Commission , the Council and Parliament - about the importance of the legislation .
It is only natural and appreciated that the legislation about censuses raises debate .
After all , you will decide upon the collection of data about all European citizens as well as upon the most cost- and burden-intensive statistical exercise .
The issue is politically sensitive and requires a considerable investment of taxpayers ' money and citizens ' goodwill in the Member States .
However , we should not forget that the absence of subjective and comparable census data would lead to negative consequences .
The data are used for policy formulation and evaluation , administrative purposes and social research that increases the welfare of the people living in the European Union .
The benefits of harmonised census data by far outweigh the efforts to collect it .
The Member States have been carrying out their national censuses for many decades .
What we can achieve with this European legislation is to make their efforts pay off even better by ensuring census data that are of the highest possible quality and comparable between the regions of the European Union .
This is why the European Commission supports the debate that is still ongoing and sincerely hopes that a solution will be found that is acceptable to a broad majority within this House , as well as to the Member States represented in the Council .
We appeal to all to support the rapporteur , Ms Juknevičienė , in her quest to find such a compromise .
The Commissioner has just said that this regulation is a historical event .
I would like to begin by saying that yes , it is a historical event , but at the same time it happens to be one of the most scandalous in Europe .
Today , could we admit to ourselves , even though it seems obvious , that up to now we have had no reliable statistics and no idea about how many people live in the European Union and in what kind of accommodation .
First of all , I would like to thank my colleagues , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , representatives of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and members of regional committees , for their close cooperation in preparing this document .
Many thanks to the representatives of the Commission and the Council who took an active part in the discussions and participated in our joint efforts to achieve the compromise that only necessary information should be included in this regulation .
Any unnecessary data that in some cases might be in breach of a person 's right to privacy should not be collected .
The EU statistics and , accordingly , the regulation have a juridical basis , provided for in Article 285 of the EU Treaty .
There is no doubt that the foundations for this document are in place .
This article specifies the need to conform to very important criteria - impartiality , reliability , objectivity , scientific independence , cost-effectiveness and statistical confidentiality .
The main objective of the regulation is to provide a detailed account of population structure and characteristics with a view to analysing the data and using the results to develop a strategy in many EU policy areas .
The data from the annual population census is used , as the Commissioner said , to ascertain such important criteria as voting and establishing the majority of votes in the Council .
High-quality regional data is necessary for the purpose of identifying regions that qualify for EU assistance , as well as for assessing progress in regional cohesion policy .
Therefore , could any other document be of greater importance in terms of being able to compare and trust the data contained in it ?
The regulation provides an opportunity to collect high-quality data on housing .
This data is necessary to establish the number of consumers of water , energy and other commodities and to determine housing demand and supply and the necessary funding .
The last census , taken in 2001 , was based on a gentleman 's agreement and did not achieve any positive results .
I believe the data are insufficiently thorough , unreliable , difficult to compare and relate to different time periods .
That is why there is some doubt regarding whether EU funds have been distributed and used gratuitously .
Of course , this makes it difficult to develop plans for the future too .
The proposed regulation would guarantee reliable , transparent and comparable results .
It would also require only the essential information on certain issues .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I am asking you to support the amendments I have proposed , which aim to relieve the Member States of the burden of collecting and storing unnecessary information .
The vote on this regulation has been adjourned until the next plenary session .
It is very important to find a compromise .
We need to get this regulation up and running in order to achieve our objectives .
We also need the support of EU citizens .
It is important that they realise the importance of the census and support it .
People need to be sure that the common statistics system is reliable and essential for their wellbeing .
Most importantly , the information must be stored safely and used only for the correct purpose .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I have been following the preparation of this report as well as the negotiations with the Commission .
It is in fact a very important report with a view to the planning and assessment of regional and social policies in the various Member States and , in that respect , the socio-economic profile of the population of Europe and housing conditions are among the most decisive aspects for measuring the improvement in living conditions .
In our view the Commission seems to be taking the correct line , which we support , on the indicators that make this type of analysis possible .
We therefore need to continue to improve the coverage , quality and reliability of this type of statistical data .
We think , however , that care should always be taken to strike a good cost / benefit balance as regards the degree of detail in the information to be provided , while also bearing in mind personal privacy .
This report will be useful only if it helps to increase the frequency , comparability and accuracy of these data at EU level .
For that it is essential to take very special care as regards the data supplied by the Member States , which needs to be consistent , complete and reliable .
That is the only way to make comparative studies and analyses of the socio-economic situation at regional , national and Community levels .
The way in which those data are processed is even more significant , since the classification of the regions for the purpose of applying the Structural Funds is based largely on such indicators , which means that in the normal course of events , this process leads to decisions that may have major consequences for the various European regions and for the Member States themselves .
I hope that , as a result of the negotiations with the Council , we shall achieve greater coherence , clarity and accuracy throughout .
I should just like to place on record that the PPE-DE Group has maintained its original position on this report , even after hearing the explanations given by the Commission , in line with the rapporteur 's position ; I hope we shall maintain that position to the end .
We are in favour in particular of deleting sections 1.3 and 2.3 of the Annex , as well as certain subsequent amendments that in our view are not consistent with the aims of improving the quality and reliability of the information .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Madeira , who was to have spoken on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , is unable to be with us because of transport problems .
I shall therefore be presenting her views on the importance of this report and her concerns , which I share , and which I expressed previously in this plenary session regarding development policies .
The approval of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is to be signed this week by the Heads of State or Government , makes it absolutely vital to have reliable European Union population data .
The new voting method included in that Treaty , which will henceforth take account not only of the Member States ' vote , but also of the population figures , means that we must be aware that population censuses are crucial for the effective operation of the European Union .
However , this regulation is important for other reasons apart from the voting method - it is important also for all indicators concerning employment , regional , structural or social matters that take account of the data provided by each of the Member States and that , often , in view of the discrepancies in the data collection methods used or in the reference periods , produce inadequate analyses and results of questionable validity .
The last time this exercise was carried out , in 2000 , the data were available only in 2005 and thus were of questionable validity .
The regulation under consideration today , purged of certain incongruities that shocked even the most inattentive reader , takes account of a series of factors that are essential in order to obtain good results from population and housing censuses and will enable us to have pre-defined reference years common to the Member States and listed questions that will allow reliable comparisons .
Finally , I repeat that I am in favour of including the non-obligatory topics in the regulation .
Using questions not covered in the obligatory topics will not only give Member States a consistent and coherent list to serve as a basis for collecting further data rather than leaving it to them which might produce interesting but totally redundant results .
The argument that censuses should be removed from the text because they cost money does not make sense .
It is precisely because high costs are involved that we should clearly place topics to be analysed within a legal framework so that the results do not prove to be worthless for future use for various purposes .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the draft regulation on population and housing censuses is a document of considerable importance .
Data gleaned from population and housing censuses provide an opportunity for rational drafting of development strategies and for intervention action to be taken .
This is why it is so important for the data to be transparent and comparable .
In that case , Community solutions will apply to real and well-studied phenomena .
Comparability is not just a matter of well-defined data ; it also means that such data have been collected over identical periods of time .
Clear specification of collection periods and updating , correction and publication dates is of great significance and this has been clearly stated in the document and amendments .
One important question is the way in which data on local communities are gathered .
I support the amendment introducing a separate definition for this .
I also support the amendment introducing environmental policies alongside regional ones .
Regular statistical studies looking at family , social , economic and residential characteristics are undoubtedly needed in view of the demographic and social problems Europe faces .
This is why I think that the amendment deleting recommended topics for geographical levels , and in particular not derived topics such as location of schools and higher education institutions , means of getting to work or school , distance from work or school , number of children born alive , type of economic activity , duration of unemployment , main source of livelihood , income , housing conditions or disability , which describe families ' actual living conditions , is wrong .
The emphasis on respect for national personal data protection rights in the text is important , and the principle of subsidiarity has rightly been retained in this area .
I congratulate Mrs Juknevičienon a thorough piece of work on the draft report .
May I point out that we have been joined in our discussion by a Member who just yesterday became a full Member of the Chamber , Mr Krzysztof Hołowczyc , a very well-known figure in Poland .
Welcome , Mr Hołowczyc !
Please familiarise yourself with proceedings .
Mr Hołowczyc is a rally driver , very well-known in Poland , and on Saturday he won a legendary stage of the Barbórka Rally .
My sincere congratulations !
Here we practise a different kind of sport , though , so please change seats quickly if you would , Mr Hołowczyc .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is right that the capture and harmonisation of statistics on the most important economic and social characteristics of the regions is essential for the European Union .
The allocation of structural funds , one third of the budget , actually relies on this base data .
What the Commission is proposing here in its regulation on population censuses , however , in reality has nothing to do with these necessities .
The data that it wants to capture and harmonise in this statutory text , which directly applies to all EU Member States , is personal data on our fellow human beings , which is not really of any concern to the EU .
Included in this are personal data on family and sex life , housing situation and religious affiliation .
Furthermore , it also has the audacity to want to include this data by law in uniform standards without including any reference in the law to data protection .
It is therefore our duty as representatives of our citizens to stop any such intrusion into individual rights , particularly as there is no reason to harmonise data on family life , personal circumstances or the housing situation when this does not in any way fall within the competence of the European Union and is not provided for in the Reform Treaty .
The EU cannot be allowed , through the back door , to claim competences here that should remain solely with the Member States , and the supervision of data collection would presume this .
For us it is not a question of time or speed , but a question of the prime necessity that the protection of personal data has absolute priority .
This Commission text does not guarantee this .
I am happy that the rapporteur wants to delete the non-mandatory text here .
We already backed this , even at committee level .
Unfortunately , she had not obtained a majority for it at that time .
The citizens expect us to ensure that what the judgment now stipulates , namely adjournment , will actually compel the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs to make sure that data protection is checked here once again and that only then will the decision on Parliament 's position and first reading be made .
I would ask all groups to be true to their word here .

for the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on population and housing censuses presented by the Commission is a step in the right direction , like the previous proposals on statistics on health and safety at work and on job vacancies .
I also agree with the Commission 's statement during the last population and housing censuses for 2001 that the collection of data from individual Member States based solely on ' gentlemen 's agreements ' is inadequate for achieving sufficiently comparable results .
It is therefore necessary to adopt legislation at European level .
Only in this way can we guarantee the reliability , transparency and comparability of the results .
On the other hand , I was alarmed when I saw the list of data requested by Eurostat in section 1.3 of the annex to the proposed regulation .
Even allowing for the fact that these are only recommended indicators , I believe that the Commission went too far in this respect .
There are no grounds for asking people intimate questions about their private life .
I was even more taken aback by the fact that this data was only to be collected from women .
I therefore wholeheartedly welcomed the decision of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to remove these intrusive and inappropriate requirements from the Commission 's proposal .
Such information is perhaps more appropriate in a medical centre .
As far as the anonymity of this data goes , in my view it should be comparable to banking data .
I think that in compiling any statistical information we must above all respect the protection of personal data and the privacy of individuals , and we must prevent a disproportional increase in the number of tasks required of the data providers .
I will recommend that the GUE / NGL Group vote in this sense .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , on 20 November , in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I was pleased to support the rapporteur , Ms Juknevičienė , in her Amendment 32 to delete paragraph 1.3.2 so as to exclude the intrusive and offensive question about women 's first sexual act , dressed up as ' consensual union ' .
The Commission representative at that time present in committee promised me that this ' insensitive question ' would be removed and not come back .
I took that as a victory for me , for my party UKIP , but , mostly , as a victory for common sense , and I was ready to congratulate the Commission on it .
By the way , that retraction proves that I was right to describe it as being about the sex act because , if it was just cohabitation following , which it was claimed to be , why did the Commission representative promise to withdraw what was an innocent question ?
I am proved right .
Now , when I saw today that the vote on this proposal would not be held tomorrow as originally scheduled but postponed indefinitely , although the debate is obviously still going on , I smelled a rat because votes usually follow debates very closely .
I was right .
The latest version that I printed off from the computer just an hour ago shows as indicated on page 1 , Text by the Commission , that a new Amendment 39 is here .
It bears no relation to the original Amendment 39 , which is an innocent thing about technicalities , but it is the old 1.3.2 - complete with the whole list of questions , including the intrusive question about women 's consensual union .
At the time , in committee , I did not like the fact that , when votes came up the following day , the rapporteur had allowed her Amendment 32 to be somewhat watered down to Compromise A , which only deleted the list of questions in 1.3.2 , and left the 1.3 and 1.3.1 preamble paragraphs , which was a peg , of course , to hang further questions on - and I was right to be suspicious of that .
This objectionable , intrusive and insulting question has been disgracefully reintroduced as Amendment 39 by the Commission - against the Commission promise to me in committee - and I am more angry , Mr President , than I have been at any time recently .
I was promised that this would disappear and it has been brought back by the Commission - a disgraceful question which no woman should be asked to put up with .
It is a disgrace to women ; it is a disgrace to the committee which has to debate the thing .
I therefore ask all colleagues to vote against Amendment 39 and - to make sure - vote against the whole of this rotten , distorted proposal .

( DE ) Mr President , in view of the ethnically based conflicts which are constantly flaring up , manifesting themselves to excess in the most recent Paris riots , for example , it is pleasing to note that we in the EU seem to be finally awakening from our multicultural dreams and are wanting to ask questions on ethnic origin and religion in an EU-wide population census in 2011 .
This data should definitely be collected so that we are better able to evaluate the risk potential in this regard .
Cultural differences can - as we have seen increasingly in recent times - escalate all too easily .
In this respect we in Europe - where some countries have boastfully declared themselves immigration countries - are sitting right over a powder keg that should not be underestimated , even in the metropolitan conurbations .
The most recent conflicts between the Kurds and the Turks have thus required massive police presence in our towns and cities , as is generally known .
Statistics on the ethnic and cultural composition of the resident population could therefore be of paramount necessity and benefit for the prevention of violence .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal on population and housing censuses is a completely new piece of EU legislation in an area that has not been previously regulated .
The question arises as to whether there is any need for such legislation .
The Commission 's arguments concerning the need to guarantee comparability and quality of statistical data are relatively convincing , particularly on a general level .
However , we must take a critical eye to the proposed areas of information to be collected and evaluated .
The Commission 's proposal contains a large group of data whose sustainability is highly questionable .
I regard as controversial the collection of housing data based on the conclusions of the Laeken European Council .
These can be only considered an expression of political will , not a valid legal document .
Besides , the EU does not have any competence in the area of housing , and so the statistics obtained on housing , contrary to other data , cannot serve to support the implementation of existing policies , unless the results are intended to serve as a possible catalyst for introducing a new common housing policy .
This would be , however , an abuse of power and a breach of the Treaty .
The proposal to collect a large amount of data on citizens ' private lives is entirely without justification .
From the point of view of implementation of common policies , there is no reason why the EU institutions should have access to data on the number of marriages and partners of each female citizen or the length of these relationships .
This is more like playing ' Big Brother ' , interfering in peoples ' private lives and improperly infringing their personal freedom .
If some of the EU institutions are tempted to do so , it is right to intervene and lay down clear limits , which cannot be transgressed .
In my view , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs did so by limiting substantially the areas of data to be collected and is to be commended for that .
The most transparent solution is that proposed by my Group , the PPE-DE , which omits all references in the annex to concrete types of statistical data .
I recommend that you give this proposal for your attention and your support .
( RO ) Mr. President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and to appreciate the importance of this proposal of regulation regarding statistics collected by Member States on housing .
Member States have to use a common system for the standard data to be regularly collected and reported .
Accurate and precise statistics regarding housing allow the Union and the Member States to implement adequate policies in this field .
Nevertheless , any data collection must observe the private life of individuals .
The Union is not only based upon economic criteria , but we also have to build a social Europe .
Decent living obviously involves decent housing .
Unfortunately , today , there are over 60 million citizens living below the poverty line in the European Union , and children are most exposed to the risk of poverty .
Obviously , these people also have difficulties in getting decent housing .
The main social and demographic tendencies affecting subsidized housing policies are generated by population aging , migration of population inside the Union , migration of population from rural areas to urban areas and predominant development of urban areas .
Yet , there is no unique model applicable to all Member States : in some Member States , there is a big number of houses in which many generations of the same family live together .
Austria , Finland , the Czech Republic and Poland have programmes for providing subsidized housing to young people .
In France , Germany , Hungary , Spain and Great Britain , the number of houses with only one tenant has increased .
In Romania , 95 % of the houses are private property and only 5 % of the houses are rented or are subsidized houses .
In Denmark , 47 % of the houses are inhabited by tenants or are subsidized houses , in Austria 42 % , in Finland 37 % , in France 44 % and in Germany 57 % .
Statistics represent only a starting point in developing adequate housing policies for each Member State .
These policies depend on the allocation of public funds at national , regional or local level , as well as on the real estate market evolution .
I believe Member States should also use the Structural Funds for building houses , especially those for regional development .
Yet , the issue of housing requires an approach based upon statistical data , as well as a global , multidimensional approach , based upon national and Community law .
Nevertheless , a pragmatic approach , based upon the needs of the citizens , is also required .
Unfortunately , there are European citizens who live in inadequate , unsafe houses , but there are also European citizens who have no house or even a roof over their heads .
What is Europe 's answer and support for the needs of these citizens ?
Mr President , one of the more important services Europe can provide is to support the collection of reliable , comparable information .
For this reason , I can give qualified support to the idea of a European census .
However , a few points need to be considered .
First of all , there needs to be some recognition of national censuses in the report .
Member States already hold censuses , and they will now be in a position of having to organise national and European censuses .
Taking a census is very expensive - it is a labour-intensive activity - and it is reasonable to expect that Member States are going to increasingly combine the national with the European census .
This needs to be taken into account .
It is very important that we allow Member States to use the opportunity of a European census to ask questions that are relevant to their own nation and to collate those questions separately from the shared questions or the exclusively European ones .
Further , more attention has to be given to the census questions .
These questions must be chosen carefully and must not cross the line separating valid information from intrusion and attacks on privacy .
We want to understand trends , to try to make policies more relevant ; we do not want to pry into people 's personal lives .
Once respectful questions are chosen , then we have to be very careful that they must go through not just a linguistic process but also a cultural translation .
As the report does not intend to harmonise the rules on census , this step must be taken to ensure that accurate comparability of data between Member States is achieved .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to draw attention to the relationship between the objective of collecting data and the amount of data actually included in an analysis such as this , as something is clearly amiss in this respect .
Something is wrong in the relationship between the tasks of the European Union with regard to housing policy , for example , and what we are now calling for .
The Union does not have competence in this field .
Nor does this Parliament have competence to discuss the relationship between religious beliefs , ethnic origin and possible integration issues ; it is not for the European Union as a whole to make pronouncements on this .
What is up for consideration , however , is how we allocate funds , how we distribute our Structural Funds .
The important thing here is having a precise insight into the number of inhabitants in the regions concerned , the regions under the NUTS classification of territorial units for statistics .
Until there are precise data on this , and until orientation towards outcomes - in financial terms - is possible , this action is indeed necessary .
Homogeneity and reliability are the primary considerations here .
I should like to make one more point , on which Mrs Novak made some very interesting proposals in the Committee on Regional Development .
With regard to interference in the family circle , the private sphere of citizens , we shall be voting against the proposal if this is not removed from it .
Perhaps these aspects will be removed during the trialogue - I am relying on the rapporteur in this regard .
Only in that case will Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats ultimately be able to give it our support ; only on this condition .
( EL ) Mr President , as has been mentioned by the rapporteur and almost all the speakers , it is important to compare the data from the Member States on population and the main social , economic , family and housing indicators , so that on the basis of that information , each Member State can better deal with the issues which concern it , within the framework of its policy .
At European level , however , we need to target the data which will lead to a better cohesion policy and improved regional development , so that inequalities are eliminated and the gap between different social groups and different European regions is narrowed .
By laying down common definitions and indicators , the proposed regulation ensures the comparability of data and , as a result , promotes better practice in the Member States .
However , there is a need for regular evaluation and corroboration of the statistics gathered by the competent agencies , and these agencies must undergo quality control and transparency checks .
Objectivity , representativeness and accuracy of data are important issues .
Paradoxically , although the Commission is revoking the annexes to the regulation , it is in favour of including recommended topics which may affect the clarity and accuracy of the data , since it is leaving it to the Member States to do as they wish .
If the aim of the proposal is to adopt binding legislation establishing common definitions for the comparability of data , I believe these points should be deleted .
We must proceed with a cost-benefit analysis , as provided for in Article 5a , since the cost of collecting such data is particularly high for Member States which have limited capacity to analyse the details .
Lastly , I would like to point out that if the amendments are not approved , the draft regulation will touch on very sensitive issues relating to personal , family and private life , such as the request for collection of data on cohabitation - which must be deleted - or the temperature of the bathwater !
Why should we collect information and details which are not related to European policies ?
Poverty is not controlled with numbers and data .
( SL ) I support the regulation on population and housing censuses .
With the data collected on the basis of this regulation we will be able better to assess the socio-economic conditions in which the inhabitants of the European Union live at regional and national level , and at European Union level .
Furthermore , with this data it will be possible to evaluate more accurately the effectiveness of the implementation of regional policy and progress in achieving regional cohesion , to which the EU is assigning an increasing amount of funds .
Two things must be ensured if we are to attain the desired objectives through the regulation : the volume of the data that we collect under this regulation must not be too great and the data collected must be of high quality and comparable .
Data which do not create the necessary added value and merely increase administration and expense must be excluded .
These are proposals which are to be found in Annexes 1.3 and 2.3 and on which the Member States should report of their own accord .
At the same time , care must be taken not to encroach excessively on the privacy of the men and women living in the European Union .
Nor may we use the collection of these data to discriminate against one sex or another .
Comparability of basic data between Member States and reliability of the data collected from the census are necessary for the assessment of European policies and for the comparison of the results of national policies at European level .
Therefore , the regulation must ensure that all the Member States use the same method and criteria in data collection .
( SK ) Mr President , precise population data and reliable data on housing within the EU are at present an essential prerequisite for the correct evaluation of all areas of European policies , as well as for the formulation of operational objectives and evaluation of the progress in individual Member States .
Because they serve many fundamental objectives , I would above all like to underscore the importance of the reliability and quality of this data .
Of the many examples where exact census data are relevant , I would like to mention two : the process of qualified majority voting by the Council and the allocation of resources from Structural Funds for the development of less-favoured regions .
I believe that it is important that this area be regulated in a unified manner .
In this way the data provided by individual Member States will be comparable at both European and regional level , as is often necessary .
As a member of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to highlight the importance of the classification of statistical units .
The quality and comparability of this type of information can only be guaranteed by a clear European framework , in other words European legislation on population and housing censuses .
I agree with the view that the legislation must be aimed mainly at the end results and not at the information being collected .
This will reliably ensure the comparability of the statistical data , which , if missing , can lower data quality .
The Member States should be free to select the best census modes and methods in accordance , however , with certain binding standards and quality requirements .
It goes without saying that the topics , as well as the time frames and the implementing deadlines , should remain the same for all countries .
Only in this way will the census data be transparent , reliable and comparable , a fundamental factor in fulfilling many important objectives .
Before I give the floor to the Commissioner , I am reminded that about 2000 years ago King Herod instituted a census , but on that occasion it was boys only .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this will be a very encouraging start for me .
I am glad to announce that the Commission is ready to accept the majority of Parliament 's amendments .
As this debate has shown , there are currently negotiations under way that will address your concerns .
A compromise could open the door to future development .
The Commission supports the debate that is still ongoing and sincerely hopes that a solution will be found that is acceptable to a broad majority within this House , as well as to the Member States represented in the Council .
However , it should not be forgotten that the inclusion of new topics in a census takes in-depth and long-haul preparation .
I am confident that the correct balance will be found between the very important reporting on the EU population and housing , and the cost and effort of collecting the data .
I would like to pay special attention to the question by Ms Schroedter .
The main point was that this legislation does not sufficiently assure data confidentiality .
My answer is that data confidentiality is being taken most seriously by Eurostat and all national statistical offices .
There is framework legislation on data confidentiality on the national as well as on the European level .
The proposal on censuses does not violate or modify any of this legislation .
In contrast , it fully respects all provisions , be they national or European .
There is no need to repeat established framework legislation on data confidentiality within this specific proposal on censuses .
No data transmitted to Eurostat allows insight into the data of any particular individual person .
It is anonymous data .
Moreover , the legislation in this current draft allows only the transmission of aggregated data , not of microdata .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at a later part-session .
Toy Safety ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on toy safety .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for its continued interest in product safety issues , and for this opportunity to give you a short presentation on the first results of the product safety stocktaking , released on 22 November 2007 .
I attended the IMCO Committee meeting on 26 November and I am now pleased to address the European Parliament meeting in plenary .
My three starting points and principles are still valid and can be confirmed : there can be no compromise on consumer safety ; we believe in open markets and fair competition ; and we want to work in international partnership with the Chinese and the Americans .
These stocktaking results indicate that the regulatory framework is fit for the purpose , if and when it is properly applied .
In particular , the rapid alert system RAPEX is working efficiently and ensuring that dangerous products are recalled from the market throughout the European Union .
The stocktaking report nonetheless identifies certain scope for improvements , in preventive actions and international cooperation as well as in enhanced enforcement .
Some envisaged improvements are already at an advanced stage towards becoming concrete actions , as is notably the case of the revision of the Toy Safety Directive .
I intend to propose to my colleagues in the Commission that we adopt a temporary measure to require that warnings be given on magnetic toys , pending revision of the standard , to address the risks that these toys could pose .
We have this right under Article 13 of the General Product Safety Directive .
I hope that this measure will become effective soon , but I am also aware that it is just a partial stop-gap solution until the relevant standard addresses the risk associated with magnets comprehensively .
The Commission is assisting the Member States ' market surveillance authorities to identify and share best practices with a view to improved market surveillance .
In October 2007 , Member States reported on initiatives for better cooperation with economic operators and on specific surveillance campaigns on toys .
The Commission intends to publish comparative enforcement capacity data on the Consumer Scoreboard in the first quarter of 2008 .
The Commission also continues concretely to reinforce the market surveillance capacity of the Member States by participating in the financing of well-designed joint market surveillance projects ( which in 2007 will receive EUR 1.3 million in Community funding ) .
The protection of consumers against dangerous products requires a consistent level of protection not only within the Community , but also at the EU external borders .
In addition to actions to improve protection within the European Union , various actions are under way to strengthen protection at borders .
Recent major changes to EU customs legislation will help in identifying high-risk consignments for control .
Secure customs exchange mechanisms will also enable rapid action to be taken when information becomes available on new types of dangerous products .
Cooperation between these two networks , in practical terms , is being stepped up through regular exchanges of alerts between the RAPEX system and the customs authorities ' ' risk information form ' system .
The latter draws border inspectors ' attention to specific , potentially dangerous , cargo .
The Commission has highlighted traceability , which is a very important area for further improvement .
Statistics show that products of unknown origin notified through RAPEX were down for the first time in October 2007 , standing at 3 % as compared to 17 % in 2006 .
The Commission is currently assessing , with the help of the Member States , how to ensure that this improvement is not just temporary .
The Commission has already included , in the ' internal market for goods ' legislation package , a provision requiring economic operators to have available the identity of their supplier , which should be helpful for market surveillance interventions once this legislation enters into force .
The Commission has also asked what China could do about traceability , and welcomes the initiatives in China to require the bar-coding , at factory level , of certain categories of high-risk product .
The Commission also consistently highlights the responsibility of economic operators for product safety .
I welcome the commitment from the industry to work on measures to build consumer confidence .
We have agreed on what I call a ' safety pact ' .
I will also send experts to carry out a study of business safety measures in the supply chain , and report further on this in the first quarter of 2008 , because in the era of globalisation we are only as strong as the weakest part of our chain .
I also find it important to communicate with the citizens of Europe on product safety issues , and to listen to their concerns .
This is essential because both you and I want to respond ever better to their queries and needs .
I found my recent web chat under the topic ' Have a Safe Christmas ' ( which I very much enjoyed ) most enlightening and engaging , and answered nearly 50 interesting questions .
Finally , our product safety concerns were communicated to the Chinese leaders at the EU-China Summit on 28 November 2007 .
The leaders on both sides shared the view that a high level of product safety is key to consumer confidence and reciprocal trade .
To this end , the competent authorities have established a comprehensive cooperative relationship .
Both sides are willing to continue and deepen the dialogue , regularly exchange information and aim at measurable , continuous improvements .
Likewise , the Commission has agreed with the United States Government , in the context of the Trans-Atlantic Economic Council , to enhance our cooperation on import safety issues .
I believe this report to you has shown that I and all my colleagues in the Commission have taken the necessary steps to enhance consumer product safety , in association with all the relevant actors , in the most effective , proportionate and committed manner .
I would like once again to thank Parliament for our many inspiring debates on this issue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is no coincidence , of course , that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has called for this topical and urgent debate just before Christmas , particularly as this issue was discussed back in September , surprising as it may be .
The PPE-DE Group also wants this debate to send out a clear political signal and has a political objective in mind .
We want to go all out for a high level of consumer protection , and want attention to the smallest , most vulnerable consumers - children - to remain high on the agenda .
Commissioner , I welcome your statements here .
We note that you have already done a particularly large amount of work in the Commission , and we should of course like to see Member States , too , being inspired to take on their share of the work .
After all , they , too , must continue to be committed to tightening up supervision of their toys markets .
We also know , Commissioner , that you personally have spared no effort when it comes to consumer protection .
We particularly value these efforts , and also agree with you that , when it comes to toy safety , we should not be devising the umpteenth new approach , but rather closing the gaps in the existing system .
There are a couple of points on which I should like further clarification : you have said - and you also referred to it just now - that the Chinese authorities are particularly hard at work too .
Some time ago , you announced that they were going to set up a kind of Chinese RAPEX system .
Perhaps you could elucidate this further .
Secondly , I also wonder whether any specific agreements have actually been made with the toy industry , or whether each Member State has its own way of doing things ?
I should also have liked to hear how it is that we are still awaiting the new Toys Directive , or the Commission proposal for amendment of the existing Toys Directive .
We had expected this round about now .
There has obviously been a delay .
Perhaps you could explain the reason for this ?
In addition , you are absolutely right : the internal market is also there for consumers .
If consumers have no confidence in it , they will not make sufficient use of it .
This is a most particularly important dossier .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks for the briefing you have given us today once again on the progress of discussions .
We have definitely made progress already , but this is still not enough for me , of course .
Various matters still lie ahead of us .
One of them we have already repeatedly discussed : the European Union must carry out the preliminary work itself .
I am also rather sorry about the fact that the amendment of the Toy Directive has still not been tabled .
When I heard we would be getting an amendment in December , I assumed that it would be in December 2007 , not December 2008 .
We are now in December and we know we shall not have it .
I hope it will be available not in December 2008 , but by this January at the latest , because it is urgent .
The second matter , Commissioner , is that the Member States also have to fulfil their obligations .
They must make much more efficient and more consistent use of RAPEX .
That is one thing .
They must also , however , take market monitoring , for which they are responsible , much more seriously .
We also have to move matters further forward here so that we can also actually achieve the necessary security .
It is not just governments or their agencies that are being interrogated in this regard , however ; toy manufacturers are being interrogated too .
They themselves also have to ensure that the quality of their products is appropriate .
They cannot continue simply shifting responsibility on to others .
We cannot let them go to China and say : yes , we want toys , but they must not cost more than so much .
This will be at the expense of quality , which they must know .
We must not let manufacturers off the hook , but must demand that they do this , too .
As we have said , however , supervision is even better and this is what we have to achieve .
I hope that you will manage to move this forward in real terms in the safety package you have been addressing .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , for some families , this Christmas will be a period of tragedy - tragedy because of the loss of a child .
What makes such tragedy even more painful is that ( a ) it could have easily been prevented and ( b ) that it was caused by a gift of love - a joy that turned into a murder weapon .
Yes , a murder weapon .
Because those that produce unsafe toys know full well that those toys can and eventually , perhaps , will kill a child .
Therefore putting such a deadly toy on the market constitutes , in my view , the committing of murder and consequently those that through their omissions fail to prevent such a crime from taking place are accomplices to the act .
Madam Commissioner , we all know who are the culprits that , in this respect , kill or injure our children .
They are the cheap Chinese toy manufacturers .
And what protection have you to offer our citizens ?
Not enough , I am sorry to say .
You are happy , it seems , that in 43 % of cases reported in the latest RAPEX-China report corrective action was taken , but , Madam Commissioner , how about the 57 % of cases where no corrective action was taken ?
And how about those potentially dangerous toys which were not reported at all ?
You have said that ' in this world you cannot given 100 % guarantees ' but ' you can make sure the system is fit for purpose ' .
What purpose , Madam Commissioner ?
The purpose of cutting safety corners in order not to upset the Chinese Government ?
There is only one way of dealing with this problem , Madam Commissioner : ban all imports of Chinese toys till the Chinese Government can give a 100 % guarantee that no dangerous toys will be sold in Europe .
Only then will you be fulfilling your most important function of truly protecting our children from death caused by Chinese toys .
And remember , Madam Commissioner , mere progress from China is not enough , because even one child 's death is one too many .
Mr Matsakis , I apologise for announcing that you had one minute 's speaking time .
It was our mistake and you did , indeed , have two minutes .
I always give extra time to people who speak in a language other than their own .
Your English is wonderful !
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there can be no concessions on toy safety and the mass withdrawal from the market of toys from China has put consumer safety back at the centre of the debate , particularly the safety of our smallest consumers , who often do not have the voice or the strength to defend themselves .
There is , in fact , a very profitable market in products that are a health hazard , a market that makes staggering amounts of money each year and that finds endless routes and subterfuges for legalising what is in reality illegal and harmful .
For this very reason , we welcome the Commission 's proposals to strengthen the application of checks on the safety of products , especially toys .
In particular , we believe cooperation with China and the United States is of fundamental importance in blocking the flow of dangerous products heading for the European market .
A number of actions , such as an overall examination of safety measures and the safety pact between producers and importers , must be prioritised in order to restore consumer confidence .
As regards the Member States , it is fundamentally important to improve cooperation between customs and the authorities responsible for controlling the markets .
A revision of the toy safety directive is essential , so that there are definite rules for planning adequate checks at the production and customs stages .
I will finish , however , by saying that China absolutely must play its part and the Commission must demand that it does so .
China must give guarantees , and must engage in a hard and uncompromising fight against illegal practices , otherwise the European Union will have to take serious measures and close the door on counterfeiting and unfair and unlawful competition .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this debate criss-crosses the Directives .
Commissioner , you are confusing the Product Safety Directive with the Toy Safety Directive !
We do in fact have an implementation problem with the Product Directive , whereas we have a legislative deficit with the Toy Safety Directive .
Greater supervision does not help us here because we have safety loopholes , namely that dangerous chemicals , for example , are not banned .
Two months ago Commissioner Verheugen guaranteed that the Toy Safety Directive would be presented this month .
He said that toys containing lead should not be entering the European market .
In the first case there is no sign of the review of the Toy Safety Directive .
In the second case , Commissioner Verheugen has admitted to me in writing that he was wrong when he said that toys containing lead were banned in Europe .
This is not right either .
You are confusing the Product Safety Directive and the Toy Safety Directive .
It is therefore very odd when you say we need a bar code for particularly dangerous products .
Hopefully you do not mean that for toys !
Dangerous products have lost nothing in children 's hands !
We need the principle of prevention .
Nor are there any warning messages here about magnets .
What about warnings on toys that contain carcinogenic substances ?
In Europe we have polyaromatic hydrocarbons .
We shall be banning them in car tyres , but they are permitted in toys even though these are carcinogenic substances .
This debate is absurd because you are criss-crossing both Directives .
Please concentrate in your second answer on the Toy Safety Directive and answer the questions on when this Directive is finally to be submitted and when - as we proposed in our resolution - the legal loopholes are to be filled , and please do not continue to mix them both up .
Supervision is good ; laws are better .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , it is of course entirely unacceptable that children should be exposed to toys which pose risks to their health .
Pretty well all of us think that we can buy CE-labelled toys in the EU with peace of mind .
Anything else is unthinkable .
But in reality we involuntarily buy toys which contain carcinogens and lead .
It beggars belief that these substances are used in toys , which children often stuff into their mouths !
The safety of children demands immediate action by the Commission .
The profit interests of manufacturers , suppliers and importers must never take precedence over children 's health .
A single dangerous toy is one too many .
Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Kuneva for coming to the Chamber today , at our suggestion , and congratulate her for being very positive and strong in the action that she has taken .
Since we had the original debates back in September , she has been to China .
We have seen the results of that .
She has also been absolutely clear in stating that ' there can be no compromise on consumer safety ' .
We all firmly believe that to be the case .
Turning to the practical aspects , a number of colleagues have already made the point that this an extremely complex issue in which many players are involved .
I therefore welcome Commissioner Kuneva 's reassurance that she will be working with the Member States to reinforce their capacity to inspect , to test and also to stop dangerous consignments , which can be properly identified because flows of information have been established .
Let us be realistic .
We are dealing with a very large number of manufacturers and a very large number of products .
However , one of the last things we want to do is to demonise those toy manufacturers who are already doing an outstanding job and producing attractive , well-designed , good-value toys that are valued by consumers and their children across the European Union and which , as we all know , are very important in children 's development .
It is entirely wrong to single out the Chinese , as our colleague from Cyprus did in what was a very emotional and illiberal speech .
There are many other countries that are sourcing products .
The most important thing is to ensure quality of design from the outset , and that the engineers responsible work with their suppliers to see that all the controls are in place .
Believe me , there are many companies producing toys in China to outstanding quality standards .
We want everyone to do that and we want that to happen now .
This is because the key decisions being made now , before Christmas this year , concern the toys that will be in the hands of children next Christmas .
That is what we are talking about , that is why we are working ahead and that is why it was very important that the Commissioner was here tonight .
Mr President , the objective of tonight 's debate and the Commissioner 's statement must , of course , be to send a very strong signal to consumers and to China - and those who supply toys from other third countries - that we are determined to rid our markets of toxic toys .
We have seen that numerous toy recalls in the run-up to Christmas mean that we have to keep up pressure for action .
And I want to add , Commissioner , that in recent raids in my own region - in Manchester - over 20 000 illegal and counterfeit toys were seized , with a value of EUR 150 000 .
They were clearly destined to fill the gaps as a result of the toy recalls .
Therefore , we need the legitimate toy suppliers and manufacturers to meet the highest safety standards if children are not to be put at risk by dangerous counterfeit toys .
So , let me be clear , as chair of Parliament 's Consumer Protection Committee , what we are calling for you to do with our support , Commissioner .
We want an urgent review of Europe 's toy safety laws , to tackle the problems of new problems from third countries , Chinese imports and , of course , new and dangerous toy designs , such as magnets , which have emerged since the original directive of 1995 .
It is out of date , and it does need to be reviewed .
We need to fill that law with stronger , intelligence-led enforcement and surveillance , to make sure we crack down on poor producers .
Commissioner , I personally give you my support , and I will continue to do that , to go as far as banning dangerous toy imports from China if necessary .
But it has to be said that your action has got results ; we have now seen 93 bans from China itself and , since July , 184 more investigations , which means that we are seeing less dangerous toys leaving China 's borders .
We need to step up that action and give you support ; but importers , too , must bear the responsibility for the import of dangerous toy products , and I therefore welcome the supply chain review to close the gaps left by manufacturers .
Commissioner , we are not prepared to make any compromises on toy safety ; warnings may not be enough .
We can see , for example in the US , that we have bans for under-threes on some toys and we have warnings for over-six-year-olds ; they complain that they are importing our dangerous toys from the European market , so perhaps we need to follow the US model in this area .
So let us get swift and effective measures to restore the confidence of our consumers in the toy market .
I pledge , Commissioner , that my committee will work with you to achieve that .
( PL ) Mr President , in speaking in the debate on toy safety , I wish to draw attention to several more general matters .
Firstly , the liberalisation of trade carried out under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation , making the European market increasingly accessible , is not only bringing benefits to consumers in the form of lower prices for many goods , but is also bringing dangers , and an eloquent example of this is the matter of dangerous toys that we are discussing today .
Secondly , South-East Asian countries are competitive in the European market because they do not cover the full costs of manufacturing the products .
They often fail to bear environmental protection costs , costs linked to observing employee rights or costs linked to the safety of goods , to name but a few .
Thirdly , it is therefore necessary for consumer and competition protection institutions in EU countries to make use of the instruments they have available to them to react more rapidly and effectively to such situations and eliminate from the market not only hazardous products , but also their manufacturers or importers .
Fourthly , and finally , the European Union , in ongoing negotiations under WTO auspices concerning expansion of access to the European market , must demand of third countries that they observe the rules of fair competition , and particularly the inclusion in product prices of the full costs of manufacture , counted using European standards .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have already stated in committee that we appreciate your efforts and that we thank you for those efforts .
Nevertheless , some of these things highlight where something is in a bad state .
If you want to provide warnings about magnets , for example , this just shows that the Toy Safety Directive is not adequate .
The Toy Safety Directive is unfortunately based on the new approach .
The new approach implies that the equivalent standardisation committees are active .
Unfortunately , the standardisation committees have not been active regarding magnets , just as they have not been active as regards carcinogenic substances .
Only three carcinogenic substances are currently banned ; the rest are not .
We must check as a matter of urgency when we are revising the Toy Safety Directive whether this new approach really is the right way or whether it is not considerably more important for European legislators to lay down standards right now in the toy sector , because toys appeal mainly to children and children must be given special protection .
I appeal to you to check once again whether the new approach really is the right way here or whether we in fact need a different approach when revising the Toy Safety Directive .
I should also like to point out that we have underlined the responsibility of importers when revising the product package .
These importers must take their responsibilities seriously .
I hope that you and the Commission will also be supporting this in the trialogue .
Importers must be held responsible in the same way as manufacturers .
One final point : the Member States .
Here it can be shown that the Product Safety Directive has simply been too weak .
The Member States must be forced to monitor it and they must also be forced to actually phase out certain products .
Unfortunately , not all of them have actually been phased out .
( BG ) Mme Commissioner , There are several reasons for my question today .
The firt one is your answer during the discussion on this issue at IMCO Committee , which was too general , in my opinion .
The second one is the question in writing which I have already asked and I hope to receive an answer together with the other answers today .
And the third reason is the following : I would like to specially draw your attention to the Christensen Report adopted in 2005 on the integration of the new Member States in the consumer protection system supplementing the internal market regime in the European Community .
The report contains recommendations to the European Commission to draw special attention to the new Member States , which includes also my country .
I would like to express my personal opionion that , notwithstanding the efforts made by the Commission in this sphere , only three percent of the Bulgarian citizens feel protected as consumers .
Therefore my specific question goes as follows : what has the European Commission done to guarantee the safety of the Chinese toys distributed during the Christmas and New Year holidays on the markets of the new Member States , given their relatively weaker consumer protection system ?
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , without being dramatic , we are dealing with a problem that affects the whole of the Union .
To give just one example : every day 40 000 goods containers enter Spain ; many thousands of those containers carry toys .
We wonder whether the authorised economic operator system , which will be introduced from 1 January 2008 , will really facilitate effective measures to tackle the commercial actions that endanger children 's health , and which have been condemned so many times .
In its resolution of 26 September on the safety of products and especially toys , the European Parliament urged the Commission and the Member States to take measures to ensure that consumer goods sold do not pose a risk to health .
It is time to speed up the adoption of the necessary measures in order to implement the European Parliament resolution .
We need to improve the control and monitoring of the markets that we have mentioned .
At a time of globalisation , toys are not just another type of goods .
Without controls , we will see repeats of the incidents that have been repeatedly reported ; time and time again there is a relapse into commercial dumping , as well as a possibility of seriously affecting the health of consumers , especially children .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by responding to Ms Thyssen on what we are doing to enhance our positive influence on the Chinese market .
If we are to achieve success , Europe should develop its role as a standard-bearer , and that is exactly what we are trying to do .
RAPEX-China gives the Chinese authorities access to details of risks found in Chinese products sold in Europe , and this is a very valuable source of information for them .
China is currently setting up its own national rapid-warning system , copying the European one .
This really represents a great success for product safety at world level .
It ensures that information is spread swiftly to local offices for action , and this should start by the end of the year .
If this continues to develop as envisaged , Europe will be able to congratulate itself , by the end of the year , on a major success , as it has established the pattern for the Chinese authorities .
I would like also to highlight that next year will be a very intensive one for me in respect of elaborating a new memorandum of understanding with China , owing to the fact that the current memorandum , which has been in effect since 2006 , will expire at the beginning of 2009 .
This will be a matter for very concrete work by the Commission .
Many of you have referred to the Toys Directive .
I cannot comment on something which comes under the responsibility of Vice-President Verheugen , as the Toys Directive is part of his portfolio , although we enjoy excellent cooperation .
However , you should be aware that a revision of the Toys Directive is in the pipeline and will be presented very soon .
Before my meeting with you , I checked with the services of Commissioner Verheugen , and with him in person , and know that this directive will soon be discussed by the Commission .
I am sure that his services are working flat out .
There is no mixing of our two approaches - the industry approach , which includes the Toys Directive and the approach on which I base my activities , which includes a general product safety directive .
I can assure you that the distinction within the Commission is really very clear .
That is exactly what we are trying to do through the new approach - to keep these two sets of checks parallel to each other .
One set concerns requirements on toys as industrial goods , and the other one , over and above those efforts , concerns checks at any given point on how safe the toys are for our children .
One good example is the magnets used in toys .
These now come under the General Product Safety Directive , and we are able to carry out checks , ban dangerous products and ask for a new standard , with the toys in the mean time being covered by a warning , and then we will come up with a proposal .
There will most probably be standardisation , and a ban on certain uses for magnets .
This approach is based precisely on filling the gap on safety , through a true General Product Safety Directive .
This is an excellent example of why we need to keep the two approaches together .
I started to respond to Ms Rühle concerning magnets .
The College will consider my proposal to adopt a targeted measure to require specific warnings on magnetic toys , and this would fill the gap until the relevant standards properly address this risk .
As you know , this process is a little long , but that is not up to the Commission .
This is legislation which we are simply executing concerning the way we implement on our standards .
I would like to dwell for a second on the opinion expressed by Mr Matsakis .
My line is quite simple , because I believe that Mr Harbour answered in a very consistent manner .
I do not think that dangerous toys have a passport , and we should address the danger from wherever the danger comes .
Let me just remind you that although 50 % of the dangerous toys in Europe come from China , I am surprised that we have not discussed at all where the other 50 % comes from .
I have to tell you that 30 % of dangerous toys come precisely from Europe .
That is why I really insist on safety , regardless of passports .
We must consider again how important confidence is to our markets .
I am not going to outsource that responsibility .
Article 1 of the General Product Safety Directive states that all producers should only produce safe goods , and that whoever places a good on the market for the first time - be it the importer , the retailer or the producer - should check the safety of toys , for which he is liable .
With reference to Ms Iotova , I would like to answer in Bulgarian because it was in that language that she put her question .
( BG ) My answer was very specific according to the standards of the Commission .
What we have done over the last year is intended to improve legislation .
Yes , part of this legislation relates to industrial goods and it is within the portfolio of another Commissioner but we work together on a number of issues .
Some of the questions asked relate also to the REACH Directive that is not in my portfolio either but , again , we are doing what is necessary to ensure the safety on the basis of the existing legislation .
Many meetings have been held with all stakeholders in the process - manufacturers , competent national authorities , retailers , and numerous non-governmental organisations .
Besides , I would like to tell you that we make no judgments and do not divide countries into old and new Member States .
The safety of goods is equally important for new and old members alike . I would like to reassure you that there are some old Member States , prior to the accession of the twelve new countries , which have their serious problems and I have no intention to abandon them .
Of course , the responsibility of the Commission with regard to the implementation of the legislation , especially in the new Member States , is something which , undoubtedly , stands very close to my heart .
Therefore what I am doing in the new Member States is talk more to the authorities , insist more on a national budget for the development of market surveillance authorities .
I can tell you , Mme Iotova , that the Bulgarian market has 180 inspectors .
Yeasterday , actually it was earlier this morning , I had further talks with all participants in the safety chain and we concluded " the Christmas Pact ” , involving manufacturers at the European level , as well as traders and government authorities in Bulgaria .
After the insistent talks I had with the Ministry of the Economy in Bulgaria , inspections increased four times .
Therefore I shall continue to work along these lines and , as I had the pleasure of doing it last time , I would like to renew my invitation from this plenary hall to do it together .
I am confident that we shall be more successful in this way .
I would like to end where I started , which is to say that all our actions should be proportional and based on solidarity and subsidiarity , which will give us additional strength to tackle this very important problem .
I have listened carefully to all of you , to your kind words and to your calls to step up our work .
If at any point there are specific cases which you would like to discuss with me , I would be more than happy to continue doing this .
I should like to thank the Commissioner and all colleagues who spoke in that debate .
I wish to make one little observation : some years ago my elder daughter was given a present of a rubber doll made in China .
The head came off and inside was a little rubber knob to put the head on , and whoever made this toy had put a little face on it ; but it was not a smiley face , it was a very sad face , and whoever did this was trying to get some sort of message out about the conditions in which they working .
So I am glad to have this opportunity of making it public tonight .
The debate is closed .
European Contract Law ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on a common frame of reference for European contract law by Mr Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs - B6-0386 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is no secret that we have already failed once with just such an ambitious and necessary project : a European Civil Code .
This is also most certainly connected with the fact that some legal systems here in the European Union have difficulty with written law .
It is also most certainly connected with some others having difficulty with the idea that substantive rules on related themes are combined to some degree and administered conclusively and comprehensively enough and that ground rules are set outside the parentheses .
The difficulties are also related to the fact that we in the European Union have common roots , yet these go way back , some having developed differently , some being buried and some being sacrificed to an arbitrary interpretation for the sake of the politics of the day .
As the first President of the Federal Republic of Germany , Theodor Heuss , so aptly put it in 1956 - and please note that he was a Liberal - Europe is built on three hills : Golgotha , the Acropolis in Athens and the Capitol in Rome .
The Acropolis is the symbol here for Greek scholarship , which with its great philosophers and political thinkers established the core of our democracies and state-building .
Golgotha stands for Europe 's social and moral values , spreading widely across every area of our lives , from an understanding of family to human rights .
The Capitol typifies Roman law , which helps us on the way to the rule of law and a sense of justice .
As stated , however , our legal practices , while originating from the same roots , have grown apart - often so far apart that these roots are no longer recognisable .
The sole foundation of this European Union appears to be the internal market .
Some would say that all legal traditions of the nation states can continue to exist .
However , this is far removed from any reality and also incidentally from any experience of life , when we live in an increasingly smaller , faster moving and more communicative world .
The better we spell out the four Gospels of the Internal Market - the free movement of people , goods , capital and services - the more perfectly we can express them democratically and against a background of European moral concepts , and the clearer it becomes that all this is of no value if we cannot put its form on the test bench of the rule of law and justice , between individuals themselves as well as between individuals and state control .
We have already failed once , when the Iron Curtain fell in Europe and countries were asking : do you have a law for us ?
Perhaps this was understandable against a background of belief that any ramification of national legal traditions could survive , at any rate in a Union only able to negotiate unanimously .
We must not fail a second time , however .
This is perhaps the most serious challenge alongside the issue of language .
The clearer we are in spelling out our internal market , the clearer the basic need for the unity of the law , not just vertically , but also horizontally over the entire geography of the continent .
We have moved forward .
We already have competition now in the legal systems .
It would be good , and we would have enough time , if this were not the external reality .
Conflict among Europeans can benefit only those who are powerful and already have redundant legal systems .
We are not a family with brothers and sisters who quarrel with one another so that sparks fly , but are united in the face of outside challenges .
We do not allow ourselves to be fazed by outside challenges .
Oblivious to the world - self-obsessed .
People 's desire for unity is therefore there , even though it subsequently creates a problem in individual regulations .
Fears are created on the basis of the powers of national policies to cultivate doctrines of self-interest - a strategy that threatens the collapse of the historical dimensions on a continental scale .
We have to come to an agreement because otherwise we ourselves will ultimately not hold on to anything .
Since the grand plan has not succeeded , we need to agree on what is possible .
The toolbox is therefore good , the reference framework is therefore good , and so it is good to sort out what is possible and a little bit more perhaps as well .
The European Parliament is therefore largely in agreement and has also repeatedly expressed this in its resolutions .
We therefore want to know from the Commission how ambitious it is in wanting to tackle this aim .
This is why we are asking questions the way we have .
The Continent and its people require a uniform rule of law , at least in the form ... at any rate in what the legal practitioner calls the general part .
We can build on this ; we need justice in terms of a balanced compromise of legitimate interests , we need speed , law in the public domain and law intelligible to everyone .
Even if it is only contract law that is up for debate today , the need for action in other fields is evident : family law , inheritance law , administrative law - yes , even criminal law .
It is the method that is on the test bench in what the Commission is now starting .
The method will essentially be the determining factor when answering the question of how much , how quickly and how well we are able to react to the obvious challenges .
Many of us throughout the world are waiting for a successful example and many are simply expecting us to fail .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it comes as no surprise that this question attracts such attention , because this is a really pivotal and very important issue .
The Commission , as a whole , welcomes wholeheartedly the interest that Parliament is taking in the Common Frame of Reference ( CFR ) .
In its second progress report , the Commission announced that , after the academic CFR has been provided by the researchers , the Commission will carefully select the parts of this draft that correspond to the common legislative objectives .
As we know from the decision , this academic CFR is due by the end of this year .
The selection process will be done in consultation with the other institutions , including Parliament and stakeholders , and I think that Parliament , which has many experts here , will play an important role as usual .
The Commission has not yet decided how to proceed in selecting those parts of the academic CFR which will be incorporated into the final Commission CFR , as this decision also depends on the content of the draft CFR that the researchers will deliver .
Also , the Commission has not yet decided which topics of the EU contract law acquis the CFR should cover .
In adopting this decision , the Commission will also take into account the content of the academic CFR - which we have not had so far - the outcome of the new CFR workshops , and the position of Parliament and the Council .
The Commission has , however , clearly stated several times that the CFR will not be a large-scale harmonisation of private law or a European civil code .
The future framework directive , as a result of the review of the consumer contract law acquis , is not dependent on the outcome of the CFR , which is a longer-term project and run separately .
The Commission will ensure that the parts of the research draft selected for the CFR - and possibly modified - are coherent with each other and with the future framework directive .
All this preparatory work will be carried out by all the Commission directorates-general involved , in close coordination .
In respect of consumer issues , my services have already carried out the respective workshops and analysed the outcome .
The results already serve as a starting point for the review of the consumer contract law acquis , and it was very helpful .
My fellow Commissioner , Mr McCreevy , recently held two workshops on information requirements in financial services legislation and on unfair competition rules for business-to-business ( ' B-to-B ' ) contracts .
Concerning general contract law , the services of Vice-President Frattini plan to organise several workshops during next year .
The Commission fully understands that Parliament wants to be kept informed of , and involved in , the ongoing work on the CFR .
We welcome Parliament 's involvement in the CFR process .
In addition to the consultation which I mentioned earlier , the Commission will continue to keep Parliament informed of developments in the most appropriate way , in particular through the Parliament working group dedicated to the CFR .
I would like to conclude by thanking Parliament for its support of the Commission 's work on this important dossier .
I know that one of the major events in 2006 - if I am not mistaken - took place in Vienna , and the outcome of that conference was very inspiring for our work .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank you most sincerely for your commitment to this matter .
It has brought with it great progress in the development of this project in past months .
I should say at this juncture that I regard this project as the most important in the entire legislative term , although it is actually a pre-legislative rather than a legislative project .
Of course , we as Parliament do have an enormous interest - and this is also the key reason why this oral question was tabled again today - in the fact that we are very consciously keeping up the suspense and keeping the discussion going not only at the level of the working group we have set up and at committee level , but also here with you in plenary .
It is therefore also important that we have put this on the agenda today .
We also want to find something out from you - you are still not able to say much about the definite schedule - because from Parliament 's point of view it is also significant , of course , in view of the upcoming elections in 2009 , for our strategy as to how we continue to deal with the Frame of Reference .
Over the coming year there will be a preliminary draft , but there will not be a final text until April 2009 .
In any case it will be so late that it will presumably no longer be possible to deal with the content in depth in this legislative term and the next Parliament will therefore have to do so in the next term of office .
I wish to emphasise very clearly once again that we think the Frame of Reference , if it is adopted by the Commission and inserted into the consultation document , must not to refer to subjects of contract law alone , and Parliament has continually made it clear by an outsize majority that this must go beyond the framework of pure contract law in order to have the desired effect .
We also want specifically to be able to consider the option of whether we can subsequently solve the many problems we have in the internal market in the shape of an optional instrument for cross-border businesses .
At the moment we have a situation in which we are having to live in a happy coexistence of the country of origin principle and country of destination principle alongside the many directives and European legislative decisions with up to 28 legal systems , all of which have also to be simultaneously applied - depending on the circumstances .
This is not right in practice because nobody - no solicitor , judge or barrister - is in a position to know 28 European legal systems .
Against this background one optional instrument could be an instrument that actually opens up the internal market , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as for the consumer , and throws open every kind of possibility in the internal market .
All the activities of the Commission and Parliament should be aimed at keeping this option open so that a final decision can be made on this in the next legislative term .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the fact that we are here , at this late hour , discussing the common frame of reference , is an indication that at least those of us who are here have a strong interest in this issue , and the Commissioner herself has indicated the interest that she and other Commissioners have in the matter .
I think , as we all do , that the procedure being adopted by the Commission is the correct one .
Before launching into a codification project , it is important that we understand its elements from an academic point of view , and we think that the initiative is a magnificent one : not just launching into legislative proposals without having considered them first .
I think that the result could be quite good .
With regard to the second phase , however , with which we are concerned , as some MEPs are working on or taking part in the parliamentary group that is monitoring the common frame of reference , what we are finding is that apparently so much material has now been accumulated that selection seems to be difficult .
My fellow Member , Mr Lehne , referred to the temporary framework ; in other words , although the codification project is a long-term project , it is nevertheless helpful for us to at least start to look at the guidelines for the project .
The idea of a framework directive on this issue seems to be a good starting point .
In any case , it is clear that what we have done in recent years towards harmonisation through procedures , legislation and the recognition and enforcement of sentences is useful , but does have huge limitations .
European law in general and contractual law in particular can only be developed by establishing certain principles .
I think that Parliament as an institution could be a magnificent instrument for the Commission to use , because the different legal systems and different national legislations are represented here , and it could be an excellent framework of reference in order to see the extent to which the harmonising proposals are ultimately going to clash with the national legal systems .
The harmonisation of the European Union is quite difficult for reasons that we are all aware of , but the correct procedure is the one undertaken by the Commission , with this initial academic phase and a second legislative phase .
What we are saying to the Commission at the moment is that , in Parliament , we feel a certain amount of time pressure , because European integration is already happening : European citizens are facing practical problems every day that can only be resolved through legal harmonisation .
These practical problems were considered by the Commissioner herself when she presented her proposals for the harmonisation of contractual law on consumer protection , which is just one of the aspects , but quite an important one , because , in short , in the European Union we are all consumers and to some extent it is an excellent principle for taking action .
I do not think that it is a question of creating a common frame of reference that is purely theoretical .
As far as possible , specifics are the most useful thing .
My fellow Member Mr Lehne referred to establishing some type of optional document .
The model would be something like the United States Uniform Commercial Code , which has been described as the least uniform code of all , giving the least possibility of unification .
This is a possibility , but perhaps the most important thing may be to see which principles can be recognised by all the legal systems , and we will really only have this information once we have studied and taken into account what the academics give us .
Therefore , Commissioner , I think that Parliament will be a good collaborator in the subsequent development of this legislation and here we already have a degree of impatience to get to work , so that , in the year and a half that remains of the legislature , we can contribute positively to the development of this legislation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her answer , and indeed for her commitment to this subject , which has been mentioned by other colleagues .
However , I have to express a little surprise .
This morning and yesterday evening I was in Munster , at the University of Munster , on the occasion of the presentation of an honorary degree to the President of the Court of Justice .
Taking place at the same time was a meeting of the acquis group on the common frame of reference .
They told me that they were discussing , amongst other things , those bits of the academic Common Frame of Reference ( CFR ) that might be used by your services .
So this exchange is already going on , and I would point out that , clearly , Parliament wants to know what is happening at any moment , so that it can see how the process is developing .
The Commissioner will know how keen this Parliament is on this whole issue , and how much it has tried to champion it .
Indeed , the Committee to which I and my colleagues belong will , in the new year , be hosting a reception with the Slovene Presidency to celebrate the arrival of the academic CFR .
So we really want to make something of this and continue the work .
But we need to be included along the way .
We have felt for a long time that this is an essential part of the whole better legislation agenda .
I do not know how many times I have risen , in relation to this , to talk about coherence .
We know that the CFR is almost there , is almost usable , and yet still we are proceeding with various bits of legislation that contain contract law , without looking at some of the basic ground rules which we are already beginning to formulate in the CFR .
We are looking at the consumer acquis review , and separately we are looking at time share .
There are other colleagues dealing with payments or with issues to do with passenger transport .
We have a tremendous tool here in the making .
We need it , and we need it urgently .
We accept and are grateful for the work the Commission as a whole has done in trying to get this matter dealt with in all the different directorates-general .
That is good news .
I can only finish with the plea that I have already made , Commissioner , which is to please keep us involved .
We know there is ongoing work .
We can be at your side .
We know this is a difficult issue vis-à-vis the Council .
Please use our voices along with your own in order to give this project as much push and drive as it deserves in order to best serve our citizens through the internal market .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is not just a courtesy : it is always a great pleasure to listen to such distinguished lawyers talking about one of the most important things to have happened in recent years in the area of civil law .
However , I know that you want me to be as practical as possible .
So let me just tell you that in 2008 the Commission needs to decide on the scope - in respect of the time schedule , content and form - of the CFR , and how to carry out the above work in terms of methodology , human and financial resources and distribution of work amongst the DGs concerned : Justice , Freedom and Security , the Internal Market and Services , Enterprise and Industry , the Secretary-General , and Health and Consumer Protection .
A meeting of director-generals or their representatives will take place on the 11 December - which means tomorrow - and the intention is to prepare a college decision in 2008 on the scope , contents and form of the CFR .
As you know , and I kept you informed , I asked the College of Commissioners about the CFR and sent them a note on the subject this year .
On optional instruments , the Commission has announced in the single market review that it will look at the merits of such an initiative in the area of financial services , and I think that this is a good sign .
All of you referred to the framework directive relating to the consumer acquis .
I believe that this is a very good exercise and , whatever we are doing with consumer credit or with the timeshare , we are trying to avoid this concentration on the horizontal instrument because I believe that we currently need a discussion on the timeshare in Parliament .
But we need to define the framework scope , and I believe that we will have an excellent test of how united we are when we harmonise the main pillars of contract law as a backbone during the framework directive .
I will , of course , gladly undertake to keep you personally informed of what is going on in this very important field .
I have received , in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , a motion for a resolution to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 12 December 2007 .
Tenth Anniversary of the Mine Ban Treaty ( Ottawa Convention ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the tenth anniversary of the Mine Ban Treaty ( Ottawa Convention ) .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for the opportunity to discuss this very important issue and to comment briefly on the motion for a resolution on a mine-free world , which we received today .
Ten years after the approval of the Ottawa Convention we can celebrate considerable progress in the achievement of its objectives .
One hundred and fifty-six states have ratified the Convention , and the use of anti-personnel landmines has been markedly reduced in recent years .
Fewer mines are being produced and there is virtually no trade in this hazardous weapon .
Since the adoption of the Ottawa Convention in 1997 , the European Community has been highly committed to its universalisation and to the achievement of its objectives .
Mine action has been part of the European Community 's assistance and development programmes in third countries , which have covered a wide range of activities - stockpile destruction , mine risk education , mine victim assistance , rehabilitation and socioeconomic reintegration .
A dedicated budget line , complemented by funding from other geographic instruments , underpinned the EC Mine Action Strategy and Programming .
In total , approximately EUR 275 million was committed over the 2002-2007 period , making the EC one of the leading donors worldwide .
As Parliament has noted in its resolution , the EC Mine Action Strategy comes to an end this year .
An evaluation will be carried out to assess whether it responded adequately to the Nairobi Action Plan .
A preliminary internal analysis shows positive outcomes .
With the changes in the Commission external funding mechanisms in 2007 , the anti-personnel landmine budget line has been replaced by new instruments for EC external assistance which can be used for funding appropriate mine actions .
Geographical budgets for development , pre-accession and the Neighbourhood Policy are now the key financial instruments .
In urgent cases , action in the area of anti-personnel landmines and explosive remnants of war can also be funded by the humanitarian aid budget and the new Instrument for Stability , which allow for funds to be mobilised rapidly in cases of crisis or emerging crisis .
This is the new legislative environment , agreed by the budgetary authority , in which we must operate .
The EC 's overall approach , however , remains unchanged : landmines and other explosive remnants of war must be considered within a broad context of humanitarian assistance , long-term and sustainable socioeconomic development programmes .
Countries wanting assistance need to prioritise mine action in their requests to the European Commission .
We fully share Parliament 's concern , also expressed in its comments on the Instrument for Stability strategy , that a security gap in this important humanitarian field has to be avoided .
Although means and methods have changed , the EC 's commitment to the Ottawa Convention continues .
In 2007 , the European Community committed assistance for mine action for a total of at least EUR 33 million in the following countries : Belarus , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Cambodia , Cyprus , Ethiopia , Guinea-Bissau , Jordan , Lebanon , Senegal and Sudan .
I want to assure Parliament that the Commission remains firmly engaged in continuing its support for the implementation of the Ottawa Convention and its assistance to third countries in destroying stockpiled anti-personnel mines , clearing mined areas and assisting victims .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the Commissioner for the comprehensive and exhaustive speech she made , effectively explaining what has already happened in this area .
This is a subject , however , that I believe should continue to engage us and others - as the Commissioner has already said , and I have noted it - because the numbers are terrifying .
Earlier we were given figures for the safety of hotels and other types of safety and , though every human life is very important , these were quite low numbers .
Here we are talking about a very different situation : 10 000 to 20 000 people affected each year .
There are probably more than half a million people who have been maimed in countries outside the EU , and therefore this is a very topical matter and it is no accident , in fact , that it is being discussed ten years on from the Ottawa Convention , but that in this Chamber it is being dealt with again after only two years .
We dealt with it in a resolution in 2005 and we are discussing it again now .
We are discussing it again now because there is a danger that people will stop talking about it .
The Commissioner - and once again , I thank her for what she said - highlighted a few channels for finance with which we can continue to fight anti-personnel mines , and I mean specifically anti-personnel mines .
I believe , however , that there much more should be done .
Too many of the world 's countries have not yet signed the Ottawa Convention , too many countries still have arsenals of these implements of war , too many countries and too much land are still covered with these mines and therefore we need to take mine clearance very seriously .
I should mention , to add to what the Commissioner said , that 34 % - those are the data , but it remains to be seen whether the statistics are realistic or not - anyway , in principle 34 % of victims of anti-personnel mines left in land where wars have been fought are children , making this matter even more serious .
I therefore believe , Commissioner , that we should not only continue with the programme , but that it should be financed better and for longer .
The Commission has already done a great deal ; the European Union has already done a great deal : 335 million over the last ten years , 33 million in 2007 alone ; however , I think that the Council , the Commission and the Member States should call a meeting to review the Ottawa Convention and should do more to ensure all the countries in the world act on this matter and to bring about mine clearance and the total abolition of anti-personnel mines in the immediate future , as quickly as possible .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) The Ottawa Convention was the result of a global and effective effort for a just cause which united and continues to unite governments , public opinion and non-governmental organisations .
Even some States not party to the Convention , and unfortunately there are still 37 , have already partially complied with the Convention .
This instrument therefore acts as a barometer for measuring the degree of participation of countries in the global community of values .
As the Commissioner said , it is worth remembering what has already been achieved .
Over a period of 10 years the States Parties to the Ottawa Convention have already destroyed more than 41 million mines .
Last year alone , Serbia , Montenegro , Angola , Cyprus , Cape Verde and Latvia fulfilled their obligations and got rid of their mine arsenals .
Thirty-eight out of fifty mine-producing countries ceased production , including four States not party to the Convention : Egypt , Finland , Poland and Israel .
However , the celebration of the Convention 's 10 years of achievements should also be the occasion to highlight how much there is still to do .
Ten States Parties have still not completely destroyed their arsenals which total 14 million mines .
Two of the ten States Parties have significant arsenals of anti-personnel mines and do not envisage any measures for their destruction : they are Ethiopia and Iraq .
The overwhelming majority of mines , however , are in the hands of States not party to the Convention .
China alone still retains an arsenal of 110 million of these inhuman weapons , whilst at the same time continuing production .
Even more shocking , perhaps because it is an ally of ours , alongside which European armies are fighting on fronts such as Afghanistan , the USA , another State not party to the Convention , not only continues to maintain an arsenal of more than 10 million mines , but also , last year , the Pentagon requested new financing for two new types of mines incompatible with the Convention .
It is to be hoped that the efforts of the American Congress will once more curb the generosity of the White House as regards the new toys of war .
The European Union still has its own glass houses with Finland and Poland continuing to refuse to ratify the Convention .
That should not , however , stand in the way of Europe fighting for as broad an interpretation as possible of what constitutes an anti-personnel mine .
It is scandalous to see how some in this Parliament insist on drawing distinctions based on the formal military definition of the device rather than on the nature of the damage it causes .
A civilian blown up after activating an anti-vehicle mine is hardly going to be interested in the complexities of the technical terminology .
Colonel Gaddafi , on his website and in the full-page advert he placed in the Portuguese press in the final days of the EU-Africa Summit , attacked the Ottawa Convention and defended anti-personnel mines as the weapons of the poor .
There are some in this House who , like that criminal madman , want to interpret the Convention in such a way as to allow rich countries to develop and use more sophisticated versions of mines to meet a supposed military need .
Finally , Mr President , faced with such obscene positions , the objective of the European Union should be simple : a world free of mines , all kinds of mines , and no more civilian victims of mines .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Ottawa Convention on banning mines has been very successful in saving thousands of lives and in preventing thousands of people from becoming severely wounded .
Unfortunately , however , there is still a lot to be done and a long way to go in order to achieve a more drastic reduction in the manufacture and use of mines .
So , as we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Ottawa Convention , we must turn our attention to how to achieve the signing and ratification of this treaty by all states in the world .
My opinion is that we should proceed as follows . Firstly , we must produce a much-publicised name-and-shame blacklist of all countries that have not signed and have not ratified the Convention .
This concerns 31 countries to date , amongst them , unfortunately , the biggest countries in the world , i.e. China , India , Russia , the USA and others .

Secondly , we must try to impose strict and effective sanctions on the countries on this list so as to attempt , at least , to force them into signing .
Thirdly , we must set up a very effective and quick mine-clearing service which would be available on request to states that are not capable , i.e. for reasons of cost or lack of expertise , of dealing with such a problem on their own .
Consequently , we must invest more in research on how to carry out demining more efficiently .
Fourthly , we must make sure the obligation to deal adequately with the health and social assistance to victims of landmines is fulfilled by all countries concerned .
To this end , a more sufficient funding system must be made available to poorer nations .
Fifthly , the time has come to direct our attention , not just to anti-personnel mines but to all mines , as well as to other types of weapons that have the capacity to go on killing after a conflict has finished , an example being cluster bombs .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Commissioner , I too would like to recognise the achievements of the Ottawa Convention .
I would also like to praise the European Union 's considerable achievements in supporting the Convention .
There are a few problems , however .
In their defence strategies , Pakistan , India and China still insist on retaining anti-personnel mines .
Unfortunately , in the EU Member State of Finland , this issue is being reviewed , with an attempt to debate the possibility of replacing anti-personnel mines with cluster bombs , which would not be acceptable to the European Union .
As is well known , the United States and Russia are developing a new alternative to the Convention : controlled and self-destructing mines .
The question therefore arises : How should the EU Member States and the Ottawa Convention act now ?
These countries could possibly be encouraged to acquire next-generation , more humane anti-personnel mines .
I therefore call upon the European Union to immediately prepare its position with regard to the wish of the United States and Russia to develop these new-generation anti-personnel mines and to take action against it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is the actual point of this debate today ?
On Friday we as Parliament want to adopt a resolution in which we firstly point out that we have recognised the 10th anniversary of the Ottawa Convention here with an exhibition in Strasbourg , but in which we also very clearly state that it is not enough to outlaw anti-personnel mines , but that anti-vehicle mines also have to be included .
The 10 years in which the Ottawa Convention has been in existence are so important because for the first time it was a civil society law suit that led to an international ban on a weapon of mass destruction , namely the anti-personnel mine .
It is very revealing that the only group not to support this consensus in Parliament disappeared after Mr Zappalà 's speech .
The point is that I wanted to ask Mr Zappalà - in view of the fact that in 2005 , for example , 100 accidents took place with anti-vehicle mines in Afghanistan alone - whether he had ever looked a crippled child blown up in a school bus in the eye and given a reason why he thought anti-personnel mines were bad , yet anti-vehicle mines were good .
The point is that I would like to know from him and his group whether they have just once looked soldiers who are now crippled in the eye , or the relatives of the dead who were crippled and murdered by anti-vehicle mines , and how they justify that .
There is no difference between good and bad mines , but there is a need to ban anti-vehicle mines internationally as well .
I should like to say something else on the issue of funding .
The Instrument for Stability is necessary and helpful , of course - and I , too , continue to do what I can to ensure this as rapporteur - in carrying out mine-clearing work in short-term measures .
We also know , however , that a short-term measure , a strategy for clearing our world of mines , is not sufficient .
With 2009 fast approaching , we are therefore pleading that we again discuss the adoption of an independent budget line .
If we are talking about humanity here , then we need clear resolutions .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Ottawa Convention is a success thanks to the upward pressure from social movements .
It was not governments that started it , but the anti-land mine movement .
In the meantime 156 countries have signed it , as have 30 armed non-state actors , interestingly enough . The problem is that it does not cover anti-tank mines .
These anti-tank mines must also be banned , because trucks , buses , etc. are also affected .
Exports must be stopped so that further exports across other countries are no longer possible .
The point is also that other mines associated with land mines must likewise be banned .
Jean-Claude Juncker pinpointed it beautifully in 2004 .
He said that a ban on cluster bombs would be the logical extension of the ban on land mines .
I must state very clearly that EU defence procurement groups are producing land mines .
I refer to the German firms Diehl , Rheinmetall and EADS .
There must finally be an end to these brutal murder weapons , land mines , not just here in the European Union , but throughout the world .
Mr President , I am delighted to see Commissioner Kuneva here this evening .
I have literally just got off a plane and I was not expecting to speak , but I am delighted to have the opportunity .
I am probably one of the few people in Parliament who was actually at the signing of the Ottawa Convention 10 years ago .
The campaign against anti-personnel landmines is something that I have been very heavily involved in over many years . So I very much welcome this debate .
I think it is very important that we keep our minds on the real problem .
When we were all at Ottawa 10 years ago , we hoped that this would be a problem that we would really eradicate over the coming 10 years .
Well here we are , 10 years on , and we are still saying more or less the same things that we said 10 years ago , which I think is a great pity .
We have got to get the thing into perspective .
We managed to have that ban on anti-personnel landmines because responsible armed forces recognised that they could take this particular weapon out of their armouries and they were fully behind it .
We have got to be very careful that we keep our armed forces on board in these debates , so trying to widen the ban into all these other areas is sometimes unhelpful - when we talk about anti-tank mines , for example .
These are weapons which we still need , to be used by responsible armed forces in our democracies . We should always point the finger at the real culprits .
The real culprits are what some people politely term ' armed non-state actors ' . These are actually insurgents and terrorists and these are the people who are making greatest use of these weapons around the world .
If we look at the problem in Afghanistan at this moment : the anti-personnel landmines which are still being laid are being laid by the Taliban in Afghanistan .
These are the people who are causing these problems at the moment .
So we need to direct our attention in the right sort of way .
I very much welcome the debate .
I would like to think that we are putting the right resources into overcoming this problem , and that has my full backing .

( NL ) Mr President , sometimes it is a shame that there is no open debate , then I could reply to Mr Van Orden , but I shall not do so .
The worldwide campaign against landmines could be seen as a great success .
Thousands of square kilometres of land are now free of landmines thanks to the work of people taking great risks in Bosnia , Angola and many other countries .
However , 10 years after the Ottawa Convention , there is still no reason to be cheerful .
Although 156 countries have signed the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use , Stockpiling , Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction , and there has been a decrease - a drastic decrease - in trade , there is still investment in the production of landmines , including by financial institutions in Europe .
Dutch and other banks and pension funds are guilty of this .
It is good to point out to these institutions the consequences of their investment in landmines .
After all , since 1975 , landmines have been responsible for one million deaths .
They claim tens of thousands of lives each year .
During this debate they will claim at least three lives , 70 per day .
Landmines have made 200 000 square kilometres of land inaccessible , and there are still 250 million of them in circulation .
The governments of Burma and Russia still lay mines , and that , Mr Van Orden , is rather different from ' terrorist clubs ' , but then again ... the Russian Government ...
There are still 13 countries in the world that either produce them or reserve the right to do so again in future .
In the US , companies such as Alliant Techsystems and Textron continue to produce mines undisturbed , with orders from the US Government .
Mr President , Commissioner Kuneva , investment in landmines is banned in Belgium , but companies are active in the rest of Europe ; one Member referred to Rheinmetall and Thales .
This activity has to stop , and that is exactly what our resolution is calling for , or rather is calling for again , as the European Parliament made the same demand back in July 2005 .
The EU Member States must agree together that there should be not one European company or financial institution still investing in companies that develop and produce landmines in the future .
The same must happen in the case of cluster bombs and anti-vehicle mines , which explode as soon as someone comes into the vicinity .
The arms industry is not influenced by ethical arguments .
The threat of an investment ban has the potential to help .
Let the EU take this initiative and make an exception to the rule that politics does not interfere in the investment policy of trade and industry .
In respect of matters that are banned under international treaties , political intervention is a moral and political obligation - and this should be incorporated into European and national legislation , in the interests of a world without landmines and without anti-vehicle mines , as Mrs Beer quite rightly said .
We should like to hear your opinion on this , Commissioner Kuneva .
The European Commission needs to show initiative in this field at long last .
Finally , it needs to do more in the way of mine-clearance effort .
We have the money , we have the know-how , but the European effort is lagging behind .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , success has been achieved in the last 10 years , as many of you mentioned , but it is clear that significant challenges still lie ahead .
Every year , landmines still leave thousands of civilians dead and thousands more with missing limbs , and they contribute to keeping countries in post-conflict poverty .
This is why we will continue to pursue action in support of the Ottawa Convention .
The European Commission is determined to continue its efforts to financially assist communities and individuals affected by landmines , through all available instruments .
Mr President , may I note with regret that , in this debate , as indeed in the previous debates , i.e. in the dangerous toys debate and in the fire safety debate , there has been no representative of the Council in this Chamber .
I think that this is shameful .
We will pass it on to the Council .
The debate is closed .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 10.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
Proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 21 / 2004 as regards the date of introduction of electronic identification for ovine and caprine animals - C6-0448 / 2007 -
( DE ) Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development discussed this yesterday evening and voted in favour of urgent procedure .
I therefore commend its decision to the House .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Commission legislative and work programme for 2008 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Economic Partnership Agreements ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Common organisation of the market in wine ( debate )
The next item is the report by Giuseppe Castiglione , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in wine and amending certain Regulations - C6-0254 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a few comments about the reform of our wine sector .
I would like to offer my particular thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , for his remarkable hard work in bringing this draft together .
Parliament has made a valuable contribution to a debate which , I must say , has at certain times been very emotionally charged .
I am ready to follow your suggestions in a number of areas , at least to some extent .
For example , with regard to the grubbing-up scheme , I see some advantages in reducing the five years to three years as suggested in the report .
I have also listened to your concerns about channelling some spending on wine through the rural development budget .
But let me remind you that all the money from the wine budget will be allocated specifically for the wine regions .
Nevertheless , I will be willing to propose a lower transfer of spending into the rural development budget .
There are three big issues where the Commission , the Presidency and most Member States still have to find a consensus in the final sprint to get reform finalised this month .
The first issue is the national envelopes .
There was always going to be a debate about exactly what measures should be allowed in this envelope , that is to say , which menu we should put into the envelope .
I am prepared to be a bit flexible here .
For example , I am open to putting into the envelope certain ideas concerning innovation and the restructuring of wine sellers , but I think we still need to keep a clear demarcation line between what is possible within the national envelopes and what is possible within rural development policy , to avoid a situation where you can actually finance an investment from both sides , what is called the ' double guichet ' .
On the other hand , the national envelopes are no place for permanent crisis distillation measures .
Support for crisis distillation holds back competitiveness and we must abolish it completely and not try to reintroduce it through the back door .
Also there is no possibility of reopening a general discussion on how large the envelopes of the different Member States should be .
If we reopen this debate - a Pandora 's box - I can guarantee that there would be no agreement at the end of this year .
I can foresee a very long and very difficult discussion if this is going to take place .
The second big issue is capitalisation .
There has been a huge row about this and I have not simply blocked my ears to this discussion .
Nevertheless , the status quo does hold a genuine problem to be solved .
Aid for enrichment with must cannot continue at the same level in this manner .
It is an old-fashioned , inefficient , ineffective , costly and trade-distorting support and , this being said , I clearly understand the importance of keeping the balance between enrichment with sugar and must in order to arrive at a compromise supported by the wine producers in both the southern and northern parts of Europe .
We will find a way through this .
I have listened to the broad call for continuing to allow enrichment with sugar , but - let us be clear - I am not inclined to accept the status quo , so any compromise would imply new conditions .
The third big issue is the discussion on the end of the planting rights system .
I am listening to arguments about when the system could come to an end , but we cannot afford to kick the whole idea into the long grass .
The wine sector clearly needs more freedom to respond to demand as soon as possible , so my suggestion of prolonging the system of planting rights until the end of 2013 was based on the clear idea of a two-stage approach to balancing the sector - first grubbing-up to bring down the production , and then liberalisation to give the successful producers the freedom to expand .
I have listened to the comments from the sector but one thing is clear - the final date for the planting rights system is indispensable .
What that exact date will be , will be part of the final compromise .
So overall , I have been listening to arguments from all the different sides , including all the arguments from the European Parliament , but one iron fact has not changed : our wine sector still needs reform if we want to keep it at the front of the pack .
We have to seize the chance now and agree on a real reform .
Carrying out reform will mean that we have to invest effort , but I am quite sure that we will get a good return .
The cost of inaction is too high for us to accept , and I hope that we can agree on this point .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner for her cooperation with Parliament during this lengthy process .
I also thank her for her appreciation of the European Parliament 's work , a significant and interesting job of work involving a major input from the Committee on Agriculture , but also from the entire House and all colleagues .
Thank you , Commissioner , for having proposed a very ambitious reform , one whose aims we cannot fail to endorse .
Consumption is falling and imports are rising , all of which means that a radical form is vital .
Our wine-growing sector needs a fresh start : new life blood , new energy and new proposals .
You are right when you say that if we wish to remain competitive , if we wish to remain world leaders in the sector , we need to invest in the wine sector .
We have to keep an eye on the market , we have to produce for the market , and we have to penetrate the market with top-quality products .
For this reason , Commissioner , I have attempted - along with my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and the European Parliament , whom I would thank once again - to envisage in the report a comprehensive , coherent reform which is above all transparent .
The system must be capable of meeting our producers ' needs , of supplying the wherewithal for them to be competitive and successful .
All in all , we have sought to draw up a text providing suitable responses to common requirements , but also to respect , stimulate and in some case settle differences between the different national settings .
I have just one preliminary remark : we need a radical change of mind-set , of production strategy .
We must break away from the logic of quantity and instead pursue quality production - excellence - in a way that celebrates the specific national , regional and local characteristics of European wine-growing .
That is why , Commissioner , we agree to the abolition of market mechanisms which have proved inefficient , which are ineffective and have merely added to surplus , poor-quality production .
I would give only one example : crisis distillation , which has now become a routine structural measure and is no longer a means of responding to emergency situations .
EUR 500 million per year for distillation had become untenable .
We therefore support a more efficient use of economic resources : for national development programmes and for the implementation of measures better tailored to the specific needs of each producer country .
For this reason , Commissioner , we saw fit in the report to extend the list of available measures : we decided to include restructuring of the sector , research , innovation and qualitative improvements .
All these actions will encourage that entrepreneurial creativity so badly needed by our wines .
It is crucial in the same vein to encourage promotion campaigns , not only on international markets but also on domestic markets .
We have said so before , and this fact also emerged from the analysis conducted by the Committee on Agriculture .
It is absurd to think we can compete beyond our borders if we cannot be at the front of the pack at home , if we cannot convince our fellow citizens of the quality of the wines we produce .
That is why the report advocates a harmonised system of protection for designations of origin and geographical indications , clear and transparent labelling , and positively identified oenological practices .
Only then will consumers , who are central here , have faith in what they buy .
It is thus essential , Commissioner , for designations of origin and geographical indications , which embody the quality of European wine-growing , to be well protected .
Protection means the obligation to produce within the designated area , but it also means confining the reference on the label to the vintage year exclusively to wines with a designation of origin or a geographical indication .
These are the only wines subjected to ongoing checks , and hence the only ones for which it is possible to ensure the truthfulness of the information given ; otherwise producers of quality wines would be at a disadvantage and consumers would be misled .
With the same logic in mind , and for the sake of coherence , the report supports the proposal for a voluntary grubbing-up scheme with payment of a premium , so that those wishing to leave the market can do so with dignity .
Furthermore , I cannot refrain from expressing my satisfaction that the Commissioner has just agreed to my idea of reducing the five years to three .
It seems in fact that the number of hectares eligible for grubbing-up has fallen from 200 000 to 175 000 .
Unlike our original proposal , the report also strives to meet wine-growers ' need for future certainty .
Given this need for certainty , we cannot decide to liberalise planting rights as of now , before seeing whether - and above all how well - the new system functions .
That is why the report provides for planting rights to be preserved at least until 2013 and calls on the Commission to present an impact assessment on the first phase of the reform , so as to be able to decide what to do next in full knowledge of the facts .
It should of course be borne in mind that decisions taken in areas with geographical indications must be taken with due regard for - and under the supervision of - those who have invested their capital and labour in these projects .
If it then proves that the system hampers the development of those who are competitive , we can increase circulation at Community level and ensure that , where reserves exist , they are properly used .
I have one final remark , Commissioner : there can be no denying that the debate has been dominated by the question of sugaring .
Coming as I do from a country like Italy where the use of sucrose is prohibited , and especially coming from Sicily where must is produced , no one can understand better than I do the Commissioner 's disappointment on this issue .
Nevertheless , we are talking about the need to give European wines a new lease of life and make them competitive , equipping them to compete in the marketplace .
This is our goal , and in order to attain it we have attempted to look beyond national differences .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your cooperation and above all for your appreciation of the European Parliament 's work .
We have put into this reform ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have had a long and sometimes contentious debate on this subject .
Let me express my thanks to the rapporteur .
He has earned a great deal of respect for his work , which he performed in a focused manner , cooperating well with all his fellow committee members .
Yes , the common organisation of the wine market must be reformed .
It must be adapted to take account of present circumstances and future markets .
At the same time , Commissioner , this proposal raises the question as to whether the Commission ought to interfere in the small things that help to create a regional identity , in the methods that have been practised in particular regions for centuries and underlie the culture of those regions ?
Such interference certainly does not help ordinary people .
People sometimes do not understand what is going on .
It is incomprehensible that we should prohibit sucrose while at the same time be signing agreements to import wine produced with sucrose from countries outside the European Union .
Commissioner , as the third institution alongside the Council and Parliament , the Commission should concentrate on its own specific task , namely making proposals which foster the continuing development of the Community , which promote that whole development process .
The common organisation of the market in wine is part of that process .
Let me say on this point that the compromises we reached in committee , for which we grappled and , in some cases , are still grappling , are good for the whole House .
I endorse them on behalf of the PPE-DE Group : we all support the compromises .
We shall reject any amendments that run counter to them .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , today the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission are to decide on the future of one of the most complex common organisations of agricultural markets in Europe .
The European Parliament gave its opinion in good time before the Council 's opinion , and this is due to the intensive efforts made by our rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , and all the efforts of the political groups .
Commissioner , I would like to stress certain points which you must take into account in the Council 's final decision on reform of the common organisation of the wine market .
Firstly , reform of the wine market cannot be carried out on a linear , bookkeeping model like the model you used in the common organisation of the sugar market , which we were called on , two months ago , to re-examine because it has reached an impasse .
Reform of the wine market cannot be based on the disastrous model of the common organisation for cotton and tobacco , with the transfer of funds to the second pillar , which has resulted in a decline in production of these two products , while the countryside has become depopulated .
The wine market needs a strong budget in the first pillar in order to strengthen the measures directly for the vine-growers , who will be called on to improve quality and to monitor their production , and also to strengthen the policy of promoting all wines , inside and outside Europe , thus boosting their commercial distribution on the markets .
Commissioner , the European Parliament wants a new common organisation of the market which will prioritise an aggressive promotion policy rather than a defensive import policy .
The European Parliament 's report will secure aid for vine-growers who apply measures to stabilise supply , upgrade quality and protect the environment .
Market regulation measures are retained and adapted to current needs , such as the distillation of by-products , which operates as a mechanism for improving quality and at the same time regulating the market and supply .
The report proposes a rationalised grubbing-up scheme which does not waste valuable Community funds on reducing the dynamic of the European wine sector , and it fixes aid for wine-growers at the regional average for assistance , without the restriction of the EUR 350 per hectare ceiling .
Commissioner , we take the view that restrictions must be placed on all those measures that create surpluses , disrupt the balance of the market and create distorted and unfair prices at the expense of other wines .
Here , on behalf of the Socialist Group and also personally as Katerina Batzeli , I shall applaud any measure proposed by the Commission that maintains balance on the question of enriching with sugar , because , as has also been said by the Socialist Group , we have contributed to a balanced motion in order to avoid creating transitional problems .
Nevertheless , the new common organisation of the market should enrich and also respect the consumer 's wine knowledge and enhance consumer protection through labelling policy .
The Committee on Agriculture has specified , amongst other things , indication of the CO2 percentage in Amendment 166 , information relating to public health matters in Amendment 157 , and information on the production of wine from hybrid or genetically modified vines , in the zu Baringdorf amendment .
We should reinforce this respect for the consumer with labelling that includes details of the wine-making practices followed .
Commissioner , we wish to signal a new policy on two categories of wine : the category using geographical indications or a designation of origin , and table wines .
These are two different products and both have a place on the international European market , and I do not think we should have dividing lines which have regional impact .
In conclusion , I would like to say that the complexity of the Common Agricultural Policy reform cannot be treated as an impasse or as a failing of the institutional bodies .
It is due , Commissioner , to the cultural dimension of this product , which we should respect in our proposals .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in vino veritas or , to quote Goethe , life is too short to drink bad wine .
These sayings sum up the essential point of reforming the EU market in wine .
What our report is about is the quality of European wine , which can certainly stand comparison with that of imports from the New World .
So what is the status quo ?
In 2006 , wine production accounted for 5 % of the total value of agricultural output in the EU .
With 45 % of the world 's vineyard surface , 65 % of its production , 57 % of its consumption and 70 % of the volume of exports , European wine enjoys a leading position in the world market .
In the world of wine , we are a global superpower !
Accordingly , there was a need for action to consolidate our superpower status and particularly to raise the quality of our wines .
The reforms that you proposed , Commissioner , included an immediate end to crisis distillation .
I believe that many of the things you mentioned , such as private storage and the ending of export subsidies , must aid and , of course , the enhancement of wine with sugar , are central points of your proposals .
We have to say , however , that they reflected a rather technocratic perspective from the outset , addressing questions such as whether there should be a link between sugaring and must aid .
In my view this Parliament has negotiated quite a good compromise between North and South , given that their respective concerns have dominated this issue .
In the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development we struck a very , very good balance with our compromises .
In this context my special thanks go to the rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , who made great efforts to broker compromises , and we managed to take account of everyone 's concerns .
I believe we have moulded the initial technocratic solution into a new elegant shape .
We have a balance between North and South .
I also wish to thank you , Commissioner , for indicating in your speech that you essentially intend to follow this line .
What are the main points ?
Besides the compromise that allows continued sugaring , another key aspect of our report is the protection of regional products .
In the light of this quality drive for European wine , there is also a continuing need for national support measures , and these have been set at EUR 1.3 billion .
We believe that these matters should remain part of the first pillar , so that payments can actually go direct to growers .
In addition , there was a need to refer - and this , I believe , is one of our primary achievements - to the need to give special attention to designations of origin and geographical indications on labels .
That is an extremely important issue in our view , because indications of the geographical origin of wines are , of course , a matter of intellectual property .
That has to be protected , and I believe we have obtained a very good compromise on this point .
The ALDE Group will support these compromises , that is to say the whole package of compromises , because we believe they constitute a good solution .
We hope that the Council will now adopt our suggestions .
The voice of the European Parliament is the voice of the people as well as the voice of the wine producers and consumers .
We ask you , Commissioner , to fight for these things too in your dealings with the Council and in the public domain in general .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the text on which we are about to vote constitutes a good compromise and considerably improves the Commission 's initial proposal .
Our aim is still to launch a reform geared to revitalising the sector on both the domestic and international markets .
Global demand is not falling , but rising , so the right approach is not to produce less but to invest in the quality and character of European wines , in cutting costs , in promoting wine so as to expand the market and in helping young people to establish vineyards .
It is equally necessary to limit the reduction in European wine production , as proposed by the Commission , by increasing the Member States ' autonomy to govern the grubbing-up scheme .
We must avoid destroying vineyards which , while perhaps not having a particularly strong market position , produce high-quality regional wines , have well-established historical traditions and even today make up the social fabric of entire regional areas .
Despite creating the conditions for greater competitiveness , this reform must retain links with the past and promote the continuation of wine-growing as a factor in preserving the land and the environment .
We are therefore in favour of allocating the earmarked resources over three years rather than five and distributing them primarily on the basis of historical data , broadly according to the same criterion used for all other reforms adopted until now .
Commissioner , we are opposed to the liberalisation of new oenological practices and the use of imported must to enrich our wines or blend them with third country wines , because we believe that this could be detrimental to the wine 's image and could compromise the consumer 's trust in the product , with extremely serious consequences for consumption .
On the other hand , we think it is vital to provide aid for concentrated musts and rectified concentrated musts used for enrichment purposes , so as to protect an oenological practice common in many Community regions .
We believe that investment by producers must be borne in mind and that any disruptions to trade flows which could increase available supplies must be avoided .
This reform must encourage the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin , as a means of better guaranteeing and protecting European wines in the context of multilateral negotiations and bilateral trade agreements .
Finally , Commissioner , we are against the full liberalisation of planting rights from 2014 onwards for wines with designations of origin and geographical indications , and we can endorse the rapporteur 's proposal that the new reform should enter into force on 1 August 2009 .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we want wine to be a unique beverage , both in its production and in its consumption .
What I mean is that we do not want any oenological methods that take us in the direction of Coca-Cola ; we want the future of designations of origin and geographical indications to be secured .
We want to see support for organic production methods , and it is our wish - we have tabled an amendment to this effect - that regions should be able to decide by a majority vote that their wines can be traded in bottles only .
We agree with you that permanent distillation of wine is inappropriate , and its introduction through the back door of crisis distillation must be prevented .
We share your view on that point .
On the question of planting rights , we believe there must be a grubbing-up option .
In point of fact , if no indication is given that new planting will be authorised at some time in a given location , the decision to grub up there is not based on the quantity of wine that can be sold .
This linkage , in short , is imperative , and we support it .
When you speak of enrichment with grape must or sugar and say that there must be a shift in the balance between these two methods , that is fine by us , because it basically means that chaptalisation will remain legal .
If a compromise were found on that basis , we would regard it as an acceptable outcome .
Sugaring is an old oenological process .
We should therefore preserve it and reject the Americans ' many unreasonable demands regarding our winemaking processes .
Provided that our amendments are carried , we shall support the rapporteur 's draft in its entirety .


on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would say to Mr Castiglione that - as the Minister , Mr De Castro , has said - the proposal having emerged from the committee responsible and now before Parliament is worse than the one originally put forward by the Commissioner .
We are talking here about millions of individuals who are dedicated to a product which has made Europe great on account of its quality and links with the land .
The first point I should like to make concerns grubbing-up .
We are told that the area affected will fall to between 175 000 and 200 000 hectares .
My first question is this : who will grub up the vines and who will take over this grubbed-up land , and what is wrong with proposing that the funds be used - and perhaps even reduced rather than increased - with a view to restructuring these vineyards so as to improve quality ?
I would ask Parliament the following : why must we expel dozens or even hundreds of workers and farmers in order to make way for large multinationals , as is happening in Sicily , Mr Castiglione ?
The point , then , is this : why use European funds for grubbing-up , rather than using them to improve quality and for business restructuring ?
We have adopted so many measures in this House and in Community policies over recent years !
My second point relates to the free market in the rights of areas under vines .
Why should the market be liberalised for the whole of Europe ?
What is the sense in buying a hectare under vines in Sicily , Campania , Greece or elsewhere and transferring it to another area ?
That hectare under vines is linked to a given quality and production , a typical product , an ecotype established in that area .
Why make this sort of proposal ?
Are we seeking here , too , to encourage the large-scale buy-outs which are occurring in some parts of the Mediterranean ?
This is the key point , and it is why we believe that the Commission 's proposal was better .
The proposal emerging from Parliament is worse than the one advocated by the Commission , if what we want is a reform that improves quality and keeps farmers and other workers on the land .
That is why we shall vote against a reform of this kind .
on behalf of the IND / DEM group . - ( CS ) Mr Chairman , the proposed wine sector reform puts the Czech Republic at a disadvantage and discriminates against it .
The European Union , which did not object to the diluting of US wines now legally accessing the EU market with up to 30 % of water and which tolerates the addition of acid to oversweet wines in southern Europe , that same European Union proposes a ban on the use of sucrose in the more northern European countries .
The use of sucrose has been a tradition in our country for over 200 years .
The EU wants to replace it with must concentrate , which will be willingly supplied at an inflated price by the southern European countries .
The subsidy for the Czech Republic works out at EUR 85 per hectare of vineyards , while some favoured countries receive as much as EUR 245 .
This is because the European Union is trying to establish a so-called historic principle , which will discriminate against the new Member States .
However , the wine grown and produced in the Czech Republic also gets consumed there .
It does not , in any way , contribute to the surplus European production .
In addition , that same Union now requires the Czech Republic to contribute financially to the advertising of European surplus wine in third countries .
We demand therefore that the money for the wine sector reform be put into the national envelopes so that the Member States can allocate it according to their own needs .
The Union has two ways of dealing with the surplus wine production .
One is the senseless and barbaric distillation of wine into industrial alcohol and the other is the grubbing-up of vineyards : grubbing-up everywhere but where it should be done .
In fact it would be enough to grub up all the illegally planted vineyards in those traditional southern countries , and one of them in particular , and the whole reform would be accomplished .
The total area of those illegal vineyards actually equals the number of hectares that the EU needs to grub up .
It is not as if the EU did not know the exact location and did not have the satellite pictures of the vineyards in Italy that were planted secretly and are over the quota , for example .
In conclusion , yet another topic favoured by the Eurocrats comes up again in the proposed reform : the handing over of the competence in this matter from the Council to the Commission , that is to say to non-elected EU officials .
In this way the smaller countries will be stripped of their right to decide , and the wine which has been traditionally grown in the Czech Republic since the time of the Roman Legions will become yet another product taken away from us in favour of the often illegal production in the southern countries of the EU .
However , we have no intention of letting them deprive us of this wonderful tradition of ours .
( SK ) I ask myself , is the reform really about good wine ?
Good wine , as we know , is the wine that sells .
That means that the customer accepts its quality at the asking price .
However , some EU countries produce unsellable wines at the cost of EUR 500 million a year .
The Slovak Republic and other Member States have carried out an uncompromising reduction of their wine sector , which is the reason why they no longer produce unsellable wines .
To create the national envelopes of financial aid on the basis of the so-called ' historic principle ' runs against the rules of the market .
It discriminates against us , penalising us permanently for not having supported the production of unsellable wines .
According to the proposed reform , we should be permanently receiving just a fraction of the aid being afforded to the producers of unsellable wines .
That is the reason why we demand that aid be based solely on the area under vineyards , and it is on the same grounds of discrimination that we disagree with the changes to the labelling of wines and want to keep the existing system .
( ES ) Mr President , next weekend the Council of Agriculture Ministers will likely take the political decision on this reform of the COM in wine .
Wine is not just a foodstuff , it is also an economic gem in the agriculture sector , which has been severely penalised by Commission decisions in recent years .
We are on time , for the first time in a long while : Parliament is going to draw up a report that can be used by the Council to determine its ultimate political decision this weekend .
I must say I am genuinely satisfied with this , and wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his work , since for the first time the EP has resolved to focus on quality , culture , tradition , a Mediterranean product that has also been taken to other parts of Europe , a product which enhances our stature not only on our own continent , but around the world .
Our wine - and let there be no doubt about this , ladies and gentlemen - is the best in the world ; Europe 's wine is the best in the world .
That is why we have to protect it and focus on promoting it : promoting it not only outside the EU , but here , too , because young people in Europe have stopped drinking wine in recent years .
Why have they stopped drinking wine ?
Because we have not bothered to promote it or to encourage them to drink it .
We must supply the tools of competitiveness to the wine sector to keep it competitive within and outside the European Union .
We must promote wine consumption and involve young people and European society as a whole in a culture , the culture of wine tourism , the culture of wine consumption , the culture of wine know-how and the culture of discussion and participation within society .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a shortage of funds for rural development because a political decision taken in December 2005 did not provide enough money for the second pillar .
However , funding must not be secured to the detriment of the COMs , but by encouraging the Member States to allocate slightly more of their national budgets to the Community budget .
It is not by taking money away from the farmers that we will fill a gap as huge as rural development in the European budget under this financial perspective .
With regard to planting rights , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that tools must be given to the sector to allow it to regulate itself .
These tools must be legal tools and they must be issued here so as to continue to protect planting rights , which enable production to be controlled .
There are already indications that it may be profitable to control such production , just as the designations of origin are strictly controls .
Commitments must be upheld , and therefore we will vote against all the amendments tabled , especially any amendments that do not respect the commitments already made , and here I am referring to the Socialist Group .
( PT ) Mr President , I too want to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his work , and also the shadow rapporteur of the PSE Group , not only as shadow rapporteur for this report , but also for the own-initiative report that preceded this debate .
Her work typifies the spirit of compromise and constructive attitude of the Socialists towards finding a balanced solution .
The long months of debate have confirmed three things : the great importance of this sector in economic and social terms , despite being so badly mistreated in the past by the common agricultural policy ; the fact that the current rules are out of step with the current market situation and changes in consumption patterns ; and the need to introduce reforms to solve these problems .
This debate has also revealed the high degree of consensus on the list of problems affecting the sector .
However , we have not all agreed on the solutions proposed by the Commission , which is why the European Parliament 's constructive attitude is proven by the broad compromise reached in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and by the PSE Group 's detailed proposals .
These proposals aim to supplement this compromise on the most sensitive issues such as : liberalisation of planting rights ; grubbing-up of vines ; addition of sugar and must aid ; maintenance of potable alcohol , which is so important for some prestige wines such as port , the competitiveness of which must be guaranteed ; crisis prevention ; promotion and so on .
Parliament 's position therefore provides real impetus and is a good indication to the Council and the Commission of the path that must be followed .
The general lines of Parliament 's position show that it is possible to ultimately find a solution capable of responding to the sector 's general problems and also to the specific issues of the production regions .
Commissioner , at a time when we are about to start discussing the Health Check and , something which is of particular interest to us , the scenario for agriculture after 2013 , it is vital that this reform be completed quickly .
I therefore hope that Parliament will inspire the Council in the decisions that must be taken because Parliament 's attitude and the general line of its recommendations are a good sign for European vine and wine .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the Commissioner , but allow me to say a particular word of thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , for his excellent , thorough and valuable work .
Meeting the challenges of international competition , through schemes to improve quality and protect typical characteristics , is the key objective that must be pursued by the reform of the European wine market .
However , it is important to ensure that we retain aid for concentrated grape musts and rectified concentrated grape musts produced by the European Community , since this is an oenological practice common to many Community regions .
With regard to sugaring , any use of sucrose for enrichment purposes should be indicated on the label , so as to achieve greater transparency and consumer information .
National aid programmes must be used to target promotion campaigns within the European Union , as well as for the purposes of crisis prevention , research , development and above all improvements in wine quality .
As far as the liberalisation of planting rights is concerned , the postponement until 2013 might be acceptable for wines protected by designations of origin and geographical indications .
So as to achieve a balanced situation for other wines , liberalisation should be allowed only following the Commission 's impact assessment , to be carried out before the end of 2012 .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the fundamental problems of the wine market is that more and more wine is being imported from third countries .
We might well ask ourselves whether wine from these countries is better .
The answer is that it is not .
The quality of wine from third countries is no better than that of our wine , but their wine is much cheaper .
My homeland is mainly a wine-consuming country .
My fellow citizens are interested in two criteria , namely price and quality .
The identifying label is less important to them , yet it is common to pay more for the brand than for the quality of the wine .
Promotion alone will not achieve anything .
It will not attract price-conscious customers in the countries of the old Fifteen either .
I have observed that for myself in shops in Brussels .
I very much welcome the fact that the possibility of using the term fruit wine has been retained .
This is a specific segment of the traditional market , and is not in competition with the grape wine market .
As in the case of the definition of vodka , it is not acceptable to act to the detriment of the traditions of particular countries , brands or quality simply because the wine sector is experiencing problems .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we certainly agree with your wish to put an end to subsidies that encourage overproduction and have unacceptable perverse effects , but we cannot accept the fact you intend to make wine , which is first and foremost attached to a terroir and an increasingly standardised product sold all over the world , subject to the whims of fashion and marketing .
I wish to highlight two points here .
The first the absolute necessity to protect the geographical indications and designations of origin , which are often questioned but nevertheless establish the link to the land that characterises the European agricultural model .
We want you to highlight this model and not sacrifice it at the altar of larger markets to the sole benefit of money-grubbers .
We also call for more attention to be paid to ecological vine-growing methods , which still require significant various chemical products and additives .
In this regard , we would ask you to provide specific support for organic wine , the specifications for which are now being drawn up .
Biodiversity of terroirs , cultures and tastes , development and promotion of quality , and the extraordinary richness of European vines : these are the future and the principles that ought to form the basis of this reform .
( PT ) Mr President , we are highly critical of the European Commission 's proposal to reform the common organisation of the market in wine .
In addition to the grubbing-up of vines , the proposal to liberalise planting rights is particularly worrying .
We consider that the report adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development does not offer any protection in this respect .
At stake are the European wine-growing heritage and the future of vast regions which not only form wine production areas with designations of origin or geographical indications , but also areas producing good table wines .
As a result , in order to defend the traditional culture of vine and wine , employment and biodiversity , we insist on defending planting rights and maintaining support for restructuring vineyards , monitoring of production and maintenance of quality , with particular attention being paid to family-based agriculture and cooperative producers , support for the distillation of potable wine and use of grape musts produced in the region .
However , we do not support the addition of sugar .
( FR ) Commissioner , beyond its technique on envelopes , premiums or plantings , this project - the third in 15 years - boils down to three ideas focused on a single objective .
The first idea is Malthusianism .
The winemakers are not to the Commission 's liking , so it wants to grub up , throw away the grapes , ban chaptalisation and curb production , in the same way as the milk or wheat shortages were brought about .
The second idea is laissez-faire capitalism for profit , laissez-faire for plantings , imports , watering down , adding wood shavings , fake wine , must imported to concoct a global wine gruel .
The third idea is globalism .
After the single market and the single currency comes the single wine : a flavoursome woody ' parkerised ' Coca-Cola wine , which would not even require any winemakers , because the real aim is to free up the Mediterranean 's winelands , especially those 250 000 hectares around Languedoc-Roussillon , two and a half billion square metres of land , where they will grub up the vineyards to plant houses , a market worth a thousand billion euro .
The COM in wine would eventually become a COM in property .
Here I am thus the Member for the winemaking Indians .
I do not wish to take your scalp , Commissioner ; All I want is for winemakers , who have been making people happy for over 2 000 years , to be left alone .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking our rapporteur for doing everything that was humanly possible to arrive at this compromise .
Ever since the Commission first presented a document on the reform of the common organisation of the market in wine and again in today 's discussion , we have seen that wine is one of the most sensitive of agricultural products ; it is one of the most sophisticated but also stirs the emotions like few other products .
I believe the European Parliament , especially the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , has managed to assemble and present a compromise package that reflects a wise choice of approach , ensuring , for example , that the traditional oenological methods used in the Member States are clearly explained on the basis of differences in European viniculture and - something I consider very important - that quality wines are set apart from table wines .
It is imperative that designations of origin should remain in place .
They are beneficial to wine producers , but most of all they benefit consumers .
Preservation of the enrichment limits bolsters traditional wine production in Europe .
The diverse climatic , geographical and structural conditions in which wine grapes are grown in Europe have to be taken into consideration .
As an Austrian , I know how necessary certain measures are , but I am opposed to compulsory grubbing-up , because there is a need to observe consumer wine choices very closely and identify where there are prospects of further increasing consumption .
Savings we achieve through these reforms - and I am also anxious to make savings - must remain in the first pillar and continue to support viniculture and wine producers in some way or other .
Let me conclude by saying that I believe the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has managed to present a coherent and prudent package , and I hope that tomorrow 's parliamentary vote will send a clear signal to the Council and the Commission that we want viniculture to have a future in Europe , too .
( ES ) Mr President , I first wish to congratulate the EP rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , for his splendid work .
The virtue of his report lies in that it includes many of the concerns expressed not only by ourselves as Members of the European Parliament , but also by the European wine industry .
Commissioner , there have been certain changes since you submitted this proposal for a new wine COM .
Some certain aspects have changed very little , while others have changed considerably , but I feel that many of the changes have been positive .
For example , grubbing-up is no longer the main focus of the reform , and I was pleased to hear you say earlier that the Commission is now working with a time frame of three years , as Parliament is requesting , and not five years as you had suggested .
This is a reform of a COM that is so important for European agriculture , as has been said from the outset , has some extremely positive aspects , and I thank you for that .
For example , the regulations have been simplified and made more flexible , and that will help to make us more competitive .
This point has already been made by Mrs Herranz in relation to the promotion of European wines within and outside Europe .
A large number of amendments have been tabled to your proposal to eliminate current market arrangements and replace them with a menu for national envelopes .
It is obvious that market measures have already helped to maintain income for farmers and economic activity in rural areas , and continue to do so .
Thus , without jeopardising Mr Castiglione 's compromise , I wish to table a new amendment to secure direct aid for diversification , aid which the Member States could include in their national allocations to help farmers in the transition to the new COM .
The duration of this and the methods employed would be drawn up by the management committee .
Commissioner , I feel that for stakeholders used to working with this COM , with back-up from the current market measures , this is the way to help them through the transition to diversification and guide them into the new COM which - I hope - the House will adopt tomorrow .
( FR ) Commissioner , I hope you can hear the message from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which has made significant amendments to your reform proposal .
I support the refusal to allow the automatic liberalisation of planting rights in 2014 , particularly for wines protected by designations of origin and geographical indications .
For other wines , the decision to liberalise planting rights ought to be taken only after the effects of the COM reform have been gauged .
As far as chaptalisation is concerned , I feel that we should not waste our energy on this issue .
What matters is maintaining the oenological practices that give European wines their quality and identity .
I would particularly like to mention table wines .
The Commission 's proposal offers the possibility of referring to a specific place of origin : for example , wine from the coasts of Provence , wine from Andalusia , wine from Tuscany , etc .
This will certainly confuse consumers and lead to unfair competition between quality designations of origin , which comply with strict specifications , and table wines , which have much freer production criteria .
Let us therefore retain the current legislation , since the only reference ought to be the country in which the wine is produced : Spanish wine , Italian wine , French wine , etc .
As to the issue of the information to be provided on the label , I feel that it is important to mention the type of bottler : whether it is an independent winemaker , a group of producers , or some other format .
The winemaking profession as practised in France has an extremely positive image , which is not necessarily the case for wines produced in other parts of the world .
Therefore , I feel that it is important to provide some information in this respect .
Finally , I wish to congratulate our rapporteur , who has largely managed to unite the Members on a compromise text amid a debate which often aroused great passions , sending out a clear message so that the EU remains the world 's leading wine producer , guarantees a future for over one and a half million wine companies , and retains its ranking as leading exporter .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to focus on planting rights since , as we are all aware , the reform intends to liberalise the market by 2013 by eliminating planting rights and freezing funds , with no real alternative for 2.4 million vine growers in Europe .
This would take out small and medium winemaking facilities at one fell swoop , and once again leave a market so culturally ours in the hands of half a dozen or so multinationals .
I consider this to be unacceptable .
Does the Commission fail to realise that the staunchest defenders of planting rights are the designations of origin - Rioja , in my case , for example - and that it is they who produce , sell and export the most wine and the best quality wine ?
I am from Navarra , where liberalisation has already been implemented : planting rights are worthless , but while in Navarra a kilo of grapes sells at 15 cent , the same kilo of grapes is worth more than 1 euro barely 10 kilometres away in La Rioja .
While La Rioja sells all it has , in Navarra we have to resort to crisis distillation .
Therefore , it cannot be denied that the gradual elimination of protectionism is a good thing , but it should not become a dogma .
The Commission has not submitted a single serious report to show that liberalisation , elimination of these rights , in 2013 or whenever , will benefit the wine market .
( EL ) Mr President , the Commission 's proposal aims to reduce funding and concentrate this sector in the large cartels .
We know very well what the result will be : we have seen it with other crops .
When thousands of hectares are grubbed up , thousands of small and medium-sized vine-growers will be wiped out , and areas - particularly those which are mountainous or less-favoured - will be deserted and depopulated , with an impact on biodiversity .
The repercussions will be dramatic : unemployment and environmental problems will increase .
Imports will increase , including wines of dubious quality , at the expense of public health .
We reject the Commission 's proposal , and also the report by the Committee on Agriculture , because it introduces measures which are even worse : it allows the addition of sugars with a view to increasing the alcoholic strength with foreign matter , when we could achieve the same result with must .
It also accepts the use of the term ' wine ' for products which are not made from grapes , thus downgrading the quality of European wine , which is the world leader in exports .
This insidious , retrograde policy is detrimental to European wines and small and medium-sized vine-growers , and strengthens big business .
These proposals should therefore be rejected and condemned .
( BG ) Mme Commissioner , You repeatedly pointed out in your speech that our wine market needed reform .
Please explain , Mme Commissioner , which your wine market is because the Commission 's proposal you are putting forward does not mean protection of the market in Bulgaria .
For the proposal of the Commission contains flagrant discrimination , a double yard-stick against the Eastern European countries , where the conditions for the production of wine are less favourable .
When it joined the European Union , my country expected a free market and economic growth but what it received in exchange was only high prices , high inflation rates and regulation what my people had not seen even in the times of socialism and planned economy . Thank you .
( EL ) Madam President , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , on his report .
A great deal has already been said about the reform of the wine market and , although I have always been a supporter of the view that Community wines have to retain their quality , tradition and authenticity if they are to make progress and gain a competitive position , I nevertheless recognise that the advantage that southern Europe enjoys in terms of sunshine should not stand in the way of production in the north .
I am sure that everyone here in this Chamber wants a balanced decision .
I therefore believe that since the Council is gearing itself towards allowing the addition of sugar , it is right that it should make provision for maintaining the status quo , i.e. support for musts to enrich wines , so that the substantial difference in price between sugar and musts does not come as a serious blow to producers who traditionally use concentrated musts to increase alcoholic strength , especially as we are talking about an authentic wine product .
Lastly , I would like to add that the measure of grubbing up vines may be regarded as a way of limiting Community production , but we must take account of small island areas , where the Member State must be able to limit grubbing-up for social , economic and , above all , environmental reasons .
Besides , those vineyards are not the ones responsible for Community overproduction ; on the contrary , in most cases they produce wines of excellent quality .
I shall conclude by saying that European wine is the best in the world .
It is wine with tradition behind it .
Wine originated here !
We must therefore maintain quality and the tradition and also adopt a more aggressive policy : we should advertise because it is only here in Europe that consumption of alcohol is increasing among young people - an extremely unwelcome fact - while their consumption of wine is decreasing , and this shows that there is a lack of information .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this reform undoubtedly rewrites the fundamentals of the wine sector to make it competitive on world markets .
Through the Castiglione report we have emphasised the fact that the competitive strength of European wine , and what has enabled it to overcome competition from the New World , is its quality .
Furthermore , it is for the sake of quality that we have improved the Commission 's proposal on certain points , such as on grubbing-up with reference to the time frame and the ecological constraints , and on the liberalisation of planting rights with the provisos recalled during this debate .
We have supported the idea that there should be more careful checks to ensure that the approval of oenological practices is not made too easy , and we have come out in favour of increasing Community cofinancing for promotion campaigns .
Nevertheless , our support for quality cannot be reconciled with the practice of sugaring .
We do understand , ladies and gentlemen , that this practice is favoured in some countries on economic grounds , but in that case we call for the same standard , the same scheme on aid for must as under the previous legislation .
Above all , we believe that it is essential , for the sake of transparent and accurate information to consumers , that where sucrose is used this must be indicated on the label .
Ladies and gentlemen , and here I am addressing some of you in particular , it is a matter of respecting the principle of traceability , which we in this House have fought to uphold in a bid to protect consumers .
Quality and health : as far as I am concerned , sugar makes me ill , so let us remember that the two go hand in hand .
( SV ) Wine is a drink with an age-old tradition , a drink which belongs to European culture .
In vino veritas , the ancient Romans used to say .
But wine is also an alcoholic beverage which is damaging to public health , in particular if it is consumed in copious quantities .
Winegrowing is an important industry in many of the EU 's Member States and gives jobs and vitality to rural districts .
I think of wine as a product which , to a large extent , should be able sell itself if it is of good quality .
Hence the report 's proposals for substantial and increased support for its marketing are difficult to understand .
It cannot be the responsibility of the European taxpayer to support the costs of Europe 's winegrowers so that they can sell products which could not compete in free market conditions .
On the one hand , the EU talks about moderate drinking ; on the other hand , it wants to sell more wine .
The two things do not go together .
Of course , the EU 's wine market needs to be reformed , but let us do it sensibly .
Wine markets vary and , by tradition , function in different ways , and the desires and demands of the public in the EU also vary .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , two proposed measures that stand out are those of grubbing up the vines and adding sugar to wine .
The first is a counterproductive and environmentally unfriendly procedure essentially entailing the forced exodus from their jobs of thousands of small and medium-sized growers who , instead of receiving assistance to stay in their jobs , are being sent away to form a cheap workforce .
As for the addition of sugar , our rejection is based on the fact that a permitted increase to 4.5 % vol. and the use of the term ' wine ' for drinks which are not made from grapes will downgrade the quality and special characteristics of wine .
Furthermore , the so-called ' simplification of labelling ' will contribute further to the downgrading of quality because it will not include the obligation to indicate the area where the wine was produced .
Here I would like to point out that rightly or wrongly , for example in my country in the past , mass grubbing-up operations were carried out , for which , however , no financial assistance measures are now included at European level .
With a clear conscience we shall vote against the proposal , and shall support the minority proposal which addresses the social and economic concerns of the producers in my country , Cyprus , and those of other European producers .
Now should be the time to assist the producers , instead of sending them into a spiral of unemployment and reduced income .
Madam President , I come from a constituency in Scotland which does not produce wine .
Indeed , climate change will have to change things considerably before we can produce any wine in Scotland !
However , we do produce some very good whisky , which I would recommend .
I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Mr Parish , who has to attend a meeting with Mr Michel Barnier in Paris , and on behalf of the UK wine sector , which Members know is very small - it represents 0.01 % of the whole of EU wine production - but which seeks no subsidy or financial assistance from Europe at all .
However , unless there is an increase in the de minimis level of production to 50 000 hl , the UK would have to impose a planting ban up until 2014 .
In a tiny sector like this , where there is some need for expansion , it would be deeply unfair if we were to do that .
Even if the UK sector expanded fourfold by the end of the planting rights system , which is highly unlikely , it would still only represent 0.05 % of total EU production , which is one 2000th of entire EU wine production .
I therefore hope that Members will be sympathetic to Mr Parish 's amendments .
I am not trying in any way to undermine the compromise .
Mr Castiglione has done a wonderful job - we had 795 amendments - and , by seeking a compromise , has got the amendments down to manageable levels .
I do not want to do anything to upset that , but I hope there will be sympathy for the UK position .

( FR ) Madam President , I first wish to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , for bringing about a considerable shift in the Commission 's positions .
We are certainly faced with a paradox here : on the one hand , there has never been so much wine drunk all over the world , and on the other , although in 10-15 years we will be witnessing record progress in wine consumption worldwide , we are told that Europe is overproducing .
Thus I have the feeling that , rather than overproduction , what we have here is a sales problem , mainly down to marketing , and that is why I do not want the reform proposed to us today to be tempted to lower the sector 's standards even slightly in order to fall into line with the new wine-producing countries .
We must remember what has happened to European industry .
Today Europe 's leading industrial producer is Germany .
Germany has stayed at the top of the class , it has refused to cut down on production and today it is the world 's leading exporter , even with the arrival of China and India on the international stage .
We cannot cut back on the quality of our vineyards and their brand image .
We must not , therefore , give in to a crude industrialisation of the wine industry , which in the future would supply us with Heineken wine , Danone wine , Coca-Cola wine and Pepsi-Cola wine .
I do feel , however , that the Commission is tempted to get rid of the smallest and favour the biggest .
That would result in us losing our soul !
I am thus asking you , Commissioner , to ensure that all of the elements that contribute to the quality of wine and can improve that quality - reducing yields , marketing support , careful protection of geographical indications and designations of origin - are preserved , not only within the EU , but also outside it , when it comes to major multilateral negotiations .
I feel this is extremely important : otherwise we will be losing what is undoubtedly one of the most important elements of our agricultural industry , and our European civilisation : wine is a product of culture and civilisation .
This is why we cannot give in to the mirages of the market and industrialisation .
( DE ) Madam President , politics is the art of the possible .
That maxim also applies to this latest reform of the common organisation of the market in wine .
It must be said , however , that the Commission 's assumption in 2006 was unmarketable wine surpluses in the EU , which have not materialised , and that its legislative proposal largely disregarded the opinion delivered by Parliament in February .
As was the case back in 1999 , we have managed , by dint of tenacity and resourcefulness and in close cooperation with the trade , particularly in the cross-party working group on wine , to work out a compromise with which the wine trade in both southern and northern Europe should be able to live , provided that growers produce good wines and vintners are able to market them effectively inside and outside the EU .
It is our intention to create the requisite set of instruments and make the regions responsible for using them within an appropriate financial framework .
In the irksome dispute about winemaking processes that was unnecessarily fuelled by the Commission , we once again reached an agreement , very largely on the basis of the 1999 compromise , even though the Commissioner is still not happy with that .
Common sense and awareness that sales problems in the South will not be solved by making it impossible to produce marketable wine in the North have won the day , and I hope they will also secure a large majority here .
The devil , as always , is in the detail .
I respect the compromise , for which the rapporteur himself had to make concessions too , and all credit to him for that .
For this reason I do not intend to table any new amendments , although I shall not refrain from expressing my opinion when it comes to the vote on disastrous specific proposals that have nothing to do with the compromise .
It is utterly counterproductive , for instance , to insist that wine labels bear an indication of the origin of EU grape must which is used to enrich the wine if the aim is to encourage that form of enrichment .
The important thing is that the reforms help to guarantee sufficient production potential in terms of quantity and quality to maintain our global market lead and to ensure that we in the EU and elsewhere drink far more wine for the sake of our health !
( Applause )
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur .
In addition , I would also like to express my gratitude to all members of the Committee on Agriculture for the hard work they have put into achieving consensus on such an essential but also very complicated issue as reform of the market in wine .
I think we all agree that changes in the sector are needed in response to the processes of globalisation and trade liberalisation .
We do not always agree , however , on how to bring about such changes .
There is therefore all the more reason for us to deem the agreement reached on key issues for wine producers a joint success .
The agreement takes account of the needs and conditions of the various regions of the Community , which differ in terms of natural environment and climate .
Wine production methods therefore differ accordingly .
In particular , I wish to highlight the amendment enabling Member States to use the term wine to refer to wines other than grape wines .
In certain parts of Europe the fruit wine tradition dates as far back as the 12th century .
This is all part of our common cultural heritage .
Consequently , it is important not to introduce any potentially confusing changes to the labelling of fruit wines .
Wines produced using fruits such as apples and currants are marketed under the designation of fruit wine or wine named after the fruit in question .
These wines established themselves on the European market many years ago , and I am glad that the provision regarding fruit wine has been retained .
( HU ) Thank you very much .
I would like to raise three issues , since the wine sector is too far-reaching for me to cover all the issues .
The first issue is that of grubbing aids , the second is that of restructuring aid for upgrading vineyards , and the third is that of the compulsory distillation of by-products .
I agree with the bases for the reform .
The current rules for the wine sector are unsustainable .
Aid for distillation must be stopped because it is wasteful .
Instead , surpluses are created , and in order to stop this we must grub a significant proportion of vineyards .
We have been OK up to now .
The trouble starts here , since this can only be done properly if we grub the vineyards and concentrate grubbing aid on the regions that produced the surplus .
This is not happening .
In fact , what is happening is that the Member States and regions that do not produce a surplus will have to bear an unfairly large burden under this reform .
This is particularly unacceptable for the new Member States since , before the accession , when we were still outside the EU , we did not receive any distillation aid , nor did we produce any surplus .
Since then , approximately 10 % of our vineyards in Hungary have been grubbed .
This is not taken into consideration by the reform , which moreover is taking place now , when not only do we not produce a surplus but we have become a net importer .
This reform burdens most of all the countries that had balanced wine production , and indeed we produced more or less as much wine as was consumed .
The second issue I would like to raise is that of aid for upgrading vineyards .
It is particularly unacceptable that this form of this aid is falling in Hungary .
Madam Commissioner should not be afraid that she is opening Pandora 's box !
It is much better to have a debate than to make an unfair decision .
The Parliament 's decision will offer an appropriate solution , and it will recommend that upgrade aid should not be less in any Member State than it was in 2007-2008 , and this would be a good solution .
I also support the repeal of the rules relating to the compulsory distillation of by-products , because it is a wasteful , superfluous measure and it is not sustainable from the perspective of environmental protection . Thank you very much .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I agree that wine regulation up to now has been bad , and at the same time it is very questionable whether this wine reform will be good .
There are countless questions , because it is obvious that this reform is essential but will be to the detriment of the poorest wine-producing regions .
The distribution of the national envelopes system - which the Commissioner spoke about - is extremely harmful to the new Member States .
This wine reform is discriminatory and rewards those who have up to now produced poor quality wine for distillation because they receive their money all the same .
Parliament has moved in the right direction , and the final compromise could be that two thirds are the area and quantity and one third is the historical reference .
It will be very useful to still have the opportunity for increasing the alcohol content for sugaring .
Marketing is an extremely important factor , but this must be ensured within the Union too .
I completely agree with the repeal of distillation , and this is the most positive element of the reform , but I reiterate that this money will be received by those who have produced for distillation up to now .
The concept of grubbing aid is flawed , since it is very attractive for the poorest Member States .
We in the new Member States will also have to grub grapes that produce good quality . Thank you for your attention .
( PL ) Madam President , the main aim of this reform should be to achieve sustainability and improved competitiveness for the Union 's wine sector .
It is also important to strengthen the position of renowned European wines that boast centuries-old traditions so that they do not lose out to wines from the so-called New World .
The budget allocated to that market should be used more wisely .
We should not promote distillation .
Instead , we ought to promote European wines in order to recover lost markets and win new ones .
I should like to mention three important issues .
Firstly , as regards the option to add sugar , the status quo must be maintained .
Secondly , the status quo must also be maintained as far as fruit wines are concerned .
This means that it should remain possible to use the term wine to designate fruit wines .
Thirdly , the de minimis level should be increased to 50 000 hectolitres , for example .
This would stimulate production and contribute to the development of local winemaking in countries that do not produce large quantities of wine .
The change would not have any impact on the Community market in wine .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , as we have heard today , the tradition of viniculture goes back hundreds of years .
For decades we have been trying to improve the quality of our wines , and those efforts have been extremely successful , which I , as an Austrian , can say of my own country 's efforts too , particularly those of my home province of Burgenland .
Part of this success , however , has been down to the use of sucrose as required .
Having to top up the sugar content of wine with must concentrate from other regions would mean influencing and even altering the character of our region 's wines .
We certainly cannot consent to that , nor would it make any sense to our growers , who have been nurturing high quality standards for many years .
It is unthinkable that sucrose as an additive should be abolished and replaced with must concentrate to compensate for the abandonment of the very costly practice of crisis distillation .
For this reason , I believe we should support the old compromise package , which will enable us , among other things , to preserve regional winemaking cultures and traditions .
- ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is no doubt that new rules of play are needed in the wine-making sector .
European viticulture is the last part of our agricultural policy that is still not reformed and still works on the principle of ' the higher the yield , the more money from Brussels ' .
This often leads to wine producers paying more attention to quantity rather than quality , which has not escaped our European customers .
They are increasingly choosing wines from California , Chile or South Africa in preference to our Moravian , Czech , French or Italian wines .
We should support quality and competitiveness .
However , this must not involve discriminating against certain Member States while favouring others .
If we really want to agree on a reform of the wine sector , it cannot include the proposed ban on the use of beet sugar for wine enrichment .
Each of our countries has different climatic conditions and different traditions .
The geographic environment of the countries situated in the more northerly parts of Europe is vastly different from that of the southern ones .
Our colder climate often makes it necessary to enrich our wines with sugar .
In my country sugar has been used for wine enrichment for over 200 years ; it is a traditional method .
The European Commission suggests banning sugar enrichment and substituting it with wine must concentrate instead .
Concentrated wine must , if not subsidised , costs at least twice the price of sugar , besides which it is only produced by a few countries .
If we were to use wine must concentrate or rectified must concentrate to enrich our wines , we would have to import it from other countries , which would contravene one of the basic principles of European viticulture , and that is defining the origin of the wine by the origin of the grapes .
Apart from that it would raise the price of the wine and consequently make it less competitive on the market .
That , in my opinion , would be discrimination .
While the Commission objects to the sweetening of wines , nobody seems to be concerned about their souring , that is about the addition of tartaric acid , mainly in the southern European countries .
I would like to raise a glass of honest wine to an honest reform without discrimination and favouritism .
I fear that wine ought to be made from grapes !
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Madam President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of reforming the wine market is to encourage the production of acceptable , good-quality wines .
We welcome the fact that the recommendation will continue to make it possible to increase the alcohol content with sugar in those areas where it qualifies as a traditional method .
There are good wines in the new Member States , including Hungary , and we do not usually produce a surplus .
If a wine is of good quality , it does not matter whether or not it was produced by adding sugar .
However , modernisation and restructuring are necessary to make wines more marketable .
The role of marketing and the provision of a larger national budgetary framework are particularly important in the interests of making investments to promote the change in structure , especially in the new Member States .
It is for precisely this reason that we cannot accept the recommendation that historically based distribution should have a prominent role in the shaping of the national envelopes , which would lead to discrimination and mainly benefit the countries responsible for over-production . Thank you for your kind attention .
( SK ) The European Union is a wine producer of global importance .
By producing high quality wines it has secured a dominant position on the world market .
However , as a result of globalisation , European wine production is facing the threat of cheap wine imports from the US , South America , South Africa , Australia and New Zealand .
Cheaper wines from third countries may bring joy to European consumers , but they are a headache for European producers .
Due to their higher production costs , European wine producers will struggle in a fully open market and that is why we need to reform our wine sector .
EUR 1.3 billion is allocated to the wine sector in the EU budget .
We must use that money to take positive steps towards increasing the quality and attractiveness of our wines as well as for research and development of this sector .
Wine-growing in Slovakia has a long history and it has always been , and still is today , a difficult business .
As wine merchants put pressure on producers to lower their prices , they in turn cannot afford to pay the growers adequate prices for their grapes .
There is a legitimate fear that in their struggle for survival the wine growers will be lured by subsidies into destroying their vineyards .
The danger is that vineyards will be destroyed in areas where no surplus wine is being produced .
To try and limit the grubbing-up to the South of Europe , where there are surpluses and they are being dealt with by subsidised crisis distillation , would be politically unfeasible , as would simply banning sugaring in the north of Europe .
In Slovakia , as in Germany and also in Austria , there is a very long tradition of wine enrichment with sugar .
I would like to express my appreciation to the rapporteur , Mr Castiglione , who has taken such a balanced approach to a topic as emotive as wine .
He has managed to negotiate a viable compromise , which takes into account all the different aspects of the wine sector .
Above all he endeavours to reconcile the interests of all the producers , North and South .
Only a good reform of the wine sector can help preserve the best wine-making traditions in the EU , strengthen social structures , and enhance the quality and attractiveness of our countryside , while protecting the environment .
I am sure visitors to all the various wine-growing regions of Europe will appreciate and enjoy sampling the characteristic wines produced from locally-grown grapes .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , yes , a reform of the COM in wine is desirable , but are the means put forward by the Commission the most suitable ?
From the Brussels viewpoint , we can understand the mathematical equation between a decrease in production and a decrease in the number of producers , but from the viewpoint of south-west France , the plains of Italy , the Spanish or Portuguese coasts , Commissioner , I can assure you that it is not the same thing , and this is an issue which should not be observed through the prism of the economist 's spectacles .
Winemaking means men and women who live off the fruit of their labours .
Vines are their livelihood , and we cannot push them towards the exit door without concerning ourselves as to what they will do for a living .
Moreover , what is the logic in grubbing-up , on the one hand , and on the other suggesting the total liberalisation of planting rights as of 2013 ?
My second question is as follows : why eliminate this regulatory tool when we have no assurances as to how the market will evolve ?
If we really want to fight overproduction , I suggest we order illegal plantings to be grubbed up first .
For you know as well as I do that there are quite a few of these in Europe .
The report also makes provision for a greater variety of measures accessible through the national support programmes .
This is a good thing , because the Commission 's proposal on this point is extremely restrictive .
I therefore regret the insufficiency of the section dealing with crisis prevention .
We know how liable wine production is to yearly variations depending on weather conditions , and crisis prevention measures will only help to mitigate the fluctuations .
I wish to conclude by saying that I understand the rapporteur 's caution on enrichment , which is a sensitive issue , but it is regrettable that authorisation has not been proposed to combine additive and subtractive enrichment methods , which would allow producers to reduce their use of sucrose .
As for the rest of the report , the general approach appears to be going in the right direction , and I will support the rapporteur 's excellent work .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I can hear that you , as well as the rest of the Members of the European Parliament , take a huge interest in the future of the European wine sector .
I do not have enough time at this stage to go into details , and we have already had in-depth discussions in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , so I am just going to leave you with quite a simple message with regard to the future of our wine reform .
It is time to do a deal .
I am quite sure that a reform will make a huge difference for our wine sector and it is time to do a deal because , as rightly mentioned here today , we see an increase in imports , we see an increase in production , but we see a reduction in domestic consumption .
It is time to do a deal because we can spend the budget of the wine sector in a much more intelligent way or in a better way than we do today , in ways which will strengthen the sector and also make much more sense to the public and to the taxpayers .
I think that a deal is within our grasp but , of course , I say as well that it must be the right deal .
We live in the real world , and I have shown considerable flexibility over many of my original proposals , but I will not allow the proposal to be watered down so far that the end product loses all its taste and all its value .
The compromise that we find must give us a reform worthy of the name and it must give us a real chance of achieving the goals that we have set for ourselves .
We can strengthen the competitiveness of our wine sector , we can achieve a better balance between supply and demand and we can make a big improvement in the rules on labelling and many other issues .
We can do all this in such a way that wine production remains a jewel in the crown of European agriculture , as very rightly said by Ms Herranz García today .
It is not the time to make excuses for inaction and watch emerging opportunities just slip through our fingers .
Now is the time to set our wine sector firmly on the road towards new successes .
I know that I can rely on decision-makers who have the sector 's best interests at heart to do the right thing , and I know that I can count on the cooperation of the European Parliament .
I would like to thank you and , again , Mr Castiglione for this very difficult task of bringing together all the different opinions within the European Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I have allowed myself to make the odd remark today because we are not short of time .
You hit the nail on the head : when I was small I almost died from breathing in the vapours emitted by grapes being trampled underfoot in a vat , so there is a close link between life and death .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) Italy and the Italian Members of this House have always defended the European project , in the interests of social rights , consumer protection and our citizens ' quality of life .
The European agricultural policy came about in order to support our farmers and enhance the quality of European produce , so as to strengthen the EU 's position in the world marketplace .
Today , however , with the vote on the reform of the wine market , we have taken several steps backwards in this sector , especially in the Mediterranean countries and regions to which Europe owes the fame and success painstakingly acquired by European wines worldwide .
Backing sucrose enrichment , without even demanding that it be indicated on the label so as to inform consumers , preferring grubbing-up to land rehabilitation , permitting the circulation of planting rights throughout the EU : all of these are practices which , as Europeans and especially as Italians , we find unacceptable in that they will damage the quality and image of one of the products which best represent the quality of European agriculture around the world .
I hope that my colleagues in the Council will make a better fist of defending the future of our wine and of all our wine-growers .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Commission certainly finds it hard to abandon the stereotypical approaches it applies to all sectors indiscriminately .
Wine cannot be treated like spare parts for cars or some other industrially manufactured product .
It is a product that shapes regions , cultures and ways of life .
As far as the COM reform is concerned , if it is necessary it must preserve European winemaking , not get rid of it or disfigure it .
It must support the adaptation of wine producers - particularly the subsequent restructuring of sectors - and give them the means to reconquer the internal market .
Nor should planting right restrictions be lifted .
They provide a guarantee for control of production and continued quality .
In relation to crisis management tools , if the EP improves the situation with respect to the Commission 's initial proposal , I can only regret that crisis distillation - which , if compulsory , would not create the excesses we are seeing now - is no longer an option among the possible instruments for handling temporary crises .
CAP : common rules for direct support schemes and certain support schemes for farmers and support for rural development ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jan Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) - C6-0283 / 2007 - .


Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking Parliament for its efforts on this report and , of course , especially the rapporteur Mr Mulder and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I know from various talks that Mr Mulder closely follows this topic , and my services and I have carefully assessed the different amendments that have been proposed .
I have read with great interest the report drawn up by Mr Mulder .
I really appreciate the strong , dedicated interest of both Mr Mulder and the European Parliament on this topic .
I also appreciate the support that the rapporteur repeatedly expressed for cross-compliance in his report .
As I have said several times , this system is right and necessary and it needs to stay if we want society to support our agricultural payments .
I know that we are completely on the same line .
I could broadly agree with the explanatory statement accompanying the amendments proposed in the report .
In particular , I can endorse the call for having the simplest possible system without watering down its efficiency .
I think we have fulfilled this objective to a large extent with the proposal concerning the control and the sanction system .
Of course , we have the possibility and the chance to continue this work in our health check , where we will mainly focus on the scope of the application of the cross-compliance system .
As regards the amendments tabled to our proposal for a Council regulation , we all have to keep in mind that the discussions were very lively in the Council .
Our initial proposal has evolved and we now have a compromise text agreed by the Commission that is the result of intense discussions .
The Portuguese Presidency has , as far as possible , reflected in the compromise the ideas that you have been raising in the preparation of your report .
On the concrete amendments to the legal provisions you are now proposing , I have to say that they are not relevant to the Council regulation we are discussing just now : a number of them concern the control rules that are under Commission competence and , as I said , the new Commission rules will soon be finally approved .
I think Mr Mulder 's main concerns have been taken on board , and this is the case , in particular , for the improved flexibility that Member States will have to adapt the control system to their administrative organisation .
We have also widely extended the possibility for prior notice of controls .
Another set of Parliament proposals has been discussed in depth at the Council and the compromise reflects all those different opinions .
It is a case of the possibility of getting rid of the 10-month rule - I think fixing a date is a much better idea - the follow-up for the de minimis and minor infringement cases , and the phasing-in of full cross-compliance for the new Member States applying the simplified system .
We want to stick to this compromise text , which was intensively negotiated .
Finally , we will take the opportunity to discuss your proposal to extend the period for the prolongation of the Single Area Payments Scheme ( SAPS ) system ; we will have this opportunity within the discussion on the health check .
As you might have noticed , I personally consider this a very good idea .
I will be back for final comments .
Madam President , following the Commissioner 's introduction there is not really much more debate required , but I would still like to throw some light on the position of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The first element is cross-compliance .
I do not know what it is called in other languages but we have adopted this word in Dutch .
It is a familiar term amongst the farmers .
We do indeed support this , as the Commissioner just said : it is an essential aspect of agricultural production and we think that this is defensible , because it sets requirements for agricultural production that go beyond what is necessary to ensure that the products from agriculture are fit for human consumption .
We go beyond that with all kinds of Directives : Birds and Habitats Directives , environmental Directives , animal welfare standards , etc .
The big question in all this is : what form should the checks take ?
As far as the checks are concerned , I think that as we have more and more reforms it will be essential to have widespread support and understanding of the system of cross-compliance among farmers .
If the methods are too bureaucratic , as they are at the moment , that will not be fostered .
What could we change in this area ?
First , there are too many controlling agencies in individual Member States at the moment and they also still visit on different days .
We are convinced in this report that the number of controlling agencies should be kept to a minimum , that the checks should also be carried out on one day , and that the farmer should be given reasonable advance notice of the visit .
How much notice should be given will be decided in the vote today .
We also believe that there should be a de minimus provision for minor infringements , for petty transgressions : the authorities should not come down too hard in such cases .
You cannot find fault with everything and besides farmers should never be punished twice for something that is covered by both European and national law That would mean paying two fines and we are against that .
An important point in the report - and I think that the Commission is also in favour of this - is that a great many things that are checked by the authorities under cross-compliance are also checked by private industry .
Why should we have two inspection systems ?
Why is it not the case that if private industry checks something , then the public authorities say ' fine , we will check the private industry schemes from time to time and if they are good , we do not need to carry out checks on the farms themselves any more ' .
That could make a huge difference , also from the farmers ' perspective .
I think that could be an excellent form of cooperation with private industry .
To the Commission and Council , we are meanwhile in agreement on abolishing the 10-month rule .
I think that the deadline for submitting applications in the Member States is a guide date for the application for support .
We in the Committee on Agriculture think it is reasonable that the new Member States should also be given extra time to adapt and we have said that if they eventually get 100 % agricultural support payments , they must also observe the cross-compliance rules in full .
We do not know what the future of the system will be but we do know that it is incredibly expensive at present .
Would it be possible for the Commission to produce a rough estimate of what it costs to implement it in each Member State , how the cost in one Member State compares with another and how it compares with the total expenditure associated with cross-compliance ?
This study could also come up with various options for how it could be done more cheaply through cooperation with private industries .
At a rough estimate there are at present about 18 Directives that farmers have to comply with in order not to have their income subsidies cut .
There may be more to come . There is a soil directive in preparation , for instance .
The Commission should investigate whether it might not be possible to reduce the number , and I do have one or two Directives in mind .
It is ridiculous that we have both a Nitrates Directive and a Groundwater Directive .
The Groundwater Directive says that the permitted level of nitrates in groundwater is 50 mg per litre ( if you exceed that , you are liable to penalties ) ; the Nitrates Directive says 1.7 livestock units per hectare .
We should have either one or the other , but not both .
That is too much of a good thing . One of them must go , and I would say the Nitrates Directive .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her comments this morning and also Mr Mulder for his cooperation on this report .
Last week an RTE television programme ( which I once edited and presented ) asked the very simple question , ' How many inspectors does it take to examine a farm ? '
In the case of one farmer , Eamon Healy of Redcross , County Wicklow , it took seven inspections and nine inspectors in a three-month period to examine his farm !
And I think that , by any standards , that level of inspection is excessive and very unwelcome on a farm that is active and busy .
I think it says a lot about the need to radically alter the way we carry out our cross-compliance checks on farms and also the need to streamline - as Mr Mulder said - the many different types of inspections , whether they are Member State or private industry , or EU-required .
About 68 % of cases of non-compliance are considered to be minor , yet they lead to sanctions , and I think we need flexibility around this .
I believe that a sanction of less than EUR 250 should not be imposed .
I know the Commission has other ideas , but I hope it will be persuaded by our arguments .
Over 70 % of cases are around the loss of an ear-tag or some minor issue about identification , with no problems or risk to human health or animal health , and I think we need more flexibility around this particular problem .
We need to be proportionate .
I think we do need to give farmers advance notice .
Many are part-time and giving them advance notice allows them to plan for an inspection .
They cannot really alter much on the farm within a short space of time .
So I think we need to be practical .
I doubt very much if Eamon Healy , the farmer I just mentioned , is aware of our debate here this morning .
I do not think he is logged on and listening .
But I know he will be very keen to find out the outcome of our work and our vote .
He does not want seven inspections or nine inspectors on his farm in a three-month period and he is telling us that we need to streamline how we do our work .
I think we owe it to him and to other farmers to get on with it .

on behalf of the PSE group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I first wish to thank and congratulate Mr Mulder for his work , and also for his methodology and the various consultations he carried out .
His report on implementation of cross-compliance for agricultural aid has acknowledged a start-up phase in the application of this rather complicated system .
The aim is to increase acceptance by all the main players .
It recommends a distinction be made between matters arising from Community frameworks and those subject to national implementation .
It stresses the importance of the principle of subsidiarity , the regulations and demands adapted to risks and local requirements , but also the importance of a common framework guaranteeing European farmers equal treatment .
This dual level of rules has made it extremely difficult to implement the system .
Insufficient information has been provided for farmers ; risk criteria have been used very infrequently ; the management , control and reduction system is too complicated ; insufficient consideration has been given to cases of minor non-compliance ; control rates are not harmonised ; prior notification of controls poses a problem .
Personally , I do not wish to question the spirit of cross-compliance , which provides a response to the legitimate expectations of our society : respect for the environment , traceability , food safety and transparency .
On the other hand , I do wish to highlight the heavy burden of regulations , the difficulties involved in applying them on the ground and the negative perception some farmers have of them , in the belief that their professionalism and know-how are being questioned .
I therefore wish to point out the need for simplification .
I was disappointed with the Commission proposals , which were very limited , and I hope that Parliament 's proposals will be taken over and that the Commission will come up with more ambitious suggestions during the Health Check .
I wish to emphasise that I do not agree at all with the compensation logic that since European farmers are subject to strict production conditions ( animal welfare , environmental concerns , veterinary practices ) they should receive agricultural aid .
Aid for agriculture would to a certain extent establish a fair playing field as regards competition with farmers in third countries who are not subject to the same production conditions . However , I feel that it is because farmers receive public aid that they should , in return , respect a number of production rules .
There should be a genuine contract between farmers and the EU .
We must somehow move from constraint to contract .
I am therefore pleased that my amendment on this matter was adopted and that , when the farmer makes his single application and declares the area used for agricultural purposes , he must also agree to comply with criteria relating to public health , animal welfare and respect for the environment .
The reductions in payments must differ depending on whether non-compliance is deemed an intentional act or the result of negligence .
I was also keen for the sanction to be proportionate to the importance of the sphere of activity affected by the non-compliance at the farm , particularly where this is a mixed crop and stock farming holding .
Farmers in the different Member States must also be obliged to observe the same rules , and therefore it is important to ensure harmonious transposition of the management requirements set out in the Directives .
I also welcome the adaptation measures for the new Member States .
On the other hand , even though I support the introduction of a threshold above which the Member States may decide not to apply any reduction of direct aid , the de minimis threshold , I am totally opposed to raising this threshold to EUR 250 , as proposed in Amendment 16 .
If this were the case , most infringements leading to a reduction in aid would not be sanctioned and the cross-compliance system for aid would make no sense .
I therefore ask you to support Mr Mulder 's Amendment 31 proposing a threshold of EUR 100 , a compromise I feel could be acceptable to all .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I also wish to thank our colleague Jan Mulder for his report today and for his methodology .
I am glad our Parliament is looking into the cross-compliance mechanisms for CAP aid , which have demonstrated since the major reform of 2003 the limitations of a system whose rules are often too finicky , and have transformed the job of farmers into a kind of ad hoc official within the European administration , when they are actually carrying out a mission essential to mankind : feeding us .
The 2003 reform is an unmistakable step forward which ought to help our agricultural sector protect the environment and health , and it was in this spirit in 2005 that we voted in favour of the new EAFRD Regulation replacing the EAGGF - Guarantee section .
I am taking part in the debate today as the permanent rapporteur on the Structural Funds for the Committee on Budgets in order to stress - like many of my colleagues - how important it is to reduce excess bureaucracy in managing these funds .
On the subject of the budget , I feel firstly that it is vital that all players in the agricultural economy and rural development , the main guarantors of environmental protection , reduce useless administrative burdens so that they can focus on their main activity , which is continuing to achieve the quality agriculture we expect , and environment-friendly agriculture at that .
Secondly , I would also like the controls to focus on two matters which are extremely useful in guaranteeing a suitable cost-profit ratio .
I feel it is vital that the rules we make do not hinder use of the available credits for which we fight so fiercely at each round of negotiations with the Member States in the Council .
It is not normal to see such under-use of appropriations at the end of 2007 .
I thus intend to vote for all these measures to the extent that they endeavour to reduce the administrative burden .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I should like to express our support for Mr Mulder .
The concern underpinning the report has been to ensure that the principle of cross-compliance and its associated controls do not penalise farmers unjustifiably .
Agriculture is not simply one more economic activity .
It has a specific social role .
Payments conditional on fulfilling many environmental requirements are not only beneficial to farmers but also to society as a whole .
This broad social role of payments should constantly be emphasised .
A significant sector of society is unaware of this role and it should be explained to them .
I should like to make a very important point .
We require our farmers to abide by the principle of cross-compliance .
We impose conditions on them .
We should impose the same conditions on those who export their agricultural products to Europe .
In particular , the requirements concerning animal welfare should be imposed on all imports without exception .
Economic and humanitarian interests require this to be the case .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , a word of thanks , first of all , to the rapporteur , who certainly took a great deal of trouble , even if the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development did not adopt all of his proposals .
I regret that .
I do not intend to go into detail now but to say in general terms that the compulsory requirement is , of course , compliance with the law .
The new feature , following the severance of the link between production volumes and aid , is that this compliance with the law is now the basis for the payment of premiums .
Those who do not take the premiums cannot have their premiums cut .
Growers need only refrain from applying .
Nevertheless , they still have to observe the law .
Mrs McGuinness , when you speak of seven inspections and nine inspectors - or vice versa - you should be taking up the cudgels with your own national government , for it is up to the Member States to determine how inspections are conducted , and if you have no coordination because numerous different administrative bodies are responsible for enforcing particular laws , and each authority sends its inspectors separately , thereby imposing endless burdens on farmers , that is not a matter for the EU but for your own national tier of government .
Sort that out , and everything will be fine .
I believe there is an urgent need to make these funds conditional .
At the congress , we heard someone say these were farmers ' funds .
No , they are not farmers ' funds : they are granted to farmers .
Do not misunderstand me : it is right that these funds should be awarded , but it is also right that society expects them to be given to those who fulfil certain conditions .
I have just had an inspection myself .
Two people came , having announced their visit .
Although they did not let me choose the time of the visit , they did announce it ; they duly arrived , and it went very smoothly .
Of course , Commissioner , these inspections should also be used to develop an advisory service to help farmers by informing them how best to comply with and apply the law on their farms .
That , as you know , was set in motion back then on the initiative of Parliament , so the possibility exists .
Please make it compulsory for the Member States , and then we shall be one step further forward .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , theoretically the common agricultural policy was meant to guarantee food safety , stability for EU production and prices , and also a decent income for all farmers .
Unfortunately , in the name of the dogma of savage competition , CAP 2003 and its aid decoupling system constitute another step towards abandoning these objectives , even though they are vital European components .
Single payment entitlements contribute to the serious difficulties in sectors such as wine , milk , meat , beetroot , fruit and vegetables .
The entitlements ' environmental cross-compliance principle is nothing more than a trick devised to sell this reform to Bohemians who pass themselves off as environmentalists merely because it is fashionable to do so .
How can we possibly imagine it is possible to increase our protection of the environment by stimulating competition in the agricultural sector and bringing down the prices of foodstuffs at the same time ?
The two requirements are contradictory : it is impossible to combine lower production costs with an increase in environmental regulations .
In the same way , the immediate consequence of decoupling the premium for maintaining suckler cows would be the disappearance of the natural carbon-absorbing meadows , which are particularly effective in combating greenhouse gas emissions .
Protecting the planet and maintaining production of quality European beef mean that decoupling must be rejected .
In a more general context , what we actually need is another agricultural policy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , the rapporteur 's explanatory statement is instructive in that it depicts cross-compliance as a condition for continued public support , and tells us that farmers are now being paid for ' complying with Community legislation in the field of environment , public , animal and plant health and animal welfare ' .
It further states that such regulations are very strict compared with standards in the rest of the world .
That neatly encapsulates everything that is wrong with the EU 's attitude to agriculture , with an aggressive regulatory regime diverting farmers away from their natural ambit of producing food and turning them into guardians of the environment , or what this report calls rural development policy , all of which adds mightily to their costs and reduces output .
It has also had the effect of putting farmers into direct competition for funding with establishments such as country parks and wildlife preserves , which would not naturally be their competitors .
I am aware that the intention of this proposal is to simplify cross-compliance , because it is openly admitted that it has created a heavy , bureaucratic burden for farmers and for Member States to enforce .
It is my contention that it was a bad idea in the first place , and simplifying it is to merely administer a band-aid rather than a cure .
As usual , in EU parlance , ' simplification ' means more standardisation and more control by the Commission .
Again , the major differences inherent in agriculture across the wide diversity of climates prevalent in the EU do not lend themselves to such standardisation .
This report enthusiastically trumpets the view that cross-compliance is an important instrument in justifying public support for farmers .
I doubt that even one per cent of the public would have heard of cross-compliance , never mind understand what it means .
For real simplification , let us do away with cross-compliance altogether and let farmers get on with what they do best , which is to grow crops and rear animals .
Madam President , farmers are not unreasonable people , nor , as a rule , are they dishonest , yet cross-compliance often treats them unfairly , with disproportionate penalties for minor offences and no-notice inspections .
We have heard that 68 % of all cases of non-compliance are classified as minor , yet the sanctions imposed are too often , for the struggling farmer , almost crippling .
Disparity in how cross-compliance is administered from country to country compounds the resentments which it has built up in some .
In my constituency of Northern Ireland , we have had a particular problem with duplicate fields , arising from our conacre system .
Instead of a pragmatic search for a solution , we have had heavy-handed rigidity .
Much of the blame lies with the local Department of Agriculture , but it , and Brussels , could each have done more to resolve that problem .
So , going forward , my plea certainly is for simplification and flexibility , and a good dose of good , old-fashioned common sense to replace the inflexibility of some over-zealous mandarins .
Madam President , first of all I would like to welcome the report today and congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
Cross-compliance and how it is implemented at Member State level are crucial .
We must not allow each other - and each and every Member State - to make their own interpretation .
If you listen to what Ms McGuinness and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said this morning , it shows the difference in interpretation in different Member States .
We have got to get it right at Member State level , and we have got to insist that each Member State implement this directive in the right and proper way in each and every Member State .
Farmers need and require less inspection , not more .
When inspection happens , there must be sufficient notice before inspection occurs .
It is madness , in my opinion , to fine any farmer for the smallest detail ; this is already happening .
Farmers should be allowed a period to put right any problem that is identified , not just be told that they have defaulted and will be penalised .
There is a great need to reduce bureaucracy and red tape in farming .
Cross-compliance must not become a system that allows farmers to be penalised and policed .
We should be there to help farmers and to offer advice on how they can do things better .
Cross-compliance could be a force for good , and those who do the inspections should have clear and proper training and know their responsibilities .
Yes , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is right .
I had an inspection at my farm which lasted seven hours .
The only thing they could find wrong was that one little part of it was no longer considered to be arable land and we had built a poultry unit , which we did not inform them about .
Now , really , an oversight as simple as that - building a poultry unit on your farm and not having informed them within the 12-month period - I do not think is something that you should actually be penalised for .
You should be allowed to put it right at the earliest possible moment .

( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think Mr Mulder 's report makes an admirable effort to improve agricultural policy in Europe .
Agriculture is attracting ever-growing interest in Europe .
Bearing in mind that half the surface area of the European Union is given over to agriculture , I believe that conditionality represents one of the most important political signals explaining the desire to confirm our support for the farm sector , while making that support dependent on respect for the environment .
I should like to emphasise the way in which these rules connect with our citizens , with consumers : we have here a very significant means of raising awareness about a subject as topical as environmental protection .
I endorse the rapporteur 's efforts to simplify conditionality : indeed , in my opinion it is counterproductive to demand excessive efforts of farmers to comply with legislation .
By introducing new issues such as climate change , biofuels , water resources and risk management , the Commission has demonstrated its wish to move forward , even though some ambiguity still surrounds the way in which conditionality is to be handled , if it confines itself to laying down a generic requirement for simplification without clarifying how - and to what end - it is to be implemented .
Elements such as simplification , deregulation and - I myself would add - transparency must always underpin any initiative emanating from the European Union .
I shall stop there but , Commissioner , I am aware that ten days ago you visited Brescia , in my own province , and - even if this is not quite germane to the current debate - you were able to taste the wines and typical products of Brescia : I believe that not adding sugar to wine is a means of striking the right quality balance and fairly rewarding producers .
( GA ) Madam President , guaranteed EU support to farmers should be provided under the common agricultural policy for the years 2007 to 2013 .
And that is why I cannot accept that Commission should attempt to scale down this guarantee by means of its recently announced ' Health Check ' .
The Commission is seeking to cut back the amount of direct payments to farmers to less than 13 % .
This breach of the guarantee is , to my mind , unacceptable because farmers have entered into set-aside arrangements for those years and it would not be right to go back on them .
As regards standards , what I would say is this : if they are to be enforced throughout the EU , they should apply equally to the food brought into the EU - and farmers all over Europe should not be subjected to pointless checks .
We should look at the standard applying to the food that we allow into Europe , and the Commission should take action , instead of bothering farmers , who are doing their best in all parts of Europe , and that certainly includes my country , Ireland .
( RO ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to congratulate our colleagues , rapporteurs and fictive rapporteurs , who undertook the difficult mission of presenting before us this package of complex amendments that are essential for the future of the common agricultural policy .
It is obvious that the very high number of European regulations and directives that farmers must observe renders their access to the aid schemes more difficult .
The rules of the single payment system must be simplified as regards conditionality .
The legal basis allows the application of the minimum rule for reduction of payments , as well as for exemptions from reduction in the case of minimum infringements .
Fewer administrative obligations , harmonized examinations , combination of examinations , including at the level of European institutions , and payments made in due time would improve the overall assistance provided to farmers , thus increasing the efficiency of the common agricultural policy .
It is also necessary to provide increased assistance for preparing inspections , which , in my opinion , should be announced with limited duration and performed by adequately trained people .
Finally , in the case of Bulgaria and Romania , as new Member States , I consider the extension of the optional nature of articles 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 and 9 until 2013 to be judicious , as far as the provisions of these articles refer to statutory requirements in matters of administration .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , all types of agricultural activity and production should comply with the requirements concerning environmental protection , safety , quality and animal welfare .
Mr Mulder 's report contains many important provisions in that regard .
I would ask the Commissioner to focus in particular on four amendments , namely Amendments 19 , 26 , 27 and 29 .
If the cross-compliance system is to be properly implemented in the new Member States whilst also responding to society 's expectations , it will have to be introduced in stages .
The full range of requirements should only come into force in those countries in 2013 , when they begin to receive full direct payments .
We should bear in mind that the financial perspective 2007-2013 does provide resources to enable holdings to adjust and for investment .
Commissioner , the requirements and standards imposed on our farmers are stricter than in third countries .
We need to support our farmers and protect them from unfair competition .
Imported products must comply with the same production process standards as Union products .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank the Members very much for all their contributions to this debate .
You will know that cutting red tape , and making things more simple , have been at the top of this Commission 's agenda from the very beginning .
That was why , when we opened this debate on cross-compliance , we commissioned from Rambøll Management a report on simplifying the CAP that was specifically linked to cross-compliance .
It is a limited study which only covers five different Member States , but it is very interesting and I will supply you with a copy .
It shows , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf rightly says , that there is a huge difference between Member States .
The way in which the cross-compliance system is implemented in Member States is different .
So , as was rightly said , the role of the advisory system is crucial .
I think we should use this study for further discussions , within the health check , on what we can do to simplify the cross-compliance system without watering down the ideas underlying it .
This is a first step , along with the discussion in Council and the Mulder report , but it is not the final step .
Let us continue with the health check to see what might be done , and use all the available information .
This report will be worth looking into to see what can be done , what Member States can do , and how Member States can define best practice among themselves , in order to find a solution in which there is a level playing field .
Thank you for the discussion .
I am sure we will return to this matter again .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) I welcome the postponement of implementation of the expensive requirements relating to cross-compliance for the new Member States ( the so-called new Ten ) .
This is certainly justified .
The countries concerned are not yet receiving the full direct payments that already represent the lion 's share of all expenditure on agriculture in the European Union .
I also welcome the extension of the possibility for the new Member States to benefit from Single Area Payments ( SAPS ) from 2010 to 2013 .
This will avoid placing a heavy and unnecessary burden on the new Member States in connection with implementation of the Single Payments System ( SPS ) .
This is a move in the right direction , but we should not allow it to obscure the serious situation concerning the distribution of resources between the old and the new Member States .
According to the most recent information available , dating from 2005 , the new Member States have received EUR 1.5 billion in direct payments .
This is 21 times less than the old Fifteen .
The beneficiaries , however , only received 2.4 times less ( EUR 2 million and EUR 4.9 million respectively ) .
These enormous differences are also reflected in the average payments received by each beneficiary .
For the new Member States it amounted to EUR 723 , whereas for the old Fifteen it was EUR 6 327 , which is almost nine times more !
Ongoing discrimination against the new Member States is detrimental to farmers in those countries .
It also calls into question the very spirit of the common agricultural policy and the development of agriculture across the whole of the European Union .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

1 .
EC / Morocco agreement : air services , protocol following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania ( vote )
Report : Paolo Costa
2 .
EC / Georgia , Lebanon , Maldives , Moldova , Singapore and Uruguay Agreements : Protocols amending the Agreements on certain aspects of air services following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania ( vote )
- Report : Paolo Costa
3 .
Rural development : adapting Annex VIII to the Act of Accession of Bulgaria and Romania ( vote )
- Report : Neil Parish
4 .
Monitoring of exports of agricultural products receiving refunds or other amounts ( vote )
- Report : Herbert Bösch
5 .
Wheeled agricultural or forestry tractors : coupling device and reverse ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Report : Hans-Peter Mayer
6 .
Non-automatic weighing instruments ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Report : Hans-Peter Mayer
7 .
Radioactive contamination of foodstuffs and of feedingstuffs ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Report : Hans-Peter Mayer
8 .
Minimum standards for the protection of calves ( codified version ) ( vote )
- Report : Francesco Enrico Speroni
9 .
Marketing of fruit plant propagating material and fruit plants intended for fruit production ( recast version ) ( vote )
- Report : Ioannis Gklavakis
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I would like to thank all the Members for their support in the drafting of the report .
I am delighted that it is unanimously being brought for a vote in plenary , but this cannot stop us from speaking out strongly against the recasting procedure which the Commission chose for this particular proposed directive .
This report is very important because it aims to provide a sound basis for the distribution of fruit trees , so that they are certified and safeguarded in terms of plant hygiene in order to protect the farmer , the consumer and the environment .
It is of paramount importance that the producer should be able to obtain healthy propagation material , both to prevent the spread of new diseases and to protect his income , and also to reduce the use of pesticides , which are , as we all know , so harmful to the environment . This is why we tabled a number of amendments .
Let us not forget that with the enlargement of the European Union to 27 countries , the movement of goods became easier , simpler and free of red tape .
This conceals dangers .
We must be careful because the movement of plant products without inspections poses the risk of the spread of diseases , with disastrous consequences for the environment and for the economy .
To conclude , I would like to reiterate my opposition to the recasting procedure , which prevents us from making improvements where we consider them necessary .
I believe this policy is dangerous , especially if the Commission chooses it in future reforms of other proposed regulations and directives .
10 .
Temporary provisions concerning rates of VAT ( vote )
- Report : Ieke van den Burg
- Before the vote :
Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted for the report by Ieke van den Burg on 21 November 2007 , and the Council took a decision along the same lines last week .
This is not the first time that we have had to make an urgent statement on these matters , and we wish to lend the Commissioner our support in his bid to achieve a stabilised system .
In this regard , however , we are taking the opportunity afforded by the report to transmit some very clear messages .
The first is that we need to determine whether or not the idea of definite arrangements based on the country of origin is still the aim of the European Union .
We also need to offer the Member States more flexibility in the use of lower rates for goods of basic necessity for social , economic , cultural and environmental reasons . We must also offer the Member States space to use lower rates in terms of political objectives .
Finally , we need to authorise lower VAT rates to assist labour-intensive services .
Parliament is willing to play its part and will support the Commissioner in his determination to find a viable solution to this issue .
11 .
The ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking ( vote )
- Report : Gianni De Michelis
12 .
The ENIAC Joint Undertaking ( vote )
- Report : Nikolaos Vakalis
13 .
The Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking ( vote )
- Report : Françoise Grossetête
14 .
The Clean Sky Joint Undertaking ( vote )
- Report : Lena Ek
15 .
Green Paper : Diplomatic and consular protection of Union citizens ( vote )
- Report : Ioannis Varvitsiotis
- Before the vote :


rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I feel I must thank the three shadow rapporteurs , Mrs Kaufmann , Mr Moreno Sánchez and Mr Guardans Cambó , for the close and extensive cooperation we have had , and all the Members of the Commission for accepting my arguments .
The large majority by which the Commission accepted my report shows that the Member States must lay aside their petty objections and take action soon , so that this Green Paper can become a reality , a legislative instrument which will help all the citizens of the Union .
16 .
Draft amending budget No 7 / 2007 ( vote )
- Report : James Elles
17 .
Electronic customs and trade ( vote )
- Report : Christopher Heaton-Harris
18 .
Protection and conservation of the marine environment : Marine Strategy Directive ( vote )
- Report : Marie-Noëlle Lienemann
19 .
Air pollution : ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe ( vote )
- Report : Holger Krahmer
20 .
The interoperability of the Community rail system ( Recast ) ( vote )
- Report : Josu Ortuondo Larrea
21 .
CAP : common rules for direct support schemes and certain support schemes for farmers and support for rural development ( vote )
- Report : Jan Mulder
We will now adjourn the session for the formal sitting for the award of the Sakharov Prize .
We will continue subsequently with the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Award of the Sakharov Prize ( Formal sitting )
Honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , for almost two decades the European Parliament has been awarding the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to men and women from all parts of the world who campaign for human rights , freedom of speech and freedom of expression .
I am delighted to bid a very warm welcome today , here in the European Parliament , to the winner of the Sakharov Prize for 2007 , Salih Mahmoud Osman .
( Applause )
It also gives me great pleasure to extend my warmest greetings to his wife , Salwa Ahmed Faragalla Ali , who has always stood by his side at difficult times in his life .
We welcome you among us .
( Applause )
The decision to award the 2007 Sakharov Prize to Salih Mahmoud Osman was taken unanimously by the Conference of Presidents , which comprises the chairs of the political groups , on the basis of a proposal adopted by a large number of Members of the European Parliament from various groups .
The European Parliament has thereby reaffirmed its solidarity with the people in Darfur and its conviction that a sustainable solution for that region can only be achieved through justice , democracy and respect for human rights .
The conflict that has plagued Darfur since 2003 is exacerbating the plight of a country devastated by more than twenty years of civil war .
As with most conflicts , it is the civilian population who have suffered most from militia raids , the destruction of villages , scorched-earth policies and forcible displacements .
The conflict has claimed at least 400 000 lives and has been responsible for more than two and a half million displaced persons and refugees , notwithstanding the signing of the peace agreement in Darfur in 2006 .
Just like the European Parliament , the winner of the 2007 Sakharov Prize does not simply accept this unjust situation but protests against the impunity of those who caused it .
For years Salih Mahmoud Osman has been defending the rights of victims of the conflict in Darfur .
Thousands of people who have been imprisoned without trial , tortured and exposed to death threats , who have been driven from their homes , displaced or subjected to sexual violence are familiar with the name of Salih Mahmoud Osman .
His commitment is remarkable in several respects .
In a country where violence is constantly on the increase , Salih Osman risks his life on a daily basis in the cause of human dignity and justice .
In the name of human dignity , Salih Osman reassures those destitute , defenceless and intimidated men and women who have sunk into oblivion that the world is aware of their suffering , that they have not been forgotten and that they have reason to hope for a return to a perfectly normal and simply human life .
Since 2004 , Salih Osman has been committing himself to the establishment and administration of the Amal Centre in Nyala , amal being Arabic for ' hope ' , for the rehabilitation of victims of violence and sexual abuse .
In a predominantly Muslim country , Salih Osman is one of the few men who campaign actively in support of women 's rights and especially for recognition of the right to compensation for victims of sexual violence .
In the name of justice , Salih Osman strives , day after day , to ensure that those responsible for war crimes are held to account both nationally and internationally .
While the Sudanese judicial system still has many defects that make it unable to put an end to the prevailing climate of lawlessness within the country , international jurisdiction seems to offer an alternative .
The fact that the Sudanese authorities are refusing to hand over alleged war criminals to the International Criminal Court , however , highlights the limits of international justice and shows how much progress is still needed before the rule of law can be established in Darfur and throughout Sudan .
That is why Salih Osman 's work is not confined to the legal aid he gives the victims .
As a member of the Opposition in the Sudanese Parliament since 2005 , he does not hesitate to affirm his convictions in the Sudanese political arena and to engage in efforts to bring about genuine reform of the legal system .
At the meeting between the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament on the eve of last weekend 's EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon , I had the opportunity and the great pleasure to meet Salih Osman .
I was immediately impressed by his strong personality and his unbending will to fight for human rights in spite of all the persecution and hostility to which he and his family have been subjected .
I learned a short while ago that Ali and you have three children , who are also very much in our thoughts today .
In 2004 Salih Osman himself was imprisoned for seven months without being charged , and it was only when he went on hunger strike that he was released .
Members of his family have been tortured and murdered or have had their houses set on fire by the militias .
The great German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe once wrote , ' Knowing is not enough ; we must apply . Willing is not enough ; we must do ' .
Salih Osman embodies that kind of will and determination , showing his courage in his daily struggle on behalf of his fellow human beings .
He is an exemplary campaigner for greater respect for the rule of law in his region . Salih Mahmoud Osman , you have our firm support and our warm acclaim .
As you know , the European Parliament has always been particularly receptive to the suffering of the African peoples .
Salih Osman is one of a number of African prizewinners to whom Parliament has given its support in past years and whom it continues to support .
Nelson Mandela was awarded the Sakharov Prize in 1988 , Salima Ghezali in 1997 , Dom Zacarias Kamwenho in 2001 and Hauwa Ibrahim in 2005 .

Salih Osman , we congratulate you on your untiring work in this cause , in this spirit , and we hope that the recognition this prize brings might grant you strength and protection from year to year for as long as your struggle continues . We are at your side .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , may I ask you to stand , or remain standing , for the European anthem in honour of Salih Osman .
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Costa on amendment of the agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Morocco on certain aspects of air services .
This relates to a proposal for a Council decision on agreeing a Protocol amending the Agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Morocco on certain aspects of air services to take account of the accession to the European Union of the Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Romania .
The Protocol provides for essential changes to bilateral agreements on air services between the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Romania pursuant to the accession of the latter two countries to the European Union .
Both Bulgaria and Romania had previously concluded agreements on air services with Morocco , in 1966 and 1971 respectively .
The European Community , however , concluded a horizontal agreement in December 2006 .
It is therefore necessary to adjust the agreements to Community legislation and enable both new Member States to accede to the horizontal agreement .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Romanian Members of the European Parliament from the Group of European Socialists abstained from voting on the report regarding the agreements between the EC and Georgia , Lebanon , Maldives , Moldova , Singapore and Uruguay on certain aspects of the air services due to the reference , in the text of the Agreement with the Republic of Moldova , to the Moldavian language in the phrase " Concluded in Luxembourg in two counterparts in the Bulgarian , Czech , Danish , Dutch , English , Estonian , Finnish , French , German , Greek , Hungarian , Italian , Latvian , Lithuanian , Maltese , Polish , Portuguese , Romanian , Slovakian , Slovenian , Spanish and Swedish and in the Moldavian language ” .
The delegation of Romanian Social Democrats emphasizes that Romania 's participation in this agreement does not involve the acknowledgment of the designation of " Moldavian ” language .
The Romanian Members of the Group of European Socialists reiterate that , in compliance with the factual and scientific evidence , including the interpretation of the Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Moldova ( of September 1994 ) , the correct designation is the Romanian language .
It is necessary to take into consideration the fact that , in many other agreements , the Commission has used the neutral wording " Concluded at ...... in ........ day of ........... of the year ............ in two counterparts in each of the official languages of the Parties , each text having equal legal power ” .
We regret the fact that this wording was not used in the agreements with the Republic of Moldova and recommend the use of this neutral wording in the official documents regarding the EU relationship with the Republic of Moldova .
in writing . - Briefly I want to raise through my support of this report the problems still being experienced by EU airlines in regard to rights to fly over Russia .
These rights are not only restricted by the Russian authorities but they are also expensive , issued in a discriminatory way , and in a manner that clearly disadvantages EU carriers , particularly those flying a number of routes to the Far East .
This problem has been known about for some considerable time but the unwillingness of the Russian authorities to renegotiate with the EU on this issue has been both expensive and unhelpful .
We now need the Commission and the Russian authorities to reinvigorate their efforts to find a solution to this very serious problem .
in writing . - ( DE ) Even though various reactor accidents occurred many years ago , we are still paying the price of past mistakes .
Immediately after nuclear accidents , things like game , berries and mushrooms are temporarily removed from our menus , only to reappear after a short while .
It is important to set restrictive maximum permissible levels , but there is still a shortage of studies on the effects of radiation on humans , just as the emerging field of genetic engineering has been insufficiently researched .
The EU must devote itself without delay to these important and urgently awaited impact studies , make preparations for the abandonment of nuclear energy and leave it to the Member States to take their own decisions on the use of genetic engineering . Since the aforementioned points were not adequately addressed in the report , I abstained .
in writing . - The common organisation of the market in fisheries products is intended to ensure stability in the market and security of income for those involved in the sector .
These aims and , indeed , the aims set out in the EC Treaty are worthy and should have led to prosperity in Europe 's fishing communities .
Unfortunately the past two and a half decades of centralised Brussels control in the form of the CFP have been disastrous for those communities .
A thriving market with job security are not achievable within the context of the CFP and control of fisheries management must be returned to the nations dependent on fisheries .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted against the report because it deals with provisions for the common agricultural policy , which we want to abolish .
The common agricultural policy needs to be radically reformed , and for a few years now we have been calling for a discussion to start as early as possible .
We think that the EU should already start to cut back on agricultural support in 2010 , after the so-called health check on the long-term budget for 2007-2013 .
This is why the Junilistan Members are usually unable to vote for the various reports on agriculture which come before the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( EL ) Plant hygiene and the certification of propagation material for fruit-bearing plants and fruit trees are of the highest importance for the producer because the initial establishment of an orchard , when properly accomplished , is a guarantee of good produce .
Undoubtedly the legislation needs to be adapted to developments in the sector .
However , although we agree with most of the amendments to Mr Gklavakis 's report , we have reservations and disagree with those amendments which accept genetically modified propagation material , even as rootstock , because it poses risks to human health and the environment .
As yet there are no scientific studies guaranteeing that there are no effects .
As regards imports from third countries , we agree that there should be no deviations because there are risks of the spread of pathogens in the European Union , with repercussions on production , product quality and agricultural income .
in writing . - ( PT ) We defend the application of the principle of subsidiarity .
As a result , we agree that the Community should not impinge upon Member States ' competence .
This is the case , for example , with locally supplied services which do not involve cross-border activities and therefore have , in principle , no effect on the functioning of the internal market .
As a result , in the area of indirect taxation and as regards the setting of VAT rates , each State must be totally free to act .
Even if the Council decides on a definitive system for the taxation of intra-Community transactions , Member States should be able to apply reduced rates or possibly even zero rates to goods and services which meet basic needs , such as food and medicines , and also to locally supplied services , including services and provision of goods linked to education , welfare , social security work and culture .
Even if a definitive system for the taxation of intra-Community transactions is decided by the end of 2010 , Member States should be able to apply reduced VAT rates in order to reinforce the existence and maintenance of locally supplied services as well as their role in the formal economy .
in writing . - ( FR ) For once we were tempted to vote in favour of a report on VAT by this Parliament .
It favours abandoning the aim of definitive arrangements based on taxation in the country of consumption , and this objective alone justified the increased harmonisation of rates .
It also favours applying the principle of subsidiarity , which would allow the Member States to apply zero VAT to services provided locally , such as catering or other aspects , as a solution to social , educational and cultural aims etc .
It also seeks to maintain many derogations which should have terminated in 2007 until 2010 .
We agree with all this .
However , we cannot agree with the desire to maintain European legislation on VAT and the wish to secure identical rates whatever happens , in the name of simplification of trade and customs formalities for intra- EU trade .
Taxation is a sovereign responsibility of individual countries , and the disparities concerning one type of tax often offset inequalities in another .
They are not , therefore , always illegitimate .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the context of the ongoing debate on transitional VAT rates , the European Parliament was asked for its opinion regarding extension of the temporary provisions concerning these rates .
We are today voting on this opinion .
It somewhat belated , as we are aware that the European Union has decided to continue applying preferential VAT rates after 1 January 2008 .
Nonetheless , I believe this is a very important opinion .
It certainly is the right decision for the countries that joined the Union in 2004 , and we fully endorse it .
Parliament 's opinion on the subject is unambiguous and advocates retaining certain temporary provisions concerning VAT rates .
The decision merits broad support .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the van den Burg report on VAT .
The report highlights the importance of the subsidiarity principle in taxation matters and , correctly I believe , states that the principle should apply where services have no cross-border element and accordingly have no impact on the internal market .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Commission can never get it right on the subject of VAT .
In the 1980s the Cockfield Report called for a range of VAT rates .
In fact , there was only a minimum rate of 15 % , 5 % as the normal rate and the lower rate .
Then the European Commission wanted VAT at the rate applied by the country of origin .
In practice VAT was levied at the rate applied by the country of destination .
It was a provisional system that became a definitive system : the so-called ' Bolkenstein VAT ' was not introduced .
There were now lower rates of VAT for French catering entities , CDs and activities generating a workforce .
The Commission gave in at least provisionally in its list in Annex H to the Sixth Directive in 1977 , because it realised that Germans could hardly drive their Mercedes to a cross-border lunch at the low-VAT restaurant .
What a shame it did not realise in 1993 that with no border controls intra-Community VAT was an inexhaustible source of large-scale fraud .
The philosophical logic of VAT , an intelligent tax since it is economically neutral , is inaccessible to the vast majority of Commission officials .
That is why their legislation has failed constantly on this issue for the past 20 years .
I would like to draw attention to the two amendments that I proposed and that have been approved in the final report .
The first proposal states that every country should have the right to apply reduced rates of VAT or , in exceptional circumstances , possibly even zero rates to basic goods and services , such as food and medication , for social and environmental reasons and for the benefit of the consumer .
The second proposal states that it should be possible to apply reduced or even zero rates of VAT to goods linked to education , social security and culture .
At present , reduced rates of VAT can already be applied to goods linked to education . This amendment reinforces this .
I appeal to the Council of Ministers to follow the European Parliament 's policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) Our abstention on this report is due to the doubts surrounding the establishment of ARTEMIS , its functioning and its management .
The formation of joint undertakings in the context of public-private partnerships , as is the case with the establishment of ARTEMIS in order to implement a Joint Technology Initiative , as set out in this report , includes the idea of using public funds for private purposes and interests , whereas cooperation in the other direction , either financial or involving the transfer of knowledge , seems to be absent .
In this context , the objectives seem to be contradictory as the private initiative pillar is founded on the accumulation of profits whereas the public service pillar is founded on the service of public interests and on the response to the concerns of the population .
However , investment in research , particularly in the area of integrated IT systems , is a contribution which we regard as essential for the development of technology in Europe .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , ARTEMIS is the first of four proposed joint undertakings with a joint aim and justification .
The others are Clean Sky , ENIAC and Innovative Medicine .
All four enterprises even have a joint headquarters in Brussels , which remains a joint capital for the Fleming and Walloon peoples .
Parliament 's Committee on Budgets expressed its support for the four new institutions provided for under the Seventh Framework Programme .
It did so in the hope that the public-private partnership model devised for them will prove more realistic than was the case for the Galileo Programme .
It should be noted , however , that the time frame and budgetary arrangements for ARTEMIS and the other joint undertakings ( 2008-2013 ) are not in line with standard financial arrangements laid down in the seven-year financial perspective 2007-2013 .
This could give rise to certain problems in the future .
We also noted the relatively low figure allocated to administrative costs in the breakdown of total expenditure on the four joint undertakings , namely EUR 84 million for the years 2008-2017 .
This represents around 3.5 % of the total expenditure and substantiates our concerns .
The question of proliferation of institutions within the framework of the European Union remains open , however , and does not only involve the institutional reconstruction of the Seventh Framework Programme .
( SK ) The Innovative Medicines Initiative is a unique initiative instigated by the European Commission and the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations , which will have a budget of EUR 2 billion to 2013 .
That is why I also voted in favour of the report .
I am convinced that this partnership between the private and public sectors will help to speed up the distribution of better and safer medicines .
I am happy that the Innovative Medicines Initiative will improve research conditions and with them the chances of developing better medicines for the treatment of neglected diseases .
Secondly , as a member of the small and medium-sized enterprises association I am thrilled with this first public-private partnership , which includes funding for cooperation between small and medium-size enterprises , universities , research centres , academies and associations , which are members of the EFPIA .
This method of financing will at last provide access to the required resources and thereby create a favourable environment for research in the European Union and increase its competitiveness .
Our Member States should expect results ....
( The President cut off the speaker )

( CS ) Mr President , I am one of the critics of the lack of cooperation between large corporations and universities and I also object to the low level of resources available for research within the EU , due to the fact that , compared with the US , only one third of funding here comes from the private sector .
Today at last we are sending very good news from Strasbourg to the European research industry by adopting a seven-year plan for innovative medicine at the cost of EUR 2 billion .
The format of this undertaking is innovative in itself as it represents a partnership between the private and public sectors .
This can double the available resources and also helps to unify research targets .
I believe it will give a fresh impulse to knowledge management , education and vocational training .
I am convinced that we can reverse the trend of falling efficiency in the European pharmaceutical industry and achieve a more easily accessible high-quality treatment , especially of cancer and Alzheimer 's disease .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for getting the report to its successful second reading .
in writing . - ( FR ) In my capacity as rapporteur I am very pleased with the adoption of this report on setting up an Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking ( IMI ) .
Implementation of this public / private partnership between the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries ' Associations ( EFPIA ) and the European Commission represents a major promising step forward for large-scale research programmes .
The European Commission is duty bound to consider European needs from another angle .
The IMI will have a total budget of EUR 2 billion between 2008 and 2013 .
The European Commission 's contribution of EUR 1 billion will be disbursed to SMEs and universities .
In return , major companies will match this amount with a contribution in kind .
They will involve the SMEs and universities by providing them with tools and methodologies to better predict the harmlessness and effectiveness of medicines , intelligent infrastructures and knowledge management .
This cooperation between leading businesses , small-scale research centres , SMEs and universities will help fashion their research projects .
IMI will also make improvements to knowledge transfer at universities and in business , and to the involvement of smaller companies in European research .
in writing . - ( PL ) The subject of innovative medicines is particularly close to my heart , because I am actively involved in Poland with helping children suffering from rare genetic diseases .
Unfortunately , these children are not covered by any health insurance programmes , and the medicines they require are too expensive .
In most European countries , the cost of the medicines needed to keep such children alive and give them the opportunity to live near-normal lives is refunded .
As a Member of the European Parliament , I realise how important a European approach to the whole issue of medicines is .
I refer to innovation , Union support for research and for scientists , and also to Union encouragement of pharmaceutical concerns , urging them to develop new medicines .
In my opinion , the report by Mrs Grossetête is very important indeed .
I agree that the Union must change to a new and more effective method of managing research and innovation aimed at promoting the economic development of our continent , bringing relief to our citizens and even saving their lives in some cases .
The European Commission 's proposal to create joint technology initiatives will harmonise and simplify project financing .
With regard to research programmes on innovative medicines , it is important to involve SMEs , universities , patients , hospitals and the pharmaceutical industry , to ensure that medicines are safer , cheaper and more readily available .
The public-private partnerships proposed by the Commission are therefore an excellent solution .
They represent a new option for the pharmaceutical research sector .
in writing . - ( ES ) The Spanish Socialist Delegation voted in favour of the Ek report on the creation of the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking , but I wish to make it clear that the basic principles of openness and transparency must be strictly observed in all Joint Technology Initiatives .
In particular , with regard to Clean Sky the Spanish Socialist Delegation has always supported the need for open and competitive invitations to tender to ensure equitable access for participants in all the Member States on the basis of excellence .
In view of all this , the Spanish Socialist Delegation wishes to place on record that the Clean Sky undertaking must not constitute a precedent for future Joint Technology Initiatives or for other instruments of the Seventh Framework Programme , and considers it is essential that all the Member States participate on an equal footing .
in writing . - ( PT ) As European citizens , we enjoy a series of rights , including the right to diplomatic and consular protection .
All EU citizens may be protected by the diplomatic and consular authorities of any other Member State where their country does not have an embassy or consulate in the territory of a third country .
This issue is even more relevant if we consider that there are only three countries - China , Russia and the US - where all the EU Member States have diplomatic and consular representation .
In addition to the fact that the representation of Member States in third countries can differ widely , there are also cases where this representation is non-existent ( such as the Maldives ) .
I support this initiative which aims to ensure that the provisions of Article 20 of the EC Treaty and Article 46 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights can be effectively used in practice , by laying the foundations for a genuine harmonised fundamental right to diplomatic and consular protection for all EU citizens , regardless of their nationality .
The establishment by the Treaty of Lisbon of a European Foreign Service with its own competences and responsibilities is also positive .
Agreeing that it is essential to inform the people , I support the establishment of a single European emergency telephone number which will enable EU citizens to obtain the information they need , particularly in critical and emergency situations .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Varvitsiotis report , which seeks to enhance diplomatic and consular protection for EU citizens living or travelling in countries in which their home Member State does not have representation .
My own country , Scotland , does not currently have independent diplomatic representation anywhere in the world .
I believe that situation is likely to change in the next few years , and I look forward to Scotland 's overseas representatives being there for all EU citizens in time of need .
in writing . - ( DE ) The case of Muhammad the teddy bear has brought home to us once again how easy it is to get into a tight spot in a foreign country .
It does not always take a natural disaster , an accident or the loss of a passport ; a cultural misunderstanding can be enough .
We still have a great deal to do in this area .
In Turkey , for example , an applicant country for accession to the EU , life can be dangerous for Western travellers , since - as a very recent study demonstrates - the oft-proclaimed improvement in the protection of minorities exists only on paper , and the situation on the ground has actually deteriorated .
Two things , therefore , need to be done .
The first is to establish a sound network of diplomatic missions that can serve our citizens as an anchor , and the second is to ensure that the travelling public are not only aware of an ambassador 's responsibilities but also know that they can seek assistance from the embassy of any EU Member State .
In the light of these considerations , I voted for the envisaged action plan .
in writing . - ( PL ) There are only three countries in the world where all European Union Member States have diplomatic and consular representation , namely China , the United States and Russia .
There is no representation whatsoever in certain popular tourist destinations .
Pursuant to the Commission 's initiative , every European citizen is entitled to diplomatic and consular protection from any other Member State with a representation in a third country on the same conditions as the citizens of that other Member State .
This is only relevant , however , when the home Member State has no embassy or diplomatic representation in a third country .
I am in favour of such a solution .
Unfortunately , in view of the content of the second part of this motion for a resolution , I was obliged to vote against it .
Mutual practical diplomatic and consular assistance in the broadest sense of the notion must not involve assuming the competences of any other Member State .
Regrettably , that is what the motion for a resolution aims to achieve .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained in the vote on diplomatic and consular protection for citizens of European Union Member States .
Clearly , however , I would like such protection to be provided .
On 11 September 2007 the Belgian police beat up and arrested Mr Borgheio , a Member of the European Parliament , in front of the European Parliament 's building even though he identified himself as an Member of the European Parliament and informed the police about his parliamentary immunity .
This incident shows that it is not necessary to seek out third countries to appreciate that the protection provided is not as good as it could be , even in the case of parliamentarians .
I believe we should first deal with the situation in our immediate vicinity .
in writing . - ( PT ) This seventh Amending Budget for the year 2007 includes a further EUR 4 324.8 million in revenue and also a decrease of EUR 1 651.4 million in expenditure , thus allowing the Member States to reduce their contributions to the Community budget by around EUR 5 976.2 million .
While the increase in revenue is largely due to the VAT and GNI balances , budgetary under-implementation is mainly responsible for the significant reduction in expenditure , with the cuts essentially affecting the headings of cohesion , fisheries , environment and agriculture .
The late adoption of many operational programmes of the Structural Funds for the 2007-2013 period ( and others ) is the justification given by the Commission and by the Council for not using the appropriations forecast for 2007 .
However , these amounts are not transferred to the 2008 budget to respectively boost the appropriations for these policies .
It is noted that the amounts forecast in the 2008 Budget for these headings are within those agreed in the Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-2013 .
The non-implementation of these amounts in the Community budget is very worrying and should be very closely monitored given that 2007 is the first year of the new financial framework 2007-2013 and that Rule N + 2 is still being applied in relation to the previous financial framework within which the appropriations must be fully used by 2008 .
in writing . - ( PL ) We are living in the 21st century , and have no option but to adjust to new and fast-changing circumstances .
That is why I warmly welcome the report by Mr Heaton Harris on the introduction of a paperless environment for customs and trade .
The provisions of this document are very relevant to modern Europe and should be introduced as a matter of urgency .
They refer to the tools with which to create a new generation of working environment in customs and trade .
I refer to the establishment of a paperless environment , which is so necessary mainly to relieve our officials , who are reeling from the demands of unnecessary administrative paper documentation .
We should also keep in mind issues pertaining to environmental protection and the quantities of trees that have to be sacrificed to meet the demand for paper required for this purpose .
I consider the introduction of electronic customs systems to be particularly important and urgent .
I also advocate the creation of ' Single Window ' and ' One-Stop Shop ' facilities .
I am convinced Europe should invest more in this type of solution , to ensure that the statements in the Lisbon Strategy become more than empty words .
in writing . - ( CS ) We are now confronted with a serious problem of trying to control the immense volume of imported goods , mainly from Asia .
Solving this problem requires customs systems that are electronic and interconnected .
Electronic trade and customs have already become a necessity for an efficient European market , even prior to the introduction of the modernised customs code .
I would like to point out that we also need a system capable of intercepting goods which do not conform to the European safety standard and preventing such goods from entering the EU .
The text we adopted today will provide for much more effective control of imports .
It also has the advantages of a single window and a one-stop shop , which will provide access to information on international transactions not only for customs authorities but also for suppliers , buyers and hauliers .
No doubt this system will also be used by the national supervisory bodies responsible for controlling the safety of goods on the market .
The Commission has slowed down the implementation of the system into three stages to be introduced in 3 , 5 , and 6 years .
I am afraid , however , that much faster action is needed and I hope that the Commission will soon be pressurised to revise its decision .
( LT ) I am glad that the Baltic Sea , the most polluted sea in Europe , has been selected as a pilot area for the implementation of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive .
The Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council leaves implementation of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive to the Member States , having drawn up an integrated framework for marine policy in the Baltic Region .
Nine countries in the Baltic Region are EU Member States and there is only one third country - Russia .
There are substantial doubts as regards improvement of the Baltic Region 's environmental status 2010 .
These doubts arise because of the plans to develop the Russo-German gas pipeline across the whole of the Baltic Sea .
We will all suffer the consequences of the construction and exploitation of this gas pipeline .
The sea water will be used for testing the pressure in the gas pipeline ; afterwards it will be pumped back into the sea .
In addition , chemical weapons from the Second World War lurking at the bottom of the sea also represent a danger .
I support the document ; nevertheless , I find it hard to visualise the integrated EU framework for improving the environmental status of the Baltic Sea .
Moreover , in my opinion , we should involve Russia in the development and implementation of this framework .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mrs Lienemann 's recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy ( Marine Strategy Framework Directive ) .
The compromise reached between the European Parliament and the Council will enable a framework to be established for the protection and preservation of the marine environment , the prevention of its deterioration and , where practicable , the restoration of that environment in areas where it has been adversely affected .
in writing . - ( PT ) Today we adopted the recommendation for second reading on the common position establishing a Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy .
Bearing in mind the economic , social and environmental aspects , it seems fairly important to have a policy for the marine environment with the necessary cooperation and coordination between the various countries , while all retaining their full sovereignty over their territory and resources .
However , the central issue is respect for the sovereignty of the Member States , particularly over their exclusive economic zones ( EEZs ) and their capacity to adopt independent measures to protect their resources .
As a result , we cannot forget that the proposed ' Reform ' Treaty contains a clause which aims to give the European Union exclusive competence for the management of marine resources within the common fisheries policy .
Furthermore , it must also be taken into account that marine pollution and intensive maritime transport impact on fishing activity and the protection of marine resources .
Fishermen are therefore the first to be interested in protecting and regenerating marine resources .
As a result , measures to ensure recovery of stocks must include measures with adequate financing in order to offer economic and social compensation to the sector and its workers .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this report , which encourages the Member States to take the necessary measures towards ' good environmental status ' in marine affairs by 2020 .
The marine environment hosts vital resources and its ecosystem provides essential services such as climate regulation and oxygen production .
Policies concerning maritime transport , fishing , energy or even tourism have evolved separately , occasionally leading to failures , inconsistencies or usage conflicts .
A more global approach was necessary , taking account of all aspects of a sustainable development policy for Europe 's marine environment .
The Member States must devise strategies for the marine environment in a number of stages for waters falling under their sovereignty .
By 2015 these strategies ought to produce a programme of measures designed to achieve good environmental status .
Member States sharing the same marine region or sub-region will have to cooperate to coordinate the various components of marine environment strategy .
Work must continue with the creation of marine parks , as highlighted by the Grenelle Environmental Forum .
The report provides for the creation of protected areas , but it could have been more restrictive .
in writing . - I was able to support the compromise package reached across this house on the Lienemann report on the marine environment .
It is essential for future policy in this area that a holistic and balanced approach is taken .
The Common Fisheries Policy perhaps serves as a template for how not to nurture the marine environment .
Central control from Brussels is no way to manage the seas and oceans of Europe and the wider world .
I therefore recognise that the EU has a valuable role to play in marine environmental policy but also believe that the needs and views of individual maritime communities must be factored into the equation .
( PL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of this report as a representative of one of the eight countries most directly concerned and fully aware of what is involved .
I did so because in Poland there is a significant concentration of particles , in excess of the permitted daily and annual levels .
Silesia is the area most affected .
It is the most industrialised region of the country .
I consider this to be a step in a very positive direction as regards protecting the environment in my country in general and in Silesia in particular .
( CS ) ( The beginning of the speech was inaudible ) ... and cleaner air for Europe is a very good example of the way the Union works .
The joint undertaking is based on Article 251 of the EC Treaty .
This Directive simplifies the legislation , replaces several other Directives and also stipulates the permissible levels of small particles in the air .
It is the result of a consensus between political groups as well as between countries .
Moreover , it is an example of a sensitive approach to the delimitation of competency in this area between the Union and the Member States .
I appreciate the work done by the rapporteurs and I am happy that we have adopted this modern Directive , which simplifies and underpins our high ambitions in this area .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mr Krahmer 's recommendation for second reading on the Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe .
I did this because I consider that the text negotiated between Parliament and the Council is generally positive , both in terms of protecting public health and in terms of environmental protection .
In Europe , 360 000 people die ten years early due to air pollution .
Studies show that the effects of air pollution particularly impact on children 's health which is why air quality plans must include measures to specifically protect vulnerable population groups such as children .
in writing . - ( PT ) The natural resource of ' air ' is every day becoming increasingly polluted , mainly in urban centres and regions of EU Member States with the highest population densities .
Air pollution is harmful to human health , in terms of diseases of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems , and also to ecosystems .
We know that children , the elderly and people living in the most populated and congested urban centres and also those living close to major traffic routes are particularly vulnerable .
The European Parliament has today expressed , at second reading , its position on the Council common position on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe .
The text of this common position includes some of Parliament 's proposals that we tabled at first reading .
However , there are some points on which the Council 's position is immovable ; for example , it does not accept any changes to the provisions regarding daily and yearly limit values .
For its part , the European Parliament intends to defend three main points of its position : the setting of more ambitious target and limit values ; more flexibility in the adoption of stricter measures at source , and the establishment of long-term goals .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report .
Of all the types of pollution , air pollution is the main concern of 54 % of the French population .
It is therefore important to supply daily information to the public , particularly people with allergies , on the particles suspended in ambient air .
As Chairwoman of the Loire departmental air quality network since 1991 , I am extremely pleased that regulations have been introduced for finer particles , often the most harmful , which had hitherto not been covered .
This will allow us to take better consideration of the upsurge in respiratory illnesses such as asthma , bronchitis and emphysema .
Preservation of the quality of exterior air must not neglect air in closed spaces , where we can spend over 80 % of our time .
Little importance is attached to the studies on air quality inside buildings , although it certainly has at least the same impact on our health as exterior air .
This new Directive means that the Member States will also have to set up particle sampling points in urban areas .
This measure follows the same lines as our work in France with the Grenelle Environmental Forum .
in writing . - I supported the compromise package reached by the various political groups on the Krahmer report on air quality .
Air pollution causes serious health damage across the EU , leading to many thousands of premature deaths .
The compromise package will introduce monitoring obligations in relation to certain fine particles and , hopefully , marks a step in the right direction in improving the quality of air and , accordingly , the quality of life for European citizens .
in writing . - I voted for this report not because I believe it makes the major step forward we need in tackling air quality , but because it is at least some advance , despite the attempt of some in Parliament to weaken this protection .
We are now recognising the importance of tackling smaller particulates , which are so damaging to people 's health , and have avoided increasing implementation periods .
Local authorities have a vital role to play in the implementation of air quality directives , and these standards need to be borne in mind when considering new developments - such as airport expansion or new road infrastructure near schools or hospitals .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe voted today for the agreement on air quality , in which strict standards are agreed for particulate matter .
By 2015 a maximum of 25 micrograms of fine particulate matter ( PM2.5 ) will be permitted .
It has also been agreed that certain areas with high concentrations may be given an extension if they can demonstrate that they have done everything they can to improve air quality and they have an effective source control policy in place .
That is very important for the Netherlands , as it will mean that construction projects are not brought to a standstill .
This will allow the protection of public health and the environment to go hand in hand with economic development .
All the same , the ALDE Group considers that the target of 20 micrograms of PM2.5before 2020 in the compromise is unfeasible .
It would be wiser to wait for the evaluation date of 2013 before setting later targets .
in writing . - ( PT ) The goal set by this report is to improve the interoperability of the Community rail system or , in other words , to increase the possibility of obtaining authorisation for a train from one Member State to travel through another Member State .
Aside from the other important aspects considered in this respect , including certain technical aspects , the fundamental aim of this directive is to remove all obstacles to the movement of ' Community trains ' .
It should not be forgotten that this report fits within the strategy of liberalising ( and privatising ) rail transport in the EU .
As we have seen in other Community legislative initiatives on transport , as well as in this one , the main objective is to remove all obstacles to the liberalisation of international rail transport , in this case by removing , through harmonisation , any different rules or requirements applied to rolling stock in each country .
Finally , it must be pointed out that the harmonisation and simplification of the national authorisation procedures and the principle of mutual recognition should never override more appropriate rules established at Member State level or remove the prerogative of each Member State to lay down such rules .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Ortuondo Larrea report on the recast of the Interoperability Directive , for interoperability is the key to revamping our European railway system .
Rail transport , in fact , can only become competitive again - compared with road traffic in particular - if it moves up to a continental scale , and this mainly depends on the ability of trains to cross borders .
Even though the administrative obstacles have been largely removed , we are still left with some very real technical obstacles .
Thus I am very glad that this text was agreed at first reading , since urgent progress must be made in this field .
The text , which now makes rail interoperability a political priority , should represent a great leap forward for European railways .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report on which we have voted today on the interoperability of the Community rail system is most important as an incentive for investment in rail transport and is vital for creating genuine freedom of movement in the European territory .
The measures proposed to facilitate the interoperability of locomotives in the Community are measures for which we have all been waiting .
In order to create a European area of transport without borders which genuinely encourages the free movement of people and goods , we must create the necessary conditions so that a journey from Lisbon to Helsinki is viable on all modes of transport .
Rail transport must be able to develop as a fully fledged partner in order to achieve the objectives of the common transport policy .
We cannot forget that this is a safe and environmentally friendly means of transport that enables the transport of large quantities of goods and passengers .
It is a mode of transport that is at the forefront of the fight against the negative effects of air pollution , dangers on the roads and road congestion .
I therefore voted in favour of the report by my colleague , Mr Ortuondo Larrea .
in writing . - I welcome initiatives that might help to improve rail systems throughout Europe in a substantive way .
The East of England is crying out for improvements in both passenger and freight capacity and greater use should be made of opportunities for TEN funding for the lines serving east coast ports .
However , there is another aspect to this matter and that is the through-running of trains from the continent and the opportunities this might give illegal migrants .
The report aims to boost the free movement of trains through the removal of technical and operational barriers .
There is no consideration of the security aspects .
There were major problems at the Frethun rail freight depot in Northern France which impacted on Channel Tunnel operations until , in 2002 , additional security was introduced .
Given the absence of consideration of this matter , I abstained on the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted for the Commission 's proposal for a directive .
We think that there is a need for common provisions on systems of direct support and that it is a positive move to replace a system in which support is linked to production with one in which , for example , rural development , open landscapes and quality are the main focus .
We support the Commission 's proposals for simplifications .
A simplified procedure is a way forward if we are to gain the acceptance of the farmers themselves .
Unlike the committee , we consider that controls are also important in order to give the system legitimacy in the eyes of the EU taxpayer .
However , the controls must be proportionate to the circumstances which they aim to bring about .
The regulatory systems should be organised in such a way that they do not lead to misunderstandings .
in writing . - ( PT ) We do not agree with the opinion expressed in the report on scrapping production aid in favour of a single payment scheme for producers based on a history of their production , thus forcing them to meet the objectives of the cross-compliance system .
This system has led to production being abandoned by many small and medium-sized farmers and family farms and to rural areas being abandoned , to losses of biodiversity and to a reduced chance of achieving the goal of food sovereignty in certain Member States , particularly Portugal .
However , we agree with the need for more information in the agricultural sector so that this can adapt to the cross-compliance rules .
We also feel it is vital to provide adequate training for those carrying out inspection of farmers ' activities and that inspectors should have the discretion to take into account unseasonal and sudden factors which mitigate against full compliance with the requirements , due to no fault of the farmer .
The importance of agricultural activity should be taken into account as farmers provide a genuinely public service to society .
That is why support measures must be maintained , including the timely payment of aid .
in writing . - ( SV ) The amendments made by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to the Commission 's proposal are good in part and very bad in part .
Junilistan agrees that it is now too difficult for individual agricultural businesses to understand the content of the EU 's various directives and regulations on agriculture .
Simplification is absolutely essential .
But I object to the proposed text of the Committee on Agriculture to the effect that there is no real place in the system for unannounced checks ' as they contribute to a disproportionate but valid sense of fear ' .
There must be effective checks when public funds are paid to individuals .
We cannot compromise on that , yet this is what the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament wants to do for some reason .
I have therefore chosen to vote against the European Parliament Resolution on this matter .
in writing . - ( EL ) The simplification and reduction of bureaucracy is desirable , but here it is being used as a pretext for more policing of farmers .
Multiple conformity is therefore an extremely hypocritical notion because it knowingly overlooks substantial issues relating to the environment and public health , such as GMOs , and places particular emphasis on matters of only minor importance .
As regards animal welfare , this is an excuse for serving external interests , mainly those of the transport companies , at the expense of stock breeders and consumers , since the cost is being increased with no substantial benefit to the community .
Overall , multiple compliance , without any substantial benefit to the environment , public health or the health of animals , for which purposes it was supposedly introduced , has placed a heavy financial burden on farmers and stock breeders .
In our country , the costs of compliance for livestock facilities are intolerable for goat and sheep farmers , with negligible benefits for the environment , public health and the health of animals , although these are areas where the problems can be dealt with effectively if production methods are suited to the physiology of animals and plants .
If , for example , a ban is placed on GM crops , meat meal , mineral oils and hormones , and systematic checks are carried out for pesticide residues in agricultural products , then the results for public health and the environment will indeed be much better .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Draft general budget 2008 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Kyösti Virrankoski and Ville Itälä , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2008 , amended by the Council ( all sections ) and on Letters of Amendment No 1 / 2008 ( 13659 / 2007 - C6-0341 / 2007 ) and No 2 / 2008 ( 15716 / 2007 - C6-0435 / 2007 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2008 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as rapporteur I would like to warmly thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Böge .
It is to his merit that the outcome , following conciliation , is so well-balanced .
I would like also to thank Mr Virrankoski , my fellow rapporteur , for his great cooperation during the budget procedure .
I am especially glad that Mr Virrankoski made possible the pilot projects in support of the sustainability of the Baltic Sea .
My main objective as rapporteur for the budgets of Parliament and the other institutions was to keep any increase as low as possible .
That is why I named this budget ' the taxpayers ' budget ' .
That objective has been achieved , and the increase has been kept to below 4 % .
( FI ) I just wish to remind everyone that paragraph 48 in the motion for a resolution concerns Article 29 of the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
The administration has requested , regarding this , that we should send a letter to all the governments of the Member States , asking how they want Members to proceed if they are re-elected with regard to the Statute for new Members .
I hope that my amendment concerning this gets through and that this matter gets dealt with via the quaestors , because that is the right way to go about this .
As there has also been a public debate on this issue , I would like to say that this Article 29 , decided by the Council , means that the governments of the Member States take a decision whether to apply the old rules or the new rules to re-elected Members .
It is not the case that Members themselves are free to make this choice .
Moreover , because this is a matter for the quaestors , it is only right that they should also decide whether to send this letter .
Mr Virrankoski now has the floor for another two and a half minutes , also in his capacity as rapporteur .
rapporteur . - Mr President , excuse me , but do I have two and a half or five minutes ?
My note from the secretariat tells me there are two rapporteurs and they have two and a half minutes each .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is not a joint debate with two reports and one rapporteur speaking on each report , as happens on other occasions .
This is one report with two co-rapporteurs , and so they both share the five minutes .
In any case , Mr Virrankoski , please take the floor and attempt to provide a summary .
As all the Members know , I am quite flexible with speaking time , and so I would ask you to start the debate because we have already lost one and a half minutes with this interruption .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , the grand total for the European Union 's budget for next year is EUR 129 149 700 000 for commitments and EUR 120 346 800 000 for payment appropriations .
Although this is an increase of 5.71 % , the payments are just 0.96 % of GNI , i.e. EUR 9.3 billion under the multiannual financial framework .
Parliament 's unconditional priority has been heading 1 : sustainable growth and competitiveness .
Parliament did much to promote financing for the two-year project for the Galileo Positioning System and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
In this we succeeded .
The Council agreed to a revision of the multiannual financial framework so that the Galileo project might be financed entirely out of the EU 's budget .
There was a gap in the financing of EUR 2.4 billion when the private sector pulled out .
Parliament insisted on the gap being filled with money from the EU 's budget .
There was no longer any question of carrying on in this vague and fragmented way .
A choice had to be made in this budgetary procedure : either to continue with all the resources needed or end it immediately .
Fortunately for Europe , the Council chose to continue .
For this we are grateful to the skilled work of the Portuguese Presidency .
For the funds needed we took EUR 1.6 billion from this year 's unused agriculture expenditure , and EUR 200 million from the flexibility instrument , and the rest we obtained by prioritising and reallocating expenditure from heading 1a .
Rescuing the Galileo project was a huge victory for Parliament in this budgetary procedure .
Another significant achievement was the promotion of the EU 's external actions .
For that , EUR 70 million was obtained from the flexibility instrument .
All this is needed for such operations as preparations for the police service in Kosovo and the continuing difficult challenges concerning Palestine , and getting ready to launch these operations .
The Committee on Budgets has created a special reserve to boost activity-based management .
This is something which will be returned to in the resolution .
A particular problem is management of the Structural Funds .
More than half the operative programmes are still unapproved .
It is important that they should be approved right away .
Finally , I wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Portuguese Presidency for their excellent work .
The same goes to Commissioner Grybauskaitfor her constructive approach and initiative .
I also want to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Böge , all the coordinators and all Members .
My thanks also go to the office holders on the Committee on Budgets and those in my own group , who were able to produce good results in drawing up the budget under all the pressure of a tight schedule .
With these words , then , I leave the budget for Parliament to deliberate upon in its plenary session .
( Applause )

Thank you very much , Mr Virrankoski , and please forgive the misunderstanding , which may have caused you to rush your speech a little through lack of time .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be taking part in your debate on the second reading of the budget for the year 2008 .
I have listened carefully to the first two speeches and should like to express my thanks for the words of praise on our joint work .
As usual , the budget procedure for 2008 was extremely complex and I am delighted to note your intention to fully respect , in the budget for 2008 , the agreement reached between our two institutions at the budget conciliation meeting on 23 November 2007 .
This agreement had two different but equally important objectives : firstly , to define the framework for establishing the budget for 2008 in order to allow the European Union to function properly and its policies to be correctly implemented ; secondly , to ensure the financing of Galileo , one of the most important projects undertaken by the European Union in recent years on a political , industrial and financial level .
In this context , please allow me to express my great pride at the leadership role played jointly by the European Parliament and the Council , as budgetary authority , with the support of the Commission , in the overall agreement reached on the Galileo project .
On 23 November 2007 we managed to reach agreement on a Community budget consistent with such a vital project , thereby speeding up the approval of all its other legislative and technical aspects .
This financing decision was undoubtedly a decisive step in launching the Galileo project towards its final orbit .
In addition , I should like to express the Council 's satisfaction at the agreement that we have reached on the budget for the common foreign and security policy for 2008 .
This is an extremely important political priority for the European Union .
Also , I believe that the budget for 2008 as a whole represents a balanced compromise between , on the one hand , the need to ensure the necessary budgetary discipline and solid financial management and , on the other hand , our duty to meet the expectations of European citizens .
Please allow me to add that this satisfactory result was only possible thanks to the synergy between the efforts of all those involved and the excellent and constructive climate which , in our opinion , characterised this whole process from the start .
As a result , I could not end my speech without taking advantage of this opportunity to personally thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Reimer Böge , for both his frankness and the spirit of dialogue that he showed during the negotiations , and also the two rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , for their constructive interinstitutional cooperation .

I also want to express my gratitude to my colleagues on the ' Budget ' Council , and to all those who cooperated with them , for the firm support that they gave the Presidency .
My special thanks go to Commissioner Dalia Grybauskaite who fully played her role as neutral mediator and , last but not least , I should also like to thank the staff of the three institutions who took part in these negotiations for their very valuable and professional contribution .
Thank you very much to everyone .
Congratulations to everyone .
I would like to remind you that during the presentation of the draft general budget 2008 , the European Commission allocated the biggest share of expenditure to investments in the development of economic growth .
This is an unprecedented case in European financial history , when finances allocated to the development of economic competitiveness constitute the biggest share of the budget .
This is a new , historic quality of the EU budget and it reflects the EU 's political priorities - competitiveness , economic growth , cohesion and social harmony .
A significant element in negotiations on the 2008 budget was the need to make a decision on two innovative trans-European projects - the GALILEO project and the development of the European Institute of Technology .
The budget negotiations have been really complicated .
However , the constructive position taken by both the European Parliament and the Commission have enabled positive results to be achieved .
I would like to thank the European Parliament and especially the budget rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , for having considered the Commission 's explanations regarding certain reserves .
At first reading these reserves for appropriations were lifted .
However , I would like to point out that there still are several outstanding problems that the Commission has drawn Parliament 's attention to .
However , there are still some reserves that will make budget implementation more difficult and complex , and I hope that they can be lifted as early as possible .
Two reserves are a specific source of our concerns , and I would like to draw the attention of the plenary to them .
One reserve reduces by EUR 17 million the preparation for staff salaries at headquarters in the policy area of external actions , and that would force the Commission to leave posts vacant and to block recruitment from the beginning of January .
This means , in fact , that there would be EUR 22 million in the combined reserve on staff salaries , and I really hope that Parliament will be able to reconsider its position on this in the plenary session .
As regards the general reserve for EUR 5 million on staff salaries , the Commission is firmly committed to delivering the required study on the ABM implementation and the reports requested by Parliament on the follow-up or the screening exercise and on the implementation of Article 44 of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
However , regarding the requested action plan on the reorganisation of the coordination and support activities , I want to be very clear on behalf of the Commission . The European Parliament will be fully informed of all different steps in the follow-up to the screening exercise .
On this we can give you the Commission 's commitment .
However , I also want to stress that the Commission cannot launch a major reorganisation exercise during the last year of this Commission and , therefore , there will be no action plan in this regard .
Major organisation can only be decided by the next Commission .
The Commission is committed to implementing progressively the results of the ongoing assessment of the number of activities identified in the screening .
We are moving on a step-by-step approach .
We have started working on the communication activities , the delegation network , the balance and the category structure of the Commission 's establishment plan .
This we promised , and we will deliver .
We hope that Parliament will take into account our commitments and our capabilities to deliver in this matter and , during the vote on Thursday , will reconsider its proposals .
Member of Commission . - ( LT ) I would like to finish by thanking the European Parliament , especially the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Böge , and the budget rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , as well as the Council , especially Mr Santos , for their very efficient cooperation and their constructive role .

I do hope that today 's discussions will prove useful and fruitful and that they will contribute to the results of the vote on the European Union 's budget for 2008 .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , this 2008 budget is a good result and for that I must compliment my colleagues on the Committee on Budgets , especially our chairman , Mr Böge , and our two rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , who I think have done an extremely good job .

Like the Commissioner , I believe that this budget reflects more adequately the changing priorities of the Union today and it is more appropriate to the challenges which we face .
I welcome the fact that it represents 0.96 % GNI and I am also happy to see that the funding for Frontex is much more appropriate to the challenge that this organisation faces .
There are , however , two areas of concern .
My first area is Galileo and , while it is not for me to comment on the technical merit of this project , I can and I certainly must comment on the financial disciplines which I see imposed .
It was of concern to me that the private sector appeared to show a very low appetite for investment in this project .
It would appear to me that there is little or no provision for cost and time overruns with the project , which are almost inevitable , and it does concern me that the vision for the business model after the development phase leaves a great deal to be desired .
The second point which I want to mention is that this budget falls under the shadow of the Court of Auditors ' report .
I have to say that , after 13 failures , this is something which must be taken very seriously .
It is something which is extremely damaging to the public perception of the European Union .
Two points are absolutely clear . I make my points here to the Presidency , the Member States and the Commission .
They must give greater urgency to achieving a positive DAS because - I repeat my words - it is very , very damaging to the perception of the Union .
Secondly , and on that point , I believe it is time for Parliament to be more assertive in ensuring that the terms of the Interinstitutional Agreement are met .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Chairmen , ladies and gentlemen , the EU 's general budget reflects the serious tendencies of economies marked by current financial prospects .
There will be EUR 120 billion in payment appropriations , accounting for 0.96 % of the Member States ' total GNI .
All this is quite modest , and a far cry from the actual needs of the political project announced by the European decision-makers in the Council , in the Commission and also here in Parliament .
We have often cited the causes of this in the House : national egoisms rocking the common boat , excessive caution by the Commission when implementing our budgetary guidelines , or the EU 's general inability to come up with innovative , realistic projects .
This year , once again , led by our excellent rapporteurs - including Mr Virrankoski - we had to find solutions to develop policies that we feel are essential and new pilot projects that our fellow citizens expect .
This year , once again , we have witnessed the slender financial framework for the EU 's international action , which does not make it any easier for us when taking up our commitments concerning Palestine and Kosovo .
This year , however , one project managed to overcome such rigidness : Galileo .

I would especially like to thank Commissioner Grybauskaitė , Mr Romero , Chairman Böge and Mr Virrankoski , and all the members of the Committee on Budgets , both Members and administrators , whose firm conviction and negotiating strategy were rewarded by a financing agreement with the Council .
I feel like saying : ' Luckily the Commission and Parliament were there ' , but I cannot neglect the role played by the Portuguese Presidency and Mr Santos , who got things moving with his know-how and his ability to listen .
We should remember that after the negotiations it is Europe as a whole that has secured the financing of Galileo entirely through Community funds .
With the European Technology Institute , the package totals EUR 2.7 billion , without jeopardising any EU policies .
This example of a joint political demand is a rare item in the EP 's budgetary history .
The Socialists interpret this as a sign of hope not only for the autonomy of the EU 's satellite navigation as of 2013 , but also as an indication of Parliament 's ability to make use of its powers and fulfil its responsibilities in the preparation of the EU 's budgetary future .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe I would also like to highlight the excellent negotiation result that we can celebrate in connection with the adoption of the 2008 budget on Thursday .
I congratulate my colleague Mr Virrankoski as rapporteur on the Commission 's budget .
He has succeeded in doing what many had thought impossible , namely to strike a compromise involving the revision of the multi-annual budget framework and the financial perspective , without us having to involve the Heads of State or Government or have a large-scale negotiation drama in late December .
The results of the negotiations that we have before us provide the billions necessary for financing the Galileo satellite navigation system without us having to reduce funding for other essential programmes .
It is available agricultural money , it is money from the flexibility instrument , and it is money that would not otherwise have been used that will now be spent to ensure that the EU can go ahead with the important investment in Galileo .
It will place basic infrastructure and important skills at the EU 's full disposal .
Extra money has also been found for Palestine and Kosovo through use of the flexibility instrument .
Overall , we have arrived at a historically good solution here .
We need a more flexible EU budget , where each year we can secure funding for essential needs .
This does not necessarily mean a more expensive budget , but a more rigid implementation of the rules and a focus on relevant problems .
Many people have contributed to the excellent solution .
Mrs Grybauskaithas guided us both prudently and with authority .
Parliament has stood united and ensured that there was support for the wishes of the Commission .
I would like to thank the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Böge , for his strong and capable leadership , and also the coordinators of the other groups for their excellent cooperation .
Thanks are also due to Mr Itälä for his sound efforts and to the Portuguese Presidency for the work done towards achieving an excellent result .
This has been a victory both for the EU and for common sense .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are today discussing the draft 2008 European Union budget for the last time .
It appears to correspond to our expectations , though the most heated debate has centred on its size , as is usually the case .
Nonetheless , we have to operate within the agreed framework and adjust individual positions to it .
We endeavoured to take account of all the amendments , but sometimes this proved impossible , as they were mutually exclusive .
I am especially pleased that discharging Europe 's responsibilities as a global partner we tried to increase resources for action of this nature as much as possible .
On the basis of today 's address by Mr Salih Mahmoud Osman , the Sakharov Prize laureate , the world is most certainly counting on the European Union .
In this connection I should like to say that the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on whose behalf I am speaking , will vote in favour of the draft budget tabled .
I should like to thank all colleagues very much for our achievement .
Everyone has commended it . Thank you again .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for the Verts / ALE Group too , the crucial question is whether the European budget is truly geared to future needs and responds to the formidable challenges of the coming years , particularly as regards our responsibility in the field of foreign policy but also in relation to research and development , education and , of course , the struggle against climate change .
We do not believe that the budget as a whole is good enough yet to rise to these major challenges .
Nevertheless , we find it gratifying that the decision in favour of Galileo has now been taken .
That represents something like a bridgehead from which we can go on to change the budget and fit it more adequately for the future , and it is also a historic step for the European Union to put on track such an ambitious project in the realm of industrial policy .
I believe it is very important , particularly in the light of the Lisbon agenda , that Europe should not leave these new technological developments , this navigation system , to the United States or China but that our aim should be to play our own self-assured role in the world and in the global marketplace .
For this reason , I believe we must do even more in the coming years to engineer these changes and to find appropriate answers to global issues .
I am also delighted that we have managed to reallocate resources from the Euratom programme to fund Galileo .
In my opinion , spending existing money on better and less environmentally harmful technology is another step forward .
I would like to add my thanks to my fellow committee members , to Mr Böge and to the two rapporteurs for their hard work on this budget .
I certainly believe it is a step in the right direction .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , tomorrow we shall adopt the EU 's budget for next year , one in which payments clearly fall below the 1 % ceiling , to say nothing of the fact that it will be 1.24 % of GNI .
In that respect the outcome is satisfactory to those in our group who want to save their own countries ' taxpayers ' money .
On the other hand , there are many in our group who would have liked the Commission 's budget to follow the policy that Parliament adopts in the way it uses its resources , which smacks of poorer budgetary discipline .
It is always trying to find new areas for expenditure , although there may be no good use for the money .
In our group there are also two attitudes to the Galileo project .
Some want to see it financed out of the EU 's budget ; others entirely reject Galileo on account of its huge cost .
It is feared that it will be poor value for what is public money .
As the private companies have pulled out , Galileo 's future now depends on financing by the EU .
Our group takes a dim view of the militarisation of the Galileo project , which was originally meant exclusively for civil use .
We also take a dim view of the additional financing out of the EU 's budget for the Union 's foreign , security and defence policy .
We adhere to the notion that the EU is a peace organisation and that it should not be militarised and become a superpower 's agent .
For that is what it will be if the Council wants to put more money into financing the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
We do not want to be involved in the use of EU budget funds to prop up the political heritage of old transitional states in Africa or the illegal actions of the United States of America , which has acted as a torturer in Iraq and Afghanistan .
In view of all this , our group will vote , in a spirit of amicability , against Mr Virrankoski 's budget report .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank and pay tribute to the rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä .
They have done a very competent and responsible job and , in so doing , have also been able to keep the budget down at a lower level than I had thought possible at the outset .
But they were , of course , obliged to work within the limits imposed on them and I would point out that these limits are unreasonable .
Firstly , the revenue side is essentially a predetermined amount .
About 1 % of gross national income goes to the EU .
But that is not how it should happen in a rational system .
The right approach is first to decide what the EU has to do , then see how much it will cost , and finally collect the money for it .
What should not be done is first to collect money and then wonder what it can be spent on .
That is quite the wrong way to proceed , and everyone knows it .
So let us change it !
Secondly , we know that at least 75 % of the money spent by the EU is devoted to completely useless and harmful causes .
Hence we have a huge amount of money to spend on useful projects .
Roughly half is still spent in practice on the agricultural policy and a further quarter to a third on something called ' the structural funds on the structural side ' .
In fact the EU should not be doing any of this .
What the EU should be doing is to develop and monitor regulatory systems for the internal market and for environmental cooperation .
This costs amazingly little .
If we switch to this for the future , we shall be able to reduce the EU contribution and still have money left for other things that the EU should be doing .
In my opinion , these include Galileo , which is now to be financed .
That is a success .
We should invest heavily in basic research , since that would enable us to develop fusion energy .
This is the proper task of the EU .
Not agents to combat forest fires , structural adjustment to globalisation and other schemes which are pure propaganda spending .
( SK ) Mr President , Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , many of the common policies which receive financial support from the EU budget are not good .
They neither foster the effective development of the European Union 's production structures nor do they increase their competitiveness .
The agriculture sector , which receives almost 40 % of the EU budget , is typical in this regard .
In the context of the overall developments , the EU 's common agricultural policy appears very inflexible and rigid .
It has been deformed in the course of its history by various compromises based on gradual concessions , predominantly to large Member States .
Up to now , with all the reforms we have more or less preserved the inefficient redistribution of resources .
We still have a situation whereby 80 % of European resources are being used by 20 % of companies , concentrated in the old Member States .
This creates unequal conditions for the new Member States and discriminates against them .
It clearly runs contrary to the basic rules of the market to create the national envelopes on the basis of the so-called historic principle , as is being considered in connection with the wine sector reform .
The EU common agricultural policy must guarantee that its tools have equivalent effect and that there is equal access to the EU budget as well as the national budgets of the Member States .
They say that budgets reflect or mirror the intended economic policies .
I am afraid that through no fault of its own , the part of the European budget dealing with agriculture unfortunately offers a distorting mirror .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , this is a fine draft budget , and we all ought to congratulate ourselves on it .
Enough , however , has been said as to the content of the draft document .
I wish to state how pleased I am with two aspects : implementation of the budget and the successful conciliation procedure .
To start with implementation of the budget , I think this year we have managed to add value to the money spent from the budget , we have fulfilled our commitments more successfully and we have had good cooperation and sound exchanges of information with the European Commission .
I think we can safely say for most areas of the budget that implementation has been satisfactory in 2007 , and among other things this means that we can have lower reserves vis-à-vis the Commission than in previous years .
This in turn entails a much smoother procedure , even in the knowledge that we are in one of the initial years of financial programming , of the new financial perspective period : this means that that implementation of the Structural Funds will be a little low , but I feel sure that it will pick up pace .
With respect to conciliation , the basis of this fine agreement , I wish once more to congratulate the European Commission on all the assistance from the Commissioner , the EP delegation and of course the Portuguese Presidency , which operated in such cohesive fashion .
They have operated as a genuine team and its members even come here wearing the same ties , meaning they really do operate as a team : it is certainly thanks to them that we have been able to finance technological development and protect taxpayers through non-excessive use of payment appropriations .
We should not change this formula in the years to come , and for future budgetary conciliations we must always bear in mind that this House represents citizens and that their will is expressed through the political groups .
Nor should we forget that the budget is a political act in itself .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the budgetary procedure for 2008 has shown how far the European Parliament can progress in negotiations with the Council if we are determined to implement our ideas for a European policy .
From the outset we have said that , following the demise of the public-private partnership idea , Galileo would have to be financed with European funds on the basis of the Community method .
Anything else would have been unacceptable to Parliament .
Parliament stood its ground on that point and then pressurised the Council - or , let us be honest , forced the Council - to break new ground in voting by a majority - not unanimously , mind you - to approve the compromise with us , which includes what is termed a small revision .
I say that here as a German who is grateful to the Portuguese Presidency .
As a result , we shall be able to fund Galileo and the European Institute of Technology properly until 2013 .
While this makes me proud of our Parliament , I am not forgetting , of course , the extremely helpful role that the Commission has played in this budgetary process .
My sincere thanks go to you , Commissioner , and to all the staff of your departments .
You unquestionably helped to ensure that the Council was put on the right path , not only in relation to our competition and innovation policies but also with regard to the arrangements on foreign policies .
Our compromise will also provide us with enough funds for the time being to honour our European commitments in Kosovo and Palestine .
It goes without saying that Parliament has had to pay a price for this progress .
In 2008 an appropriation of EUR 285 million will be made to the common foreign and security policy .
While this is EUR 125 million more than the 2007 allocation , we are all well aware that heading 4 will remain chronically underfunded until the end of the period covered by the financial perspective .
However delighted we in Parliament might initially be at this shift in the Council 's position , we must also strongly emphasise that the Council has not only remained focused on its main aim of paying out as little as possible but has actually achieved that aim .
Total planned expenditure amounts to EUR 120.3 billion , which represents only 0.96 % of the combined gross national income of the Member States , whereas the financial perspective provides for 1.04 % .
In 2008 , then , we shall have a tight-fitting budget , although we should have preferred something more comfortable .
All the more reason for a concerted effort on our part to ensure that the Commission implements the multiannual programmes swiftly and correctly , that it acts on our comments on specific budget lines in ways that match our intentions , that its initial response to our proposals for pilot projects and preparatory measures is to seek ways of implementing them , not to describe all the obstacles to their realisation .
I call on all Members , including those who serve on specialised committees , to monitor the implementation of the 2008 budget systematically and critically .
Let me conclude by expressing my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs , all my fellow Members and the secretariat for their wholehearted constructive cooperation in 2007 .
I hope for the same parliamentary solidarity in 2008 whenever I have the task of drafting a report .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost I would like to compliment and congratulate our rapporteurs and the general rapporteur , our friend Kyösti Virrankoski , and the entire EP delegation , expertly led by Mr Böge .
I also congratulate the Commission and , more unusually , the Council Presidency , which dared to take up its responsibilities .
Minister , if there were a European légion d 'honneur , I feel you would richly deserve it .
The main concern I and many of my colleagues had in relation to the 2008 budget was ensuring full Community financing for the launch of the Galileo project , and consequently the European Technology Institute , without jeopardising the funding for programmes aimed at implementing the Lisbon Strategy .
The result has been achieved : this is good news for Europe as a whole , and also good news we can explain easily and simply to our fellow citizens , who understand its scope .
If I can put on my LIBE Chairman 's cap for a moment , I wish to express my satisfaction that the Commission on Budgets supported the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs concerning the elimination of the reserves in connection with SIS II and Frontex .
These are two essential instruments for the surveillance of the EU 's external borders , and we must increase their operational capability .
On the other hand , I request that we leave in reserve all appropriations relating to the European Return Fund until Parliament and the Council have adopted the proposal for a directive on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals .
( PL ) Mr President , it is hard to be optimistic regarding the 2008 budget , because it is the lowest for many years in relation to the gross national income of the Member States , in terms of both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations .
I should like to remind the House that in the financial perspective 2007-2013 the ceiling for commitment appropriations for 2008 was set at 1.08 % of gross national income . It was set at 1.06 % of gross national income for payment appropriations .
There is therefore a significant difference between what the European Union was prepared to finance only two years ago , and what it is now prepared to finance .
We cannot have more Europe for such limited funding in any of the areas to which the European Union allocates financial resources .
I welcome the fact that the conciliation procedure resulted in an agreement on financing the Galileo programme and the European Institute of Technology .
I hope , too , that the European Parliament will agree that budgetary reserves may be drawn on to finance the Frontex Agency .
This is particularly significant for countries such as Poland .
As early as December the borders of these countries will become the external borders of the European Union in the full sense of the term .
( DE ) Mr President , at the heart of a policy without any ' -isms ' is credibility .
Credibility has a great deal to do with the purposes to which available tax revenue is put , and people can see this most clearly in the amounts spent on administrative bodies .
Regrettably , this budget once again fails to indicate precisely how much is actually to be spent on administration .
We have an item with EUR 6.6 billion there , but administrative expenditure is also hidden away inside many other appropriations .
Besides , whether the lifestyle of the political classes bears any relation to the living conditions of the vast majority of the population or not says something fundamental about the democratic nature of a society .
We have a glaring example of a gulf between the two inside the European Union in the form of the pension scheme for officials as well as for those in this House who are in the luxury-class supplementary pension scheme .
In the case of officials , the total volume of annual payments now stands at EUR 963 million , to which these officials themselves contribute no more than a third .
The bill , moreover , just keeps rising .
The number of pension recipients alone is set to increase by 5.5 % .
The inflation rate is automatically factored in .
In this way Brussels is becoming increasingly remote from those it claims to represent , and that is bad for democracy .
This would be a starting point for rational budgetary reform , and it is also a call to action for you , Commissioner .
( DE ) Mr President , let me begin with my warmest thanks to the two rapporteurs , Mr Itälä and Mr Virrankoski , who have done a very good job over the past few months and have produced extremely sound reports .
I extend these thanks to the coordinators and staff of the political groups and also wish to express my sincere gratitude to the committee secretariat .
Let me pick out the names of Anne Vitrey , Ian Vollbracht and Marie-Cécile Bernard as a way of thanking the entire team , who have worked extremely hard for all of us .
I must also say that we could not have arrived at this final cumulative outcome on which we shall be voting on Thursday without the great solidarity shown by the European Parliament .
Commissioner , with your knack of seizing the right moment , as you did once again at these negotiations , you made an absolutely vital contribution to their successful outcome , for which I warmly thank you .
As someone who has experienced a good few budgetary coordination processes , I wish to pay glowing tribute to the Portuguese Presidency for the way it conducted the Council 's negotiations in this difficult situation .
It wrote a new chapter in the history of the EU institutions in securing the final vote and consent of the Council , an achievement which we deeply and keenly appreciate .
All in all , then , we have a budget for year two of the financial perspective period with a volume of EUR 120.3 billion , corresponding to 0.96 % of the Member States ' aggregate gross national income , a budget that is very heavily geared to fiscal discipline .
We have a budget that safeguards the programmes which create added European value , such as the ones we have just adopted here .
We have a budget that safeguards the foundations of the strategic Galileo project until 2013 in the first instance , and the secret lay in a mix of revision , flexibility and reallocation .
We have a budget that provides extra resources for Frontex , thereby permitting essential responses to pressing challenges , and we have a budget that funds the common foreign and security policy , albeit only for 2008 , and makes it possible to draw on the flexibility instrument for CFSP purposes .
Let me say here that we should have preferred a long-term , multiannual approach that would have shored up the chronically underfunded heading 4 , ' the EU as a global partner ' .
That , however , is a subject to which the CFSP , Palestine and Kosovo will surely compel us to return in connection with Mrs Haug 's forthcoming report on the priorities for the following budget .
I commend to the House the present budget in its agreed form .
( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me a brief summary in the area of ' other sections ' .
The European Parliament 's work on the budget has resulted in major achievements and I will mention just a few .
Firstly , we reached a compromise on the overall size of the budget .
Secondly , as regards providing EU citizens with information about the work of the European Parliament and its results , we now have the tools for better cooperation and communication with citizens .
It must be stressed , however , that making progress in improving Parliament 's information and communication strategy , would not in itself be sufficient .
If it is to be effective , the strategy requires the involvement of the Commission and of the European offices in the individual countries .
It must be coordinated and its results evaluated on a regular basis .
In that way we can achieve not only better access to information but also more transparency and a better use of resources .
Thirdly , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for supporting our efforts in building our knowledge management system .
It will help you in your future legislative work .
Fourthly , we have achieved more flexibility for groups of visitors .
Fifthly , I believe that the measures taken to support language services will result both in higher quality services and a better use of resources .
Finally , we reached agreement on several points concerning the environment and access to employment for the disabled .
What is important for the budget for ' other sections ' is to assess each institution individually .
I would like to mention the Court of Auditors as an example of good practice in terms of drawing up a budget .
Savings were made in some budget lines by working out the budget on the basis of real expenditure rather than index-linked calculations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank our rapporteurs as well as all the teams from the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
Our meetings , debates and conciliation procedures have all left me feeling very satisfied .
When you feel that all those involved want to reach an agreement , it makes for a positive environment , which can only lead to good results .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know in 2006 many of us voted for the multiannual budget for the financial perspective with a heavy heart .
We were in fact fully aware that the contributions by the Member States would not be enough to take up the major challenges facing an EU comprising 27 nations and , notably , half a billion citizens .
This inadequate budget , aggravated by the withdrawal of the private partners who had hitherto been stakeholders in the Galileo project , made us vulnerable to serious problems and was the source of much concern .
I am therefore glad that Parliament has been heard this time after a very long battle with the Member States in the Council .
This 2008 budget is in fact a victory for Europeans and for the House , and I also wish to express my most sincere thanks to our general rapporteur and his entire team for their difficult negotiations , and also of course to Chairman Böge and the COBU Members and administrative staff .
I am pleased that after hours of intense negotiations we have secured total credits of almost EUR 120 billion , representing 0.96 % of the EU 's GNP .
This is due in particular to use of the flexibility instrument , which will allow us to considerably increase CFSP appropriations ( heading 4 ) , with particular emphasis on Kosovo and Palestine .
Finally , as a member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , like my colleagues I welcome the payments secured for Galileo , which is a major crucial project that will enable Europe to retain and even improve its ranking as a space power and guarantee us independence from other countries .
This is a great success , not only politically but also in terms of employment , attractiveness and , notably , visibility of European integration for our fellow citizens : quite simply it is a great success for our future .
( HU ) Mr President , ' And yet it moves ! '
Galileo Galilei allegedly said .
Now , after many years of fault-finding , the Galileo programme moves yet .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , the Commission , the Commissioner and Parliament on forcing an agreement .
But why is force needed ?
Why did the Council not act sooner ?
Why is it shocked and horrified that the Union has to pay again ?
Why are we not glad that the Union is willing and able to implement important programmes like Galileo ?
Why did we need to scrape together the necessary amount from left-over money instead of everyone bearing the costs of investment as well as the profit ?
Why does the Council try to reduce resources for cohesion policy from one year to the next - by more than EUR 100 million this year ?
Why was it necessary to withhold agricultural aid for the new Member States for ten years , and to make European citizens who are aided in different ways compete with each other in the common market ?
When the Austrian emperor and king of Hungary asked for help with the wars of Maria Theresa , the Hungarian nobles gave the spirited response , ' Our life and our blood ! ' But they added ' No oats , ' in other words , we will not bear the costs .
It is difficult to be successful with such behaviour .
We should not regard the Union 's budget as wasted money .
It is an instrument through which European citizens get value for their money .
Parliament , the Commission and finally the Council have worked on this .
If only the thoughts and intentions had clicked sooner . Thank you for your kind attention .
- ( NL ) Mr President , once again we can congratulate ourselves that an agreement has been reached after so many attempts .
It was a long and painful process and everyone who played a part can now look back on it with a clear conscience .
The big question is whether this is the best procedure for adopting the budget .
I think that it would be a good idea , once the new Treaty has been ratified , for us to look again at whether we cannot find a quicker and more effective way to do this .
We could also , for example , consider the question of whether deciding on pilot schemes and preparatory actions at this late stage is the best method or whether we should do that at an earlier stage .
I think the latter .
If we look at the negotiations , the major successes of this budget are the Galileo project and the European Institute for Technology .
When I read the press reports about all the negotiations , it always seems as if there is only one institution that matters and that is the Council of Ministers .
Once the agreement was concluded and you read the press reports , it was always ' agreement has been reached in the Council of Ministers ' .
Is it not possible to get the message through to the public for once that it was not exactly like that ?
It was difficult to persuade the Council to adjust the multiannual budget .
In itself that is commendable : the Treaty is still new , but there was a pressing need for it .
I think that we should adhere to the Treaty and to the multiannual budget , but that also applies to the Council , especially as regards the point in Article 44 on the presentation of country statements concerning sound financial management .
Perhaps the Council could also give that some attention .
( PL ) Mr President , in terms of both structure and size , the 2008 budget indicates that we are still at the early stages of introduction of new generation multiannual programmes linked to the financial perspective 2007-2013 .
One relevant example is the record low level of payments in relation to gross national income .
I am cautiously optimistic that in 2008 the beneficiaries of this budget will give the European Parliament a pleasant surprise , and simultaneously give an unpleasant one to the Finance Ministers by calling for a so-called amending budget as a result of higher implementation than currently estimated , notably concerning the Structural Funds .
Conciliation was extremely successful , and was indeed a joint success for the three participating institutions .
I congratulate Mr Böge on his role as the head of Parliament 's delegation .
Congratulations are also due to the rapporteurs , the secretariat and others involved .
As has already been mentioned in today 's debate , however , the conciliation procedure generated an unpleasant impression .
It felt as if rather than being actively involved in reaching the agreement and party to it , the role of Parliament 's delegation was that of some kind of observer in a deal-making arrangement between certain national delegations .
The latter were particularly interested in the method of financing and even more so in the public procurement contracts related to the Galileo programme .
This unpleasant impression was subsequently reflected in media comments on the event .
It should be remembered that the main purpose of the latter was budget conciliation .
It was more than simply a meeting between the Finance Ministers of interested countries .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I hereby undertake that we will draw conclusions from this experience for future meetings of this nature in 2008 .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , allow me to begin by paying a compliment to the President of the Council .
I believe you have greatly adorned this Chamber with your Portuguese Presidency ties , and you have generated an esprit de corps in the Council that we should never have thought possible .
From the perspective of budgetary control , there are two points on which we wish to lay particular emphasis for this coming financial year .
The first point , to which the Commissioner has already referred , is the continuation of the screening exercise focusing on the staff establishment in the realms of coordination and administrative support .
We know that the Commission itself has doubts as to whether it actually needs to have 1 700 employees assigned to communication or 3 500 to document management or 1 700 in the personnel directorate .
All of these together amount to almost a third of the staff in the support and coordination services .
We seek to ensure that the administration is not concerned with itself but that its workforce contains employees who can implement the political priorities of the Commission as well as those of Parliament .
For this reason we continue to call on the Commission to shed further light on these areas of activity in an action plan .
This issue must remain on the agenda , and it will remain on the agenda , with or without the reserve , with or without paragraph 11 of our resolution and even with or without the fulfilment of prior conditions .
I urge you very strongly to continue to pursue this matter .
You have commented on it ; I have heard those comments , and I shall judge you by them .
I believe that this Commission certainly can draw up an action plan , for this particular Commission is in a position to do so .
Its successors , however , will not be .
This is why I believe it is important for you to fulfil this prior condition , to carry out the appropriate preliminary work .
I myself am very interested in this matter and am always willing to discuss it with you .
The second point to which we attach importance concerns national management declarations for funds that are subject to shared management .
Mr President-in-Office , during our conciliation procedure you made certain statements in which you indicated to us that you would deal with this matter .
So far you have not said precisely how you intend to set about this task .
Our call for action on this issue also extends to the Slovenian Presidency .
We strongly urge the Commission to use the relevant guidelines to establish the conditions in which we can initiate talks with the Member States in the first place .
Without recourse to these guidelines and without corresponding activities on the part of the Member States , it will be difficult to take any action .
( RO ) Mr. President , the European Union budget for the year 2008 is a pragmatic one , of results , guided by the current development priorities of the European Union .
All through the budgetary procedure , the European Parliament used its prerogative of control over the other institutions for promoting the main objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , economic competitiveness and employment .
The Parliament transferred funds designated to the Commission to reserve , due to deficiencies in the approval system for operational programmes , because exceeding of deadlines means money lost by the European citizen .
The same thing happens in the case of delays in recruiting personnel from the new Member States , which has generated important costs and affected the activity of the European institutions .
Thus , I consider it is very important that , after the Lisbon Treaty comes into force , the competence of the Parliament will significantly increase , co-decision will become a general rule and the veto of the Parliament in adopting the budget will be extended to agriculture as well .
The solutions found for financing the great technological projects of the European Union , namely Galileo and the European Institute of Technology , result in significant assistance for research and development .
Nevertheless , we have to make sure that the European assistance will be distributed uniformly and will not deepen the already existing technological and informational development gaps between the Member States .
Although it is a technical solution for financing these programmes , the use of the agriculture margin should not become a rule .
Agriculture should not be a field whose fate is decided beforehand and whose funds are systematically deviated .
I am very glad about the support you provided for increasing the amounts designated for the European programme for financing the school milk scheme and expanding it to other products as well .
Last but not least , I consider the increasing involvement of the European Union in the educational field , in general , and the expansion of scholarship and continuous training programmes , in particular , to be very important .
For this reason , I thank you for supporting the amendment regarding the significant increase of the budget in this field for the next year .
( EL ) Mr President , this year 's budget is resounding proof that the Community method works .
This year we have demonstrated the added value that the European Union can provide in resolving complex problems where the original plans failed .
This is borne out not only by the spectacular success of Galileo , but also by the way in which we were able to provide Frontex with new , necessary funding to meet new challenges ; and by the pilot schemes , and the European Institute of Technology .
Simply put , the European Union shows that it can provide Community solutions to large-scale , complex problems where others have failed .
This is the first positive message .
However , there is another , negative message connected with the broader trend of the budget figures : the fact that this year we are spending , for next year , 0.95 % of the Community GDP does not strike me as good news .
I have heard that some fellow Members regard it as a success .
For me it is not .
It proves that we are spending as much now , with 27 Member States , as we were when there were 15 .
Budgets at this level do not represent the scale of ambition of the European enterprise .
Building on this year 's success , we should start preparing the future allocations in good time , and I am glad that discussion of this has already begun .
Let me end on a personal note : on Thursday when we vote on the budget , it will be a year since Loyola de Palacio - the architect of this great European project - passed away .
A great European , a great woman , a woman who initiated this process , the successful conclusion of which we shall be voting through on Thursday .
I believe that for a politician who speaks through her work , there can be no better memorial .
- ( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
One of the points on which Parliament and the Council are agreed is to substantially increase the Frontex agency 's budget - in fact this has been doubled .
I would like to state that between this budget 's first reading and its second reading , at which it will be approved this week , Parliament 's Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs had an intensive session with the Head of the Frontex agency , in which we spoke and were given a detailed presentation about the agency 's work programme for the coming year .
This presentation , Mr President , convinced us that we are doing the right thing in increasing this agency 's budget and that with more means at its disposal throughout the coming year , the agency will be more effective than it has been so far .
The Head of the agency also supplied us with the details of several new missions to be carried out in the course of next year on the external borders of the Union - land- , air- as well as sea-based missions .
As regards sea-based missions , it gives us great satisfaction to see that Frontex 's activity will increase substantially on maritime borders , especially in the centre of the Mediterranean , but also in the Eastern Mediterranean , where we have recently seen problems increase substantially .
Meanwhile , missions will also continue near the Canary Islands .
Mr President , I am in no doubt that the citizens of the countries affected will welcome Frontex 's more effective presence to help them meet the influx of migrants , which , as we all know , is a main preoccupation for citizens of these countries .
They will therefore appreciate the decisions we have taken as regards budget .
Moreover , I have no doubt that with this budget we are going to send a clear message to the organised crime network that is benefiting from the trafficking of migrants , a message that their activity will not be tolerated . Thank you .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , I have listened very carefully to the Members ' speeches and I must say to you that , while I indicated at the beginning my delight at the success achieved , I now have all the more reason to feel extremely satisfied , both on my own behalf and on behalf of the Council , at the results that we have all managed to achieve together .
Please allow me to add that not only do these results allow us to feel satisfied , but they also give prestige to our institutions : Parliament , the Council and the European Commission .
In the eyes of European citizens , we have demonstrated a common will and a common ambition to continue building the European Union , now with 27 Member States , as an area of peace , democracy , freedom , justice and also prosperity .
I must take advantage of this occasion to express my great hopes , not only for the correct implementation of the budget to be adopted , but also for the correct implementation of the projects which were covered by these negotiations .
Many thanks to everyone for their generous words addressed to the Council . Thank you very much , Mr President .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) We should congratulate Parliament 's rapporteurs on their successful budget : Mr Virrankoski for the Commission 's budget and Mr Itälä for Parliament 's budget and that of the other institutions .

The outcome is an historic one .
The Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund for the first time now receive the largest slice of the budget .
This reflects the changes in the Commission 's priorities .
The size of the budget has long been known : just under 1 % of GNI , which means around EUR 120.3 billion for 2008 .
The budget also looks to the future , with the result that EUR 3.4 billion will go on the Galileo satellite radio navigation system , and EUR 309 million on the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) .
There was also further investment in the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
This is immensely important for strengthening our credible international role .
As regards Parliament , Mr Itälä has highlighted the importance of budgetary discipline and that of the responsible use of public funds .
I therefore consider the new budget to be excellent .
Annual report of the European Union on Human Rights ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Annual report of the European Union on human rights .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to be here today to witness this debate on the ninth EU Annual Report on Human Rights .
This report covers the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and was formally presented to the European Parliament on 26 November in Brussels .
As in previous years , the ninth EU Annual Report on Human Rights 2007 is a genuinely joint report prepared by the Presidency , the European Commission and the General Secretariat of the Council .
The purpose of this report is to provide an overview of the human rights-related work of the European Union during the Finnish and German Presidencies .
The report aims to illustrate how the common values on which the EU is based translate into concrete human rights-related activities in its bilateral relations with third countries , in multilateral fora and in relation to a number of thematic issues .
A second objective of this report is to ensure transparency in the EU 's human rights-related activities and also to ensure the visibility of these multiple and extremely important activities .
I should now like to highlight the most striking general aspects of the EU 's policy on human rights during the period in question .
These were as follows : implementation of the EU guidelines on human rights - as you know , we already have guidelines on torture , the death penalty , human rights defenders and children in armed conflict ; the development of new more comprehensive EU guidelines on the rights of the child , initially focused on the issue of violence against children ; the first year of functioning of the UN Human Rights Council ; the conclusion of the institution building process of this new body and , finally , the mainstreaming of human rights into all aspects of EU policies , including crisis management in operations and missions of the European Security and Defence Policy .
Although the structure of this report largely follows the same format as last year , this year 's edition strives to provide additional focus on analysis in order to offer a more comprehensive and in-depth overview of the impact and effectiveness of EU action in the fields of human rights and democratisation .
This focus on analysis stems from the suggestions made by the European Parliament contained in the Coveney report from April .
This report therefore presents the EU 's human rights-related activities from both thematic and country perspectives .
This year two new sections have been added : one on the neighbourhood policy and the other on freedom of religion and belief .
We wanted , in this way , to underline the importance we place on the fight against intolerance based on belief or religion .
The annual report includes comments on the resolution sponsored by the European Union on this subject during the 2006 session of the United Nations General Assembly .
I have pleasure in informing you that this year we again sponsored a resolution on intolerance based on religion or belief which was adopted by consensus in the UN Third Committee .
In the Human Rights Council session which began yesterday , 10 December , in Geneva , another EU resolution on religious intolerance will be presented .
This particularly aims to renew the mandate of the Special Rapporteur .
We hope that this resolution will also be adopted by consensus .
The report also includes a more comprehensive section on the European Parliament 's activities to promote and protect human rights and democracy , particularly through resolutions , but also through hearings and debates organised in the Subcommittee on Human Rights , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development and with representatives of third countries .
The European Parliament 's vital contribution to our joint efforts to promote and protect human rights is undeniable .
The report also mentions the mechanisms developed within the EU to guarantee respect for and protection of human rights .
Mention should be made in this respect of the establishment of the Agency for Fundamental Rights on 1 March of this year , replacing the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia .
The report highlights , among other activities , the steps taken to implement the EU guidelines on human rights .
I should like to start by mentioning the steps taken throughout this year to implement the guidelines on the death penalty .
By cooperating with countries in all regions , the EU has given great impetus to its campaign against the death penalty .
Throughout the reporting period , the EU took numerous steps on the death penalty , trying to convince countries to change their positions on this issue and also trying to save human lives .
It was also in the context of these guidelines that we presented a declaration on the death penalty in 2006 to the United Nations General Assembly which led this year to the adoption of the resolution against the death penalty on 15 November .
We have also reinforced our position against torture within the context of the guidelines and continued to improve the implementation of the guidelines on children in armed conflicts and also on human rights defenders .
This year , the EU has also taken a new initiative and developed a set of guidelines on the rights of the child which will in all likelihood be adopted by the Council at the end of this year .
The core of the report continues to be the EU 's activities in the area of the common foreign and security policy , dialogues on human rights with various countries and troika consultations .
Information is given on the development of policies and actions in relation to 20 different thematic issues , including not only those areas in which the EU has adopted human rights guidelines , but also other thematic issues , such as women 's rights , children 's rights , the fight against racism and the trafficking of human beings .
The report includes an analysis of the EU 's activities in neighbouring countries and provides an overview of the EU 's activities in international organisations .
I would remind you in this respect that the period analysed in this report coincides with the first year of activities of the Human Rights Council , with the European Union having actively contributed to the latter 's work .
Another priority for the EU in relation to human rights has , as in previous years , been the streamlining of human rights into all aspects of EU policies .
I am thinking of the planning and execution of crisis management operations and missions under the European Security and Defence Policy and the assignment of dedicated human rights and gender advisers to missions .
The mandates of the special representatives of the European Union have also now become concrete instructions in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I also welcome this EU report , which is a joint report by the Council and the European Commission .
Those of you who were present the first time I spoke here as a Commissioner will know that it has always been my wish for us to address this issue together .
I would also like to thank those in Parliament who have contributed to our report .
At the end of the day , this is a very good document which expresses what we have to say , and shows what we have been doing , in the field of human rights .
Yesterday the world celebrated International Human Rights Day , which is particularly significant this year as it marks the start of the celebrations to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
That was the first step in establishing a comprehensive international framework for the protection of human rights , which has now been followed by an impressive codification of international human rights law over the past decades .
Today , the challenge is to turn implementation into reality , worldwide .
For instance , the deplorable human rights situations in Burma / Myanmar , in Sudan / Darfur , Iran and Zimbabwe are a stark reminder of the challenge we face , and one brought home to us today by the winner of the Sakharov Prize , Mr Osman .
He has clearly shown us the way .
I would like to draw your attention to four key developments which have particularly marked the European Union 's activities over the past year .
First , we have seen important changes within the United Nations human rights system .
The institution-building phase of the Human Rights Council has been more or less successfully completed , and there is ground for cautious optimism , provided the Council addresses human rights violations in a timely manner whenever and wherever they occur .
In that light , we were pleased to see that , further to the EU 's initiative , the Human Rights Council has taken steps to address the grave violation of human rights in Burma / Myanmar , and also in Sudan / Darfur .
Moreover , we also welcome the creation of the system of the Universal Periodic Review which , as of next year , will also allow for a regular thorough examination of the human rights records of every UN member state .
Despite the creation of the Human Rights Council , the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly remains , of course , an equally important forum for human rights issues .
The European Union will continue to make full use of that Committee to propose both thematic and country resolutions .
At this year 's session there was a particular success - namely the adoption for the first time of a resolution calling for a moratorium on the use of the death penalty .
Thanks to the EU 's initiative and the building of a cross-regional coalition , the historic condemnation of the death penalty marks a crucial step in building an international consensus towards its eventual eradication .
Secondly , one of the most important tools at our disposal for raising human rights issues with third countries is the human rights dialogues .
They also enable us to raise particular human rights concerns with a partner country , make recommendations for improvement and also discuss possible ways to promote reform through training projects or cooperation .
The last year has seen a considerable increase in the number of human rights dialogues .
We now conduct dialogues with around 25 partner countries .
For example , we have established human rights dialogues with most of the European neighbourhood countries , and initial meetings have generally been quite - and sometimes highly - constructive .
The first round of the human rights experts ' dialogues , including with the African Union , has opened up new possibilities for engaging with the African continent on human rights .
In May 2007 , the European Union held the first human rights dialogue with Uzbekistan , and the EU strategy for Central Asia foresees the establishment of such dialogues with all Central Asian countries .
However , as the number of dialogues increases , we must be vigilant to ensure consistency and effectiveness - a point that the European Parliament rightly underlined in its resolution of 6 September 2007 .
Thirdly , let me turn to the EU human rights guidelines .
I am pleased - and the Council Presidency has already noted this - that 2007 has seen the adoption of the new guidelines on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child , jointly with an implementation strategy .
As a first priority , we shall address under those guidelines the crucial issue of violence against children .
As in the case of all EU guidelines it is , of course , implementation that counts .
The European Union has , in particular , been active under the guidelines on the death penalty , torture and ill-treatment , with numerous general démarches , but also with many specific representations on individual death-penalty or torture cases in a range of third countries .
We will consistently raise these matters in political dialogue meetings with third countries .
Finally , I must mention the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) , which has been in place since January 2007 .
The EIDHR enables us to provide funding directly to civil society organisations worldwide , without the intervention of governments .
This has become a vital instrument for strengthening grass-roots organisations throughout the world , without which human rights and democracy could not flourish .
The EIDHR puts a new emphasis on the promotion of democracy and also allows us to provide support for actions in support of the EU human rights guidelines .
A further innovation is that funds can now be mobilised to assist human rights defenders who are in danger as a result of their activities .
In total , some EUR 140 million will be available each year under this instrument , and the first calls for project proposals are now open .
Time allows me only to touch on those few points today .
However , I think any reader of this good and interesting annual report cannot fail to be struck both by the sheer geographic scope of our activities on human rights and by the range of thematic issues covered .
In addition to the topics I have already mentioned , I would like to say that the European Union has been active on issues as diverse as promoting membership of the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) , women 's rights and the rights of persons with disabilities .
The year 2007 has been a year of achievements .
Nevertheless , we are also aware that human rights violations remain , unfortunately , endemic throughout the globe .
In this 60th anniversary year of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , we will , of course , continue our efforts to ensure that the rights contained in that Declaration eventually become a tangible reality for all of us .
First of all , I would like to thank all those who have prepared the annual report .
Not only the European Parliament , but also such institutions as The United Nations Human Rights Council , the Council of Europe and NGOs that continue to work in the sphere of protection of the human rights , a dialogue that cannot be overestimated , have been looking forward to this document .
I am talking about the dialogue between the European Parliament , its Subcommittee on Human Rights and the UN Human Rights Council , society and the groups within them .
I agree with the ideas expressed by the country holding the EU Council Presidency and by the Commissioner .
Nevertheless , I would like to highlight several points .
The annual report is a detailed survey of the actions taken by the EU globally in the sphere of human rights .
It covers the activity of the EU Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament .
The report gives an account of situations in certain regions of the world , but I feel there are several issues missing that would have made the report even more valuable .
First of all , the report is lacking in the evaluation of the EU human rights policy .
At the end of the year it would be good to learn the opinion of the Council and the Commission of the results and the effect of the actions mentioned .
Such an account would be of much greater value than one that simply provides a list of actions taken , no matter how long that list might be .
A result-oriented outlook would highlight all the actions taken by the EU in the area of protection of human rights and would underline the insignificance .
This also applies to the individual cases mentioned in the report : what results has the European Union actually achieved ?
Could it be that our tactics and activities have yielded no results at all or have even had negative consequences ?
On the other hand , I am missing a clearer explanation of the European Parliament 's work and the recommendations for resolutions that we have adopted .
The European Parliament would benefit from having information on which of its recommendations have been taken into consideration by the Commission and the Council , which of them have been implemented and what the results have been .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to make three rapid remarks on this ninth report , followed by a brief reflection on future reports .
The remarks are positive remarks .
First I wish to say that , although this report follows the structure of previous versions , there is greater concern for detailed analysis .
Some issues are even examined from a dual perspective : geographical and thematic .
This is a positive feature .
Secondly , another positive feature is the report 's increased emphasis on abolishing the death penalty , torture , children 's rights and greater concern about the protection of human rights defenders .
We should also be pleased with the increased concern about the particular vulnerability of women in situations of abuse , and consequently the need to reinforce their protection .
My third remark is that this report covers the first year of the UN 's Human Rights Council .
The EU has played an active role in the introduction of the Universal Periodic Review mechanism , and this could create some extremely positive synergies .
Finally , I wish to share a reflection partially coinciding with the thoughts of Mrs Andrikienė .
We are making good progress towards the establishment of a much more comprehensive diagnosis every year , but we still have a long way to go to turn this exhaustive and discerning analysis into more tangible and effective results of the European Union 's action .
This means , therefore , that we must develop a conceptual and analytical device that allows us to assess our own instruments .
The way in which we approach dialogue with third countries , conditionality , the terms of the discourse we use to speak out against certain situations , whether or not we apply double standards depending on the proportions or the strategic importance of such-and-such a country , all of this we feel ought to be thoroughly examined , and we hope it is considered in future versions of our annual reports .
( Applause )

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think the European Parliament has started off well towards the celebration of the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with the award of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to the impressive Mr Salih Mahmoud Osman .
But he told us that we are failing in our duty to offer protection to the people of Darfur and that the EU needed to put determination and resources , including troops , into that effort .
How can it be that an EU that preaches human rights allows the murder of 600 000 people and the displacement of four million ?
The EU must build up its capacity to intervene in crisis situations such as this .
Without action , our words on the promotion of shared values are so much hot air .
I think many of my constituents and the suffering people of Darfur will have been astonished at the sight of EU leaders enjoying cocktails in Lisbon last weekend with the Presidents of both Zimbabwe and Sudan .
A major gap in the Council and Commission 's 2007 human rights report is any response to the revelations , not least by this Parliament , of EU governments ' collusion in extraordinary rendition .
We are told that the EU has been active on the issue of torture .
How can it be that an EU that stands for human rights and the elimination of torture has offered no true accountability or establishment of the truth , but only blank denials and bland assurances for its own involvement in this barbarity ?
The signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights this week - welcome as it is , not least as it will be the first time that sexual orientation discrimination is banned in an international human rights instrument - rings hollow if we see hypocrisy in practice .
Lastly , Mr Osman also warned that justice and accountability must not be compromised by a political deal and that the cycle of impunity must be broken .
I think we can apply that warning to the current situation in the Balkans .
The European Union must not allow itself to be blackmailed by Serbia into signing the Association Agreement as a sweetener for the loss of Kosovo , unless and until Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karadžić are delivered to The Hague .
We cannot sweep aside the judgment of Hague prosecutor Carla Del Ponte that the Serbian Government has deliberately failed to deliver Mladić and Karadžić to justice .
We cannot reward Serbia for holding back from a violent reaction over Kosovo .
Mr President , defence of human rights should be a matter of conscience , rather than of keeping up with whatever the latest intellectual fashion happens to be .
I therefore call for the European Union 's activities in this area to be imbued with greater sensitivity towards the issue of religious freedom .
Believers ' consciences are coming under attack ever more frequently , and the problem has now reached dramatic proportions .
I could mention China , Burma , North Korea , Iran , Sudan , Eritrea , Vietnam and also Russia , Saudi Arabia , Uzbekistan and Cuba .
Is that a long enough list ?
It is therefore striking that so little attention is devoted to this problem , especially in the first part of the report .
I welcome the fact that gender issues and children 's rights have been prioritised on our agenda , but regret the lack of attention to religious freedom .
This may be interpreted as an indication that certain people in Europe are prejudiced against faith per se .
The European Union should develop general guidelines on religious freedom as a matter of urgency .
Religious freedom is the human right most commonly infringed with impunity in the contemporary world .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I welcome this annual report .
It is an important piece of work providing us with a comprehensive view of the initiatives taken over one year and two presidencies to implement EU policy on human rights .
It is obviously no mean feat : it is a practical tool and a reference document .
For all that , I feel Mrs Andrikienis right .
The report lacks a certain amount of objective appraisal , analysis and critical spirit , and as it does not draw any conclusions from the issues it considers , it lacks any recommendations .
The successes or failures of this policy are not sufficiently developed in the report .
That , I hope , and I feel sure this will be the case , will be the work of Members in the report to be drawn up by Parliament in the spring : their work must move in this direction .
There are also some disturbing silences in this report .
As Mrs Ludford mentioned , the section on human rights in relation to the fight against terrorism fortunately concludes with a reference to Parliament 's work on CIA flights and extraordinary renditions , but it says nothing about the Council 's lack of action in pursuing inquiries , charges against those responsible , and even less about compensation for the victims unjustly transferred , imprisoned or tortured .
Likewise , the section on asylum and migration says nothing about the mass violations of the rights of migrants ; no assessment is made of the implementation of agreements for a series of readmissions , nothing on the quasi-militarised administration of borders , nothing on the thousands of people who die trying to reach our coasts , although the work of Members is extensive and regular on these issues .
Nor , on reading this report , can one understand the reasons why our Member States have placed themselves in an extremely embarrassing position vis-à-vis our partners and vis-à-vis international law by refusing outright to ratify the Convention on migrant workers and their families .
On these issues our internal policy has consequences on human rights outside our borders .
I welcome the adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights which will help us take a much wiser look at ourselves , including Great Britain and Poland .
Analysis of our successes could also be useful for inspiring our future strategies .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner is right : the decisive role of the EU in the UN Human Rights Council 's adoption of promising and demanding work mechanisms , such as the recent adoption of a resolution calling for a moratorium on the death penalty , must be analysed .
An active presidency , a mobilised Council , a European Parliament on the offensive and tenacious civil organisations are helping fashion Europe as an effective world player : this is very good and encouraging news .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , ' a new man of human rights has been born who has nothing in common with his ancestor of 1789 but the name ' : that was the piqued description used by the philosopher Marcel Gauchet to describe the Charter of Fundamental Rights proclaimed here and made binding made by Article 6 of the Lisbon Treaty .
We know that in many respects the large number of rights it contains contradict the rights and freedoms protected by our national constitutions .
European law is superior to national law , even constitutional law .
In that case , what will be left of the secular principle when faced with Article 10 of the Charter , which states that religious freedom includes freedom to manifest one 's religion both publicly and privately ?
What will be left of the principle of equality when faced with Article 20 and subsequent articles of the Charter , which draw up a catalogue of victims ' rights based on their belonging to a particular group ?
What will be left of the principle of liberty , which includes the right to self-determination , when faced with Articles 6 to 19 which confuse this with personal rights and the simple power to demand a service from others ?
What we are trying to do is speed up the transformation of citizens who control their own future into mere consumers , passive service-providers , and we could not do this any better .
To my fellow Members who appreciate their countries ' secular freedoms and rights as protected by their constitutions , I can only say two words : wake up .
( NL ) Mr President , a human rights policy that is not consistent is hypocritical and lacks credibility .
The European Union is right to want to support human rights in third countries , but to be credible , we must also respect all fundamental democratic rights among ourselves .
We do not always do that , especially in the case of the right to freedom of expression .
That right is one of the most basic rights , if not the most basic right , but it is increasingly being seen as a problem .
In particular , criticism of the failed immigration and integration policy is always labelled as racism and so is criminalised .
The report we are discussing now also makes this mistake .
People risk being prosecuted and convicted , not because of something they have done , but because of their opinions and the expression of those opinions .
In this way the policy being pursued does not produce solutions to the problems , but the policy itself becomes part of the problem .
Mr President , I am grateful for this report , but would like to point out that our human rights are still selective - they are politically correct .
Even in this House we could not hold a photographic exhibition on the atrocities in Chechnya , because we were afraid that the Russians would not like it .
Concerning our human rights dialogue with China , there was no mention of the 30 to 40 million girls who are missing , demographically-speaking , in China .
Where are those children ?
They have been aborted , murdered after birth or abandoned , or are in the hands of organised crime .
Therefore , next time , our mission should be to take up this matter with the Chinese authorities .
Are things any better in the EU ?
I by no means want to make anyone feel guilty .
All I am asking is for you to consider what the basis of humanity is .
Why do we point a finger - quite rightly - at those countries which have the death sentence when we also have a death sentence in the EU , with over one million children in the EU being murdered before they can be born ?
All I am asking is whether this is humane .
Can we build a sounder society when human life does not have an absolute value ?
Our first mission is to defend the defenceless , those who are the most vulnerable .
That is called real solidarity .
This may not be politically correct thinking , but we have to ask where the values lie .
Are they negotiable ?
Can human rights values depend on a majority reached one day , which may be a minority another day ?
To put it simply , the first human right is to be born .
I am very happy I was born , and I am sure my colleagues are happy that they were born .
By seeing the absolute value of human life , we can build a society of compassion and love .
We cannot build a better tomorrow on sand that is wet from the tears of unborn children .
( PL ) Mr President , we have before us the EU Annual Report on Human Rights .
This is an excellent report .
It is actually one of the best documents produced recently in the European Union and is a positive example of coordinated action in the area of human rights across the main European institutions , in this case the Council and the Commission .
The European Union 's policy on human rights is the best developed of all its policies .
It symbolises what the European Union stands for in contemporary civilisation at the start of the 21st century , over and above the common market .
The European Union does speak with one voice on human rights on the international stage .
It has no hesitation about presenting its own stance that is not always in line with that of the United States .
The Union is proving increasingly effective and helpful to individuals persecuted under undemocratic regimes the world over .
Nonetheless , Mr President , we do realise that much still remains to be done .
The winner of this year 's Sakharov Prize , Mr Salih Mahmoud Mohamed Osman , has made this clear for instance in today 's address to the House .
We should consider what action is required to make the European Union 's human rights policy more effective .
I have in mind in particular a study of the situation regarding human rights in Russia following the elections in that country .
I am also thinking of the situation in China in the run-up to the Olympic Games due to take place there next year .
There is a lot for the European Union to do there , especially regarding human rights .
( FI ) Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council said that human rights issues should be taken into account in all policy .
That is true , and that is what should happen in foreign affairs , but the EU should also take a look in its own backyard .
Are foreign workers within the EU treated in a way that takes account of everyone 's human rights ?
There is much poverty here .
In fact , that does not come under the EU 's official policy . It is outsourced to the Church and charities .
The EU must take a more determined stand on human rights ; only deeds mean anything , not words .
Finally , I would like to raise the issue of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq , which is about to reach catastrophic proportions .
Some 4.5 million people have had to leave their homes , and the Iraqis last year represented the largest group of asylum seekers in Europe .
The EU has responded to the crisis by allocating EUR 4 million to the work of the UN Refugee Agency and the Netherlands Red Cross , and a further EUR 11 million is planned for the country 's health services and schools .
Is this sufficient support , however , from a rich European Union for these 4.5 million people who are , through no fault of their own , in such a plight ?
The Iraq crisis is now one of the world 's worst .
( PL ) Mr President , in this report I particularly welcome the section on the actions of Members of this Parliament .
The award of the Sakharov Prize to Alexander Milinkievich , along with the strong and unequivocal condemnation of the murder of Anna Politkovskaya showed that Europe will not stand idly by , ignoring infringements of human rights beyond our Eastern border .
Much remains to be done in this regard , however .
The latest parliamentary elections in Russia proved that fundamental principles and freedoms are being infringed there as a matter of course .
The events that took place in Russia call into question the regular consultations between the European Union and the Russian Federation in the area of human rights .
The time has perhaps come to redefine the nature of these meetings , to introduce sanctions for lack of progress in implementing commitments made and to establish mechanisms for monitoring their implementation .
One thing is certain .
Russia is moving ever further away from democracy .
We can but hope that next year we will have more grounds for congratulating ourselves on not having wasted time and opportunities to make the world a better place .
( DE ) Mr President , the report contains good innovations .
There is , for example , a chapter on the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The report also describes the worsening human rights situation in Russia but sounds a warning against any moves to isolate that country .
Nevertheless , it is important that subsequent dialogues should involve further discussion of issues such as freedom of expression , freedom of the press and religious freedom , anti-NGO and anti-extremist legislation , the fight against terrorism and the Chechnya question .
The Council and the Commission should establish a follow-up mechanism .
Moreover , there is a complete lack of willingness on the Russian side to engage with the NGOs .
We must hope that the Russian Government will agree at long last to take part in the consultations leading up to the human rights dialogues .
The report shows that the EU has become more active in the field of human rights , but it regrettably misses the opportunity to engage in more critical reflection on the human rights situation within the EU itself .
That , however , needs to be done if we are to pursue a credible policy on human rights .
( RO ) Ladies and Gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the European institutions for drawing up this report , which represents a true indicator of the importance the European Union gives to human rights and the promotion of democratic values worldwide .
It is a detailed report and I appreciate the initiative to extend it to other fields as well .
At the same time , in the same theme of improvement , I would like to point out three aspects of major importance , which should be the priority of European action in the future .
First of all , I would like to emphasize the importance of promoting and respecting human rights , in the capacity of peace guarantor in Europe .
Today 's Europe is a globalized and multiethnic Europe , and recognition and mutual respect of our rights and freedoms should lay at the basis of promoting tolerance and understanding .
Therefore , guaranteeing the rights of minorities , especially in the Western Balkans and in the Neighbourhood Policy , as well as intensifying the European Union 's efforts in this direction , is of major importance .
At the same time , promoting the rights of the Roma and their integration into the European community , including by creating an agency responsible in this field , should continue to be consolidated .
The situation of human rights on the territory of the European Union , which aspires to the role of human rights promoter , is not less important and , therefore , of reference .
In this regard , I express my concern regarding the recent deterioration of the situation of Romanians in Italy , which has resulted in massive infringement of their rights .
Therefore , I request the Commission and the Council to take firm actions in order to restore the rights of Romanians and prevent this type of situation in the future .
In the end , I would like to draw the attention of the Council and the Commission to the need to consolidate the European Union evaluation mechanisms within the annual human rights reports .
Only by knowing concrete results will we be able to develop these actions in a coherent and efficient manner .
Also , the examination and evaluation of the European Union 's regional actions , including in developing the Black Sea synergy , should be integrated in the future reports .
Mr President , may I also welcome this year 's Council and Commission annual report .
It certainly makes progress in terms of extra detail , which we have called for in past years .
But , if I can say so , it is still a little longer on description and a little shorter on analysis than we would like .
However , I want to wholeheartedly congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on their new guidelines on the rights of the child - a major step forward .
I hope in the next year that successive presidencies will ensure an effective role for the Fundamental Rights Agency and the upgrading of EU legislation to provide effective protection against discrimination on all grounds , and maintain pressure on the countries of the Western Balkans to bring war criminals to justice .
I also want to call today for specific European support in the next year for the final report of the UN Secretary-General 's personal representative on business and human rights .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on this issue , I am deeply concerned that in Bangalore this week Indian courts will seek to execute an international arrest warrant against seven Dutch activists from the Clean Clothes Campaign because they posted a report on labour violations at the Indian supplier of the fashion label G-Star , including forced overtime and physical and verbal abuse , on the internet .
This is in contradiction of the Indian Government 's responsibilities under Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
I ask the Council and Commission to investigate this case , and I appeal for all EU governments not to cooperate with this arrest warrant on a fundamental issue both of labour rights and of freedom of speech .
( PL ) Mr President , the report contains information on talks with Russian and Chinese leaders regarding respect for human rights .
Unfortunately , the information is not very specific .
In the meantime , the conflict between the police and the army in Russia over organs belonging to Chechens continues .
Chechens are being seized from their homes , and when all organs suitable for transplantation have been removed from their bodies , they are dumped .
In China , organs are taken from political prisoners .
The Council of Europe issued statements on these cases earlier in the year .
All our Parliament managed to do was dismantle a display illustrating crimes committed by Russia against the Chechen people .
The display was taken down one evening because it was deemed too shocking .
I should stress that it was the display that was considered too shocking , not the actions it illustrated .
How long will we condone genocide ?
I should like to ask for clarification as to whether the problem I have referred to was raised in the talks with Russia and China .
( PT ) I must congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on this report which contains a detailed description of the valuable work carried out , in particular , for me , the moratorium on the death penalty .
However , it is lacking one critical and , above all , self-critical analysis .
I am referring to the lack of a response from the European Council on the recommendations of this Parliament and Senator Dick Marty on the so-called CIA flights .
Despite having been confronted with proof that the territory and agents of various Member States are implicated in the kidnap and torture of terrorism suspects , who were therefore denied justice , the European Council , and the Portuguese Presidency in particular , have done nothing to date to properly find out what happened , to apportion blame and to prevent such criminal actions happening again .
Despite admissions and investigations in the US , the European governments still have their heads firmly in the sand , thus offending basic European values and interests and seriously compromising Europe 's credibility in terms of the universal promotion of human rights .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to say how glad I am that my country , Poland , decided to withdraw its reservation regarding establishing World Day Against the Death Penalty .
Not only does this decision accurately reflect the feelings of the Polish people , but it also allows the Union to speak with one voice .
With regard to the report before us , I welcome its Chapter 4.5 , entitled Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
It is good that the European Commission included gender equality and women 's rights amongst its priorities and action frameworks for 2010 .
Every Member State must now keep these issues in mind and take them into account in all political initiatives and cooperative actions aimed at development .
We would do well to consider the situation on the ground with regard to these issues .
Can we really feel satisfied when we hear what is actually happening ?
I could refer for instance to a 24-year-old Iranian woman named Delaram Ali who was sentenced to 32 months in jail and 10 lashes simply because she took part in a demonstration against the persecution of women .
In addition , in July of this year , the bodies of 42 women were found in Basra .
How do we react to the fact that those women were murdered simply because they had failed to cover their heads or had worn make-up ?
Surely we cannot condone the needless deaths of those women ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will be very brief .
Firstly , on the report presented and debated here today and on the manner of this debate , I must thank you for your support .
In fact more than that , I must thank you for your recognition of the work carried out by the Council , the Commission and also the General Secretariat of the Council in preparing this report and its contents .
The comments we have heard have been music to our ears as they have recognised the detail , the merits and the effort put into this report .
We have also heard criticisms , specifically that we could here and there have improved the analysis and gone deeper into the causes and consequences .
This report is definitely heading that way : it is more analytical , or aims to be so , than previous reports and you should not be in any doubt , ladies and gentlemen , that we will continue along these lines as you have advised and suggested .
Comments were also made on the substance .
There was one Member who said that Europe has done something , or has done a great deal , but there is still a long way to go .
I believe that Europe is probably the greatest area of freedom , justice , human rights and rule of law .
It has followed a consistent and constant path in its ever stronger and more solid defence of human rights .
However , it is clear that there is always more that can be done because we will never reach the end in terms of freedom and human rights : there will always be something to defend , to develop , to protect and to safeguard .
However , we should recognise that , both internally and also externally , the European Union has done a great deal .
A recent case was cited : the decisions or measures that we have adopted in the area , for example , of the protection of children 's rights .
We have done this .
I would also point out four or five initiatives in the area of human rights that indisputably prove what the EU is trying to do in terms of defending these human rights .
Here , tomorrow , we will solemnly proclaim the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
In this half of 2007 , the European Union has secured the adoption , in the United Nations , of a resolution on a moratorium on the death penalty .
We have established the European Agency of Fundamental Rights which is in its final stages of preparation .
We have also created the European Day Against the Death Penalty .
These are concrete , specific and recent examples of how our work to defend human rights is continuous , persistent and solid .
We must accept that there will be problems and that there will be measures or actions or attitudes that may be less than perfect !
Yet we must also recognise the great successes that we have had in this area .
Specifically in terms of external action , reference was made to the EU-Africa Summit which will be debated next .
There can be no doubt that the issue of human rights and good governance was an important , in fact , a very important issue in the dialogue that we held in Lisbon during the EU-Africa Summit .
You all know , ladies and gentlemen , as do all European citizens , that , in our dialogue with third countries , the issue of the defence of human rights is a constant and priority theme on our agenda and in our bilateral dialogue .
This is proven by our condemnation whenever violations of human rights occur in third countries and by the measures that we have taken in response to violations of human rights in third countries , in particular by adopting sanctions which are specifically aimed at preventing these violations from reoccurring .
We should therefore recognise our merits and the efforts that we have made .
Of course we must also correct what can be corrected , but we should have , on this issue , a confident and positive attitude and a belief that we are on the right road in line with our humanist traditions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , before responding to some of the issues that have been mentioned here in the debate , let me say that we have brought a number of copies for you , just in case you would like them .
They are available .
Going into the discussion , let me begin with the general remarks about the report .
I am glad many of you find it a useful report and we also take note of the suggestions and the recommendations that you mentioned in this debate .
On the question of analysing the effectiveness of our own policy , which was raised by some of you , I would just like to point out that , in Chapter 7 , which is dedicated to this issue , there are evaluations and analysis , but it is also true that we can do better ; we can do more .
Let me also say that there is a certain limit , because very often human rights questions also relate to changing the whole society , therefore they are not as easily measurable as other things that are quickly implemented .
Let me also say a few things in general .
Religious freedoms have been mentioned .
The European Union is , of course , strongly against discrimination affecting any religious groups and our dialogue with third countries is expected to reinforce the respective governments ' own efforts to pursue and apply human rights principles , including , for instance , through national institutions for human rights .
With regard to the other questions that have been mentioned here , for instance the situation of the Roma in the candidate countries , it is stated in this annual report that we are committed to respecting fully the human rights of all persons , including those belonging to minorities .
Roma communities , in the mean time , have been identified as one of the most vulnerable minorities , both within the EU and in the candidate countries .
I think we still have to go on to tackle this question and to have it improved .
There was also the question about renditions in general .
In our opinion , practices referred to as ' renditions ' or ' secret detention ' constitute a violation of fundamental rights .
This has been clearly mentioned .
Here the Commission has from the beginning actively supported and facilitated the investigations launched by both the Council of Europe and the European Parliament into the renditions and the secret detentions .
I would just like to mention that here .
Things have been done .
On Sudan : we heard Mr Osman here today .
One of the key elements of the joint strategy at the summit was the question of partnership on security and peace .
Here we provide substantial support for conflict prevention , peace operations , and reinforcement of Africa 's capacity to tackle conflicts at regional and national level .
President Barroso and Commissioner Michel have used every opportunity , including the last Africa-EU Summit , to remove remaining obstacles .
I was present today when Mr Osman spoke and he also expressly said that he has received a lot of support from the delegations of the European Commission .
So there is great support there , but , of course , one can always do more .
Concerning the human rights situation in Iraq , which was also mentioned here : we know that this is still an alarming situation , particularly in the light of the bad security situation there and also with regard to women , children , minorities and displaced persons .
Here , I think , good governance , democracy , human rights and the rule of law are the focus of our policies , in order for them to slowly go in the right direction .
We have often called on them concerning the abolition of the death penalty .
This is just to highlight a few of those issues .
On Russia : we hold EU-Russia human rights consultations twice a year and Russia is also mentioned in our report twice , on pages 72 and 73 : first consultations were highlighted , and , secondly , we spoke clearly on the human rights situation , including in Chechnya .
So , again , Chechnya is not forgotten .
Let me finally say a word on India .
We are aware of the legal action that has been taken by Fibres and Fabrics International against the Clean Clothes Campaign .
This issue is particularly important to those of the Commission 's directorates-general that are concerned with fair labour practices .
We have asked the Commission delegation in Delhi to keep us apprised of the situation that is proceeding in the Indian courts , and we have to look into the detention that has been mentioned .
There remains a lot more to be said , but I think it was a broad debate and I do not want to take up any more time .
The debate is closed .
Second EU / Africa Summit ( Lisbon , 8 and 9 December 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the second EU-Africa Summit which was held in Lisbon on 8 and 9 December 2007 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner Michel , ladies and gentlemen , the second EU-Africa Summit that was held last weekend in Lisbon was undoubtedly a success and marked the start of a new relationship between the European Union and Africa based on strategic dialogue .
Almost 80 Heads of State and Government , the Presidents of the European Parliament and Pan-African Parliament and representatives of civil society sent strong messages to the European people , to the African people and to the world .
The concrete expression of the new relationship between the EU and Africa can be found in the documents - in my opinion high-quality documents - that were adopted at the summit : the Joint Strategy , the Action Plan and the Lisbon Declaration .
These documents set out the specific details of the relationship between Europe and Africa .
The new approach firstly favours multilateral channels and , secondly , tries to deal in an integrated manner with all the various dimensions of the relationship .
This approach constitutes the difference that the EU can bring , particularly in comparison with other international actors .
The treatment of Africa as a partner in strategic dialogue was also reflected in the method followed when both preparing for the summit and producing the documents that this summit was to adopt .
The strategy - for the first time a genuinely joint strategy - and the action plan were the result of intense and in-depth work with the African side , in particular with the African Union , and were , in the end , prepared and concluded by a joint group of experts .
I must also highlight at this point the constructive role played by the European Parliament in the process of producing the documents and preparing for the Lisbon Summit .
The Joint Strategy identifies four interlinked areas of common concern : peace and security , democratic governance and human rights , trade and regional integration , and development .
For the initial period from 2008 to 2010 , the first action plan provides for eight partnerships in areas of common concern which primarily aim to have a positive impact on the day-to-day lives of African and European citizens .
The Lisbon Summit confirmed the major changes that have occurred in Europe , Africa and the world .
In the Europe of today , with 27 Member States , there are very diverse external policy priorities and approaches .
The African Union is emerging as a favoured discussion partner of the EU , with the agenda also including the issue of human rights and good governance .
There is also a widespread perception that a series of global challenges , such as peace , security and international trade , require concerted action on the part of the international community , thereby justifying the emergence of new forms of cooperation .
The same can be said with regard to finding answers to problems affecting both Europe and Africa , in particular the effects of climate change , management of energy resources and migration flows .
Africa and the EU understand that there is a need to raise their relations to a new level , with the summit representing the moment when this common desire became clear and unequivocal .
However , the second EU-Africa Summit must not be presented as the end of the road , but rather as the turning point in relations between the two continents .
Therefore , of particular importance in the documents adopted , especially to guarantee a medium- and long-term view , is the explicit reference to the follow-up mechanisms for decisions made .
In addition to setting a three-year frequency for these summits , sectoral ministerial and expert meetings are planned for the various areas of the action plan , together with regular contacts between the Commissions of the European Union and the African Union .
However , civil society , NGOs , trade unions , business forums and think tanks will also have a very important role to play in implementing and monitoring the planned measures .
Finally , I must stress the central role of the European and Pan-African Parliaments in implementing the new partnership .
Existing ties between the parliamentary representatives of Europe and Africa must now be reinforced .
The Presidency is delighted , as you must be aware , at the joint statement presented by the Presidents of the two Parliaments at the second EU-Africa Summit .
There can be no doubt that a new and very exciting road is opening up in the relationship between Europe and Africa following the Lisbon Summit .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be able to report to you on the results of the Lisbon Summit .
There is not much more to add since I feel that the President-in-Office of the Council has described the results splendidly .
I also wish to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency for arranging and organising this summit - as I feel it was urgently needed - and especially for its great success .
The summit evidently brought home a new and clear message : that of a radical change in relations between Africa and Europe .
The Lisbon Summit marked the adoption , as has already been said , of a new common vision within a joint strategy , a political partnership of equals - complex-free , liberated and pragmatic - and a mutual responsibility .
Having said that , the summit also adopted eight strategic plans to specifically implement this new vision .
The summit featured intense , rich , high-quality debates pointing to the new nature of our relationship , and thus its genuinely and essentially political nature .
Yes , we discussed Zimbabwe , and many new European leaders , such as President Barroso and Chancellor Merkel , made it clear that Mr Mugabe 's policy is totally unacceptable , that we cannot tolerate violations of human rights , and that the policy operated there damages the desires for reform on the African continent .
Many African leaders share these criticisms , and I feel the EU ought to lend its full support to African mediation under the auspices of the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) and led by President Mbeki .
Yes , we talked about Darfur and the unacceptable humanitarian and security situation , and we criticised the uncooperative attitude of the Sudanese Government .
At a troika meeting with the President of Sudan , we clearly set out our expectations and demands for him to take the decision to permit rapid deployment of the hybrid force in order to put an end , as soon as possible , to the violence we know is being committed there .
It should be noted that , as a general rule , democracy , governance and human rights are no longer taboo , and many African countries have embarked on the road to progress , as they say , not in response to Europe 's expectations , but in response to the expectations of their own people .
Yes , we also talked about economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) , and yes , agreements were reached with many African leaders .
President Barroso and I explained time and again the real issues behind EPAs .
We also explained that the real challenge in the short term is to draw up interim agreements , not EPAs , before 1 January to ensure compatibility with WTO rules and thus prevent non-least-developed countries ( non-LDCs ) from being left in a more unfavourable situation as of 1 January 2008 .
I was told about the example of the Côte d 'Ivoire which would have lost around 750 million euros in commodities trade if it had not drawn up the interim agreement .
President Barroso suggested that next year the EPA discussions should be held at the highest level with each of the regions concerned , to finalise the agreements with a view to reasonable economic integration .
These are , of course , difficult issues .
We brought them up with no fear of divergence .
I feel that this will obviously give our new partnership quality and depth but , ladies and gentlemen , as of tomorrow we will face the even greater challenge of transforming this new political vision into specific action .
It is our political duty to present specific results by 2010 , in other words when we meet up again for the Third EU-Africa Summit .
We have a collective obligation to produce results .
The joint strategy and the first action plan form the roadmap for our partnership and divide it into very specific , operational , thematic objectives , as the President said .
These two joint documents adopted at the summit were unanimously welcomed in view of their quality and their ambitious nature .
This success is the result of a very long period of preparatory work which began in December 2005 with a communication by the Commission on a strategy for Africa , which in 2007 became the EU-Africa joint strategy .
The European Commission fully intends to assume its responsibilities during the implementation phase .
Success , however , is not only the responsibility of the Commission .
The Member States and our African partners must ensure that their mechanisms are in full working order .
One of Europe 's major responsibilities in implementing this partnership will consist of mobilising funds for finance .
I wish to remind you that the Member States undertook to disburse an additional 20 billion euros per year by 2010 .
The latest results show we are on the right track but that , if we take account of the effect of debt cancellation in certain countries , the current good results are quite relative .
Secondly , one very important aspect is a better distribution of the work between donors .
This is why the Code of Conduct on Division of Labour is a vital component .
Thirdly , I also wish to remind you that the Member States committed themselves at Gleneagles to finding one billion euros per year for Aid for Trade , half of which must be paid over to Africa .
These are public political commitments .
I wish to remind you of this because these are components that will consolidate the feasibility and achievement of the strategic plans .
I have another thought on this subject : it is now clear that the commitment of the Commission and the Member States must not be the monopoly of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs or of the Ministers for Development .
I would like us to institutionalise the principle of joint and regular sectoral ministerial meetings on these issues .
Obviously sectoral ministers , for example in the areas of scientific research , trade , agriculture and finance can make an enormous contribution to the new relationship with African countries .
As I explained at the conference of the European and Pan-African Parliaments in Lisbon , we are also relying heavily on the European Parliament and the African and European national parliaments to gather and relay the opinions and expectations of civil societies .
The central place given over to democratic actors and African and European civil societies at the very heart of the strategic partnership and its implementation is also an innovative feature which I hope will produce a genuine partnership focusing on people .
The speeches by the Presidents of the European and Pan-African Parliaments to the Heads of State and Government marked the official implementation .
I also wish to tell you that I took due note of the request by your colleagues in the Pan-African Parliament for financial support for this institution with respect for its autonomy .
We are obviously willing to consider , with the budgetary authorities , more direct access to finance .
I reiterate to you my hope that one day we may include the European Development Fund in the budget , for I think it is right and fair for you to perform your function of democratic control over the process of allocating public development funds .
Ladies and gentlemen , before the summit I said that the main challenge there would be to strike the right note on this EU-Africa political partnership and send out a clear message of a complex-free , joint and pragmatic relationship .
I think this is precisely the message emerging from the Lisbon Summit .
As the Portuguese Prime Minister José Socrates said , I have the feeling there will be a before-Lisbon and an after-Lisbon in relations between the EU and Africa .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the summit is behind us , a historic moment , a turning point in our relationship with Africa .
The basis of the relationship has really changed : from domination to cooperation , from monologue to dialogue .
It is right to talk about a partnership of equals .
After all , both Europe and Africa have a responsibility when it comes to the development of Africa .
Europe is responsible for European policy ; the African governments are responsible for their policies .
A joint strategy , based on shared values and mutual respect , and geared to the welfare of people , was sorely needed .
A joint strategy was also needed to enable us to tackle the problems that affect both continents together .
I am pleased that the summit was not taken hostage by Mugabe .
The situation in Zimbabwe is unacceptable and it is right that his policies are severely criticised .
However , the summit was not just about Zimbabwe .
There are other disasters going on in Africa which are claiming many victims .
Just think of Darfur , Somalia and , let us not forget , the Congo .
Mr President , Parliament adopted its report on the strategy in October .
The joint declaration of Parliament and the pan-African Parliament was signed at the parliamentary pre-summit .
Both presidents presented this at the opening session of the summit .
The parliaments should indeed not only have a role in preparing the strategy , they also have an important monitoring role with respect to its implementation .
When it comes to the action plan , unfortunately this is still vague , as are the issues of financing and the structural involvement of the parliaments .
I am pleased with the Commissioner 's promises on this .
The action plan talks about seminars , studies and evaluations .
They are all very important but ultimately it is about the results .
We all know that there is enough water , know-how and money to give Africa a better existence .
A great deal is dependent on political will .
Let this strategy be a genuine new start for sustainable development in Africa .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to add my congratulations to the Portuguese Presidency .
It was completely wrong that for seven years the world 's largest trading entity and the poorest continent had not sat down together to talk .
That stumbling block has now been overcome .
The summit has been held and has doubtless achieved many successes , the first success being that it was actually held .
The Parliaments , and this House especially , are ready to take our inspiration onto the stage , as we say in Spanish , meaning to match words with actions .
However , Commissioner , I regret that the reference to the parliamentary dimension was mere lip service , for none of the requests we made at the previous summit in relation to specific courses of action and funds to develop the role of the Parliaments were included in the summit 's conclusions .
Despite this , the House will continue to work and point out areas where we have not done well .
It must be said we have not done well in connection with those famous economic partnership agreements .
What has happened is that we have a complex-free relationship , a relationship of equals .
Certain African leaders have clearly stated the problems posed by some of the approaches we have fiercely defended .
It is not enough to be right , or to have reasons .
What we have to do is reach agreement .
Agreements are agreements , and cannot be impositions .
We ought to work harder and better to secure agreements on this equal footing that we proclaimed in the spirit of the summit .
This trade disagreement will go down in history as one of the main features of this summit .
The other main feature was human rights .
Substance was in short supply here too .
Yes , Commissioner , you discussed Darfur , but not much .
Not much , no , and in fact nearly not at all , because some of us here had to write to remind you that it was not on the agenda , and that it was a disgrace that Africa and Europe should meet up and not discuss Darfur .
Once again people were concerned , but did not actually concern themselves much in practice .
As we were reminded this morning , it is certainly time for us to be concerned , but it is also time for us to concern ourselves much more , and more effectively too .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to come back to the interparliamentary encounter between the Pan-African and European Parliaments to comment on two points where a common vision is needed within a common strategy .
As in love , words are not enough : we need action and proof .
Thus I feel there are two points where we could implement a common vision to really make it part of a common strategy .
The first point , Commissioner , as you said , is budgetary control .
Our job is to control outgoing funds and so it is absolutely essential , and it is up to us , to include the European Development Fund ( EDF ) in the budget in such a way as to allow parliamentary control to be exercised .
Our outgoing funds are , of course , incoming funds for our colleagues in the African parliaments .
It is vital that they can use national parliamentary controls to handle incomings which , particularly in a budget-support policy , can often be an important lever in their national policies .
It is high time , therefore , for us to get down to including the EDF in the budget and provide them with budgetary control mechanisms , with assistance if necessary .
The second point I wish to make concerns joint action within the context of international humanitarian law .
International humanitarian law - as you said , Commissioner - is flouted and trampled on , and this is totally unacceptable , and it is often for the extremely surprising reason that there is a war on .
International humanitarian law is precisely a law which is applied only in a war situation : it is not a law for times of peace .
Thus on this issue we may all insist together , the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament in unison , that any person who has ever violated international humanitarian law , especially during a power struggle , cannot be excused , and that we can then impose sanctions on those responsible .
These sanctions , however , will serve a genuine purpose and will be properly perceived only if they are transmitted on the ground in Africa , and if the kind of passive complicity we occasionally observe in such cases is curtailed .
I believe our parliamentary colleagues would be honoured if we undertook joint reflection on this issue .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the Presidency and also Commissioner Michel and the African leaders for all the progress that was made at the summit .
I think very often we look at the negative side but I think that an awful lot of good things came out of it .
The theme that emerged from the summit was one of partnership .
This was a summit of equals .
But we must make sure that this is more than rhetoric .
Let this pledge to partnership be reflected in practice .
To this end we should both demand equal standards from our partners on human rights and deal with them as equals on trade and economic issues .
We want to build a new strategic partnership with Africa , one that helps to establish a peaceful and secure future for the people of Africa , one that helps to strengthen investment , growth and prosperity through closer economic ties , and one that is based on a shared vision of Africa .
Before the summit there were some concerns about President Mugabe - but I do believe that he got the message very clearly - and also about EPAs .
I know that I was delighted to hear the Commissioner say that he and President Barroso had explained and re-explained to African leaders the benefits of this .
I want to thank him again for the meeting that I and other groups had with him .
They were very clear on the advantages of EPAs for the long-term economic future of Africa and , obviously , for the people of Africa .
I would like once again to congratulate the people involved in the summit and I think a lot of momentum and progress has been made .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I wish first of all to say that we in the European Parliament delegation attended two summits : first the parliamentary pre-summit with our colleagues from the Pan-African Parliament , and also the official summit .

Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I think you cannot be aware of the status we had there , in other words the degrading status of observers : Members of the European Parliament , even if they had worked well on previous occasions , had no access to the official summit .
I very much wished to inform the House of this , and I feel that we , as Members of the European Parliament , represent European citizens in the same capacity as heads of state or government .
Thus it would be right if we were also represented at the next summit .
The official summit , however , was a splendid initiative , and it is good to know that it has been held after seven years of failed attempts .
I do feel , however , that the main lesson to be learned from the summit is that the African continent is finally becoming emancipated and organised as an African unit , and this is certainly good news .
This reminds me of the discussions we had at our parliamentary pre-summit with the Commissioner , where we stressed the contradiction between , on the one hand , the political display of the EU 's vision and the new approach to its partners , and , on the other hand , the pressure exerted by the EU to get the economic partnership agreements signed .
I now wish to ask the Commissioner about the status of these partnerships , these interim agreements to be signed , because I must remind you that the African countries rejected this type of agreement and this kind of pressure .
Finally , Commissioner , another question on a matter of some concern : the nuclear issue .
The question from the Group of the Greens is as follows : why did nuclear talks commence with African countries ?
African countries are now in need of renewable energy .
Our technology , our solar energy , photovoltaic systems and wind-energy systems are truly suited to Africa .
What , then , was the reason , particularly when we are aware of the difficulties this can entail , such as with Iran at the moment ?
Why , Mr Vice-President ?
This is a very important question .
I would also like to know which country forced the EU to add the nuclear issue to the strategy .
Was it my president , the worldwide nuclear sales representative ?
This is totally unbelievable .
It is renewable forms of energy that Africa needs at the present time .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we can be satisfied with what happened in Lisbon .
At last , despite its differences - and after all we too have ours - Africa is showing that it is united and capable of overcoming the paternalistic relationship that arises between donor countries and recipient countries .
Building a political , economic and social partnership forms part of our strategy .
We can therefore be pleased that what we have asserted in our documents ever since the Treaty of Rome in 1957 is today becoming a reality .
Mr Konaré stated that Africa wishes to draw up its own agenda : this is quite extraordinary , and I hope it really does mean that Africa assumes responsibility for jointly tackling poverty , desertification and disease .
Criticism of economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) has long been expressed in this House , and in my opinion we should bear in mind that not only social groups but also African governments are now expressing such criticism and hence try to find alternatives .
The Pan-African Parliament and the European Parliament have now entered the field with determination , with a joint statement , and this is something exceptional .
It will also be a challenge , however , with regard to the policies to be pursued together with civil society organisations .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Mr Mugabe claimed a diplomatic victory at Lisbon in that he had ' defeated the British ' .
In a way he was right .
Instead of attending the conference himself , Gordon Brown sent Baroness Amos , who is , with no disrespect to the Baroness , a relatively minor figure in the British Government .
In the same way , he will send his errand boy , Mr Miliband , off to Lisbon on Thursday to sign up to the Lisbon Treaty .
It fell to Angela Merkel to rebuke Mr Mugabe with wonderful , almost British understatement that ' Zimbabwe damages the image of the new Africa ' .
Well , you could certainly say that !
Mr Brown should have attended the conference and taken the opportunity to tell Mr Mugabe to his face that he is a bloodthirsty tyrant who has no place in the modern community of civilised nations .
That would have given heart to oppressed Zimbabweans , and it would also have required real leadership - which is precisely why it did not happen .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to have the courage to see the truth before our eyes .
The EU-Africa Summit last weekend was in fact a failure and you do not need to look far to find the reason why .
People may well make fine statements about a new strategic partnership , but the fact is - as I said in Lisbon - that a satisfactory partnership between Europe and Africa has to be based on shared values and principles , such as democracy , human rights and good governance .
That is not the case at all today .
Europe rolls out the red carpet for Gaddafi and Mugabe : for Gaddafi in order to secure lucrative contracts , for Mugabe so as not to offend the other partners .
However , if the member states of the African Union continue to support the dictator Mugabe openly , the question will arise as to what their own promises on democracy and human rights are actually worth .
I will say it again therefore : if there is one signal that Europe should have given at this summit , it is that only democratic systems based on the rule of law offer a guarantee of improvement in one 's lot and that development aid should be made contingent upon the fulfilment of these conditions .
( PT ) Mr President , we will only find out if the EU-Africa Summit was worth the effort in 2010 when the next summit will be held , depending on whether the issues discussed at that time are new or the same as today .
That will be the criterion and the time for assessing the results of what happened this weekend in Lisbon .
However , in the meantime , we can take stock to a certain extent .
This summit was presented as a summit for dialogue , genuinely bilateral partnership and common sharing of responsibilities .
These are worthy aims .
In the new relationship between Europe and Africa , there can be no one leader as Africans must be responsible for their own destiny .
It is up to us , the European neighbours , to be generous and consistent in our development aid .
If , in 2010 , we are well on the way to achieving the Millennium Development Goals and if there are fewer deaths , less hunger , more democracy , more respect for human rights , more fair trade and more growth and development , then this summit will have been a success .
If the same dictators are still in power and the same deals are still being done , bringing many benefits to very few , then it will sadly have been an opportunity lost .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , following the EU-Africa Summit I wish to make a few remarks as a kind of summary of this important encounter .
As the Commissioner said , the results of the summit would certainly appear to be positive .
First of all , for months , or more than months , we have been asking the Commission to review the economic partnership agreement agenda and contents .
On each occasion , the Commission , or Commission representatives , told us that our criticisms were not shared by any African government officials or partners , and that we were merely relaying , for I remember the response , the perverse arguments of a number of large NGOs .
In Lisbon , there was a stream of criticism from the vast majority of African Heads of State and Government with regard to methodology and also the contents of negotiations .
A clear call went out to take the time to sign up fair and balanced agreements in compliance with EU commitments towards African development .
For a long time now we have been asking the Commission to ensure genuine coherence among its various policies .
We agree that several decades of European development cooperation with Africa have failed , but we would maintain that the limits of this cooperation have been constantly set by the Commission , taking back in one area what it gave in another .
Post-Lisbon , it is therefore obvious that the issue is not about substituting trade for cooperation , but about making both policies pursue the same objective of sustainable development .
In relation to food security , the fight against disease , human rights and migration , especially support for more fragile states , we have also constantly asked the Commission to do more and better for and with Africa .
We can see that this will be the case from now on , and that is good .
It can no longer be ignored , however , that the demands of this Parliament are the demands of ordinary African citizens , and also of their political representatives .
We are therefore pleased that the Parliaments , so long ignored in this process , have finally been included .
We hope that the next summit will provide the opportunity to gauge the effectiveness of the new strategy more rapidly and without too much delay , in order to confirm the suitability of the objectives and achievements .
( PT ) This summit took place because the Portuguese Presidency insisted and the African Union took a gamble .
Those in Europe who wanted to diminish the summit on the pretext of Robert Mugabe 's presence in Lisbon have lost .
Yet those who receive the King of Saudi Arabia in London with all due pomp and circumstance have no place to talk about human rights .
At the same time as the summit , numerous civic actions denounced this duplicity of words and deeds , the duplicity of those who were missing but also of those who were there .
In Portugal , the summit allowed people to talk about Africa and its problems and only for this reason was it worth the effort .
However , those who have listened to the Presidency and the Commission will believe that this was a genuinely historic event , a moment with a before and an after , which is clearly an exaggeration .
In fact , for the Portuguese , this was a kind of Luso-tropicalist provincialism , as apparent from the European press .
Progress was made : in fact , the main element of progress was that the African countries drew up their own agenda .
However , in all other respects , there was a gaping hole between the vanity of the words and the meagreness of the results .
This summit was better than the Cairo Summit , but that was hardly difficult !
What is difficult is to accept joint responsibility when starting from the fixed idea of economic partnership agreements .
( DE ) Mr President , it is good that the EU-Africa Summit has taken place .
We see more clearly now .
We have a strategy and a first action plan .
We in the European Parliament shall monitor their implementation closely .
As chairman of the delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament , I can tell you that we shall be doing that together with our African counterparts .
In the realm of good governance , we issued a joint statement at our parliamentary pre-summit meeting which included an expression of our conviction that measures to strengthen the capacity of African parliaments would enable those institutions , which had previously been overlooked , to make an effective contribution to good governance and to scrutiny of policy implementation .
To this end we need adequate resources to be earmarked in the specific programmes of the Commission and the Member States .
On human rights , we see Africans closing ranks whenever warranted criticism of conditions in specific countries is voiced in Europe .
Sporadic remarks from delegates dissociating themselves from Robert Mugabe 's policies before the summit gave way to a united front at the summit itself .
My thanks go to the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , for expressing herself clearly on Zimbabwe on behalf of all of us .
On the subject of economic partnership agreements , however , I believe we have a real problem .
It cannot be the aim of the EU to bring about the effective disintegration of the Southern African Development Community or the Southern African Customs Union by concluding interim agreements with some countries and not with others .
On this subject , President Mbeki argues objectively , whereas on the subject of Zimbabwe he tends to adopt a more partisan stance .
With regard to economic partnership agreements , I call on the Council to give the Commission a more flexible negotiating mandate so that unwanted effects like the interruption of trade flows for non-least-developed countries ( non-LDCs ) do not occur on 1 January simply because of the expiry of the present trade arrangements .
Yes , WTO-compatibility is essential , but it must also be possible to exercise a certain degree of creativity in order to achieve it .
Sometimes the stopwatch can be put on hold for a limited time .
All of our countries , after all , are WTO members too .
Mr President , as Michael Gahler said , clearly the Summit was somewhat overshadowed by the fact that there have been these acrimonious negotiations over economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) and a relationship has indeed been soured by these negotiations , as much as the Commissioner and the Council have tried to work for a good partnership .
A number of heads of state raised their concerns , including the head of the African Union , Mr Konaré , who said that the Commission was playing African regions one off against the other .
The General Affairs Council this week - rather disappointingly , for some of us - did not recommend the flexibility that many of us wanted to see , particularly towards the non-least-developed countries ( non-LDCs ) , although , as I understand it , the UK and the Netherlands in particular were pressing for this to happen .
Still that sword of Damocles is poised over the heads of the non-LDCs and they face the consequences , both economic and social , and economic shocks which , for us , ought to be absolutely unthinkable .
There are still concerns that have not been addressed on EPAs , on development assistance , on rules of origin and on commitments on the impact of agricultural subsidies .
These are all things which the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) states , in general , and Africa , in this case , were asking for .
It is not enough for the Commission to say that those of us who criticise EPAs are somehow in the pockets of the non-governmental organisations , that the ACP states are misinformed and misled by people and that it is only trying to comply with World Trade Organisation rules .
These kinds of argument really do not wash when we see the kind of dangerous situation the non-LDCs are in .
I want to say , finally , that our citizens in Europe will not accept any situation where , in 2008 , any poor countries are worse off than they are at the moment , and we cannot stand and allow that to happen .
We urge the Commission to show flexibility .
( DE ) Mr President , allow me to refer to some results of the summit which , I believe , reveal more than anything else the lack of a consistent development policy .
The good frameworks that were created for the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals and climate goals are being demolished again by the build-up of pressure in relation to the economic partnership agreement negotiations and , to an even greater extent , by an energy policy driven by the needs of the conglomerates .
Free trade agreements are to be wrung out of individual partners , which will ensure that even established regional economic areas in Africa are segmented once more .
In the field of energy policy , the only concern is to serve the interests of major European investors , and the drive to export nuclear plants to Africa is , in my view , a scandal .
On the subject of management of migration , you have once again made significant promises .
These , however , run counter to the draft directives on selective migration that Commissioner Frattini has presented .
I believe there is an urgent need to withdraw these drafts , otherwise mobility and freedom of movement between Europe and Africa will remain a pipe dream .
( FR ) Madam President , Africa and Europe talked politics in Lisbon at the highest level , and this is very good news .
Having said that , I would like to be sure they are speaking the same language , and particularly on three major issues .
First of all , a partnership of equals .
Alpha Konaré told the forum that Africa does not need either charity or paternalism .
The Lisbon Declaration confirms this : we will be setting up a partnership of equals .
Europe , however , has often treated this commitment rather lightly or à la carte by imposing its own agenda whenever its interests were at stake : on terrorism , migration and , at the present time , economic partnership agreements .
Secondly , a partnership of peoples .
We also expect some action on this issue .
The new partnership must bring together civil societies much more systematically , and also the people 's representatives , in other words the parliaments , especially by assisting with the capacities of African parliaments .
This is the message conveyed by the common statement made by the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament , and I hope this message will be heard .
Lastly , in relation to migration : Europeans and Africans had the chance in Lisbon to send a clear political signal which would have placed human rights centre stage in our partnership .
I truly believe that Lisbon was , regrettably , a missed opportunity .
The new strategy still places the emphasis on protecting borders rather than on the rights of migrants .
This means Europe can continue to flout the rights of migrants either here or there , for it has actually made very few commitments in its ' Migration , Mobility and Employment ' action plan .
( PT ) The EU-Africa Summit was held thanks to the diplomatic and political persistence of the Portuguese Presidency .
Europe has reported a success but it is doubtful that Africa will do the same , particularly those men and women fighting oppressive and kleptomaniac regimes .
They know that the majority of their representatives have absolutely no intention of abiding by what was legitimately agreed at the summit .
Future trialling of the joint strategy and the action plan adopted will be in the hands of the Portuguese Presidency .
As the terrible tragedies that Africa is facing in Darfur and Somalia were only briefly mentioned at the summit , we need to move on to practical measures .
When will European forces advance into Chad , as promised for last summer ?
When will the EU take vigorous action against the Sudanese regime which is preventing the hybrid force mandated by the UN Security Council from protecting the civilian population in Darfur ?
When will European troops or other contributions be sent in to make the invading Ethiopian troops withdraw from Somalia , as decided by the UN Security Council ?
The organisation of summits does not justify allowing such urgent issues to be forgotten , as this calls into question the EU 's credibility among millions of Africans and Europeans .
We need to demonstrate that the protection of lives in the Sudan , in Somalia , in East Congo and other countries in Africa counts for more than the signature of contracts in the tents of the criminal Gaddafi .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am going to be frank as some Members have been , some more than others .
The EU-Africa Summit was a success .
Without the constraints of a written text , here are my comments .
I remember very well when , at the beginning of the Portuguese Presidency or in fact during the preparations for the Portuguese Presidency , we indicated that holding an EU-Africa Summit was one of our objectives , there were comments , doubts and sometimes even criticisms expressed about us setting this summit as one of our objectives .
Some said : ' Africa does not raise , among public opinion , society , Member States or the institutions , the necessary interest and commitment for a summit to be held : you , the Presidency , will be alone with very little support .
Africa is not on the international agenda and there is no interest ' .
Others said : ' there are participative and organisational issues which will be difficult , if not insurmountable ' .
We were discouraged from taking this idea forward .
However , the fact is that we managed to hold this summit , as we say in Portugal , ' against wind and sea ' , or in other words against all odds .
We managed this because we did have the support of many Member States which collaborated with us , with the Presidency , in preparing the texts and also in the direct negotiation of the texts with the African representatives .
We also had the support of the EU 's institutions , the Commission and Parliament , to the annoyance of the critics and sceptics .
We also managed to resolve certain delicate and difficult diplomatic issues .
I would not presume to say whether or not this summit was historic : that is for the future to tell us .
However , there can be no doubt that this summit marks a new phase in the relationship between Europe and Africa and the fact that it was held was , in itself , a success .
As Commissioner Michel said , we did not avoid at this summit , in our comprehensive dialogue with Africa , the problems , difficulties and differences of opinion .
On the contrary !
We talked about the problems , the difficulties and what divides us .
We talked about trade , security , conflicts and violations of human rights , eye to eye , with frankness and with transparency .
However , the aim of the summit was obviously not to negotiate trade agreements - it was not the right place for that - and it was certainly not intended to immediately solve the problem of the Sudan .
It was also not intended to immediately solve , with a wave of our magic wand , the situation in Zimbabwe .
However , both sides together tackled these issues , discussed them , gave our opinions and , when there were differences , did not shy away from saying what these differences were .
The message conveyed by the European Union on all these issues was absolutely unequivocal .
As you know , we discussed Sudan both in plenary and afterwards in a ministerial troika meeting .
We also defended our position , the EU 's position , on economic partnership agreements .
Mr Mitchell may have spoken on this issue in more depth and more detail , but we had the opportunity to clearly explain what the EU 's position is on economic partnership agreements .
We are seeking agreements that are fair and balanced and that favour Africa and our African partners : that is our position and nothing else .
We should be absolutely clear on this issue !
What we are trying to do is respond to African concerns and aspirations and nothing else .
Those who , in this respect , attack , criticise or devalue the effort being made by the Commission , and also the Council in support of the Commission , to conclude the largest possible number of economic partnership agreements by the end of this year are wrong .
Those who say , however , that the summit is not , in itself , the end of the road and that it will not , by itself , revolutionise relations with Africa are right .
We need to follow up the decisions made , without any shadow of a doubt .
The real value of this summit , its real importance , will be determined in the medium and long term by our capacity to fulfil what was agreed , decided and undertaken .
We must therefore follow up the decisions that were taken .
We must assess the results achieved and , only then , when this assessment has been made in the medium and long term , will we be able to properly say whether the summit was successful in terms of its consequences and effects .
As I have said , by agreeing a joint strategy , a specific action plan and concrete follow-up mechanisms , by discussing such important and current issues as climate change , integration , energy and immigration , the summit clearly represents a step forward , a maturing of our relationship with Africa .
We waited seven years to get from Cairo to Lisbon .
We are absolutely certain that we will not wait so long before we have another summit between Europe and Africa .
The importance , usefulness and significance of this summit demonstrate , without any shadow of a doubt , the need to hold another summit in the short term .
You will understand why the Portuguese Presidency is delighted at this event and this initiative which we shared together .
We thank everyone for their cooperation , commitment and effort which made this summit a success .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to quickly reply to the main points made , and then I intend to briefly discuss the economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) .
Two Members spoke of their regret at the inadequate involvement of the European Parliament .
I must say that perhaps we can do things better , but to be honest , with regard to other major international meetings in the past , I have the feeling that today , in any case , Parliament is fully involved in this process .
What is more , as far as I am concerned , I always take great pleasure in debating with the Members and even contradicting them , since this helps hone my own postures .
I regularly change my opinions because of you , not to keep you happy , but simply because you persuade me .
The second point is Darfur and Sudan .
First of all I wish to say , like the President , that the priority of this summit was not to find a solution to this issue .
We did , however , arrange a troika meeting with the Portuguese Presidency , President Barroso , the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and myself .
We met with the Sudanese President , and I can tell you that the tone and content of the message conveyed during that meeting more than amply reflected the tough words I have heard here .
We told Mr Bachir quite clearly that he had to respond in a positive manner as soon as possible to the UN to allow rapid deployment of the hybrid force that is obviously necessary to improve the situation of the people in Darfur ever so slightly .
Mr Cornillet , I must tell you that I fully agree with your speech on international humanitarian law .
As you know , yesterday , for instance , I had a meeting with all the ECHO partner operators .
There was a great number of them , and I discussed this problem of international humanitarian law .
I took up the proposal you had mentioned to me , and we have made arrangements to organise a major conference in April or May on this matter .
I also told them , even though I have no power to invite , that I would invite the European Parliament and national parliaments to attend this conference , if this is possible and if Parliament is interested in such a proposition , because it is true that every day I observe the increasing banality with which respect for international humanitarian law is being treated , and this is extremely serious .
To such a point , in fact , that while I was there , I talked to the person responsible for gaining access for humanitarian convoys .
I said to him : ' but you are not respecting international humanitarian law at all ' , and he said : ' but you must understand there is a war on ' .
It is obviously quite dramatic to hear that , because this attitude contradicts the very essence , the very origins of international humanitarian law .
We will therefore move forward on this issue , believe me .
On the nuclear issue , Mrs Isler Béguin , I must say that this is a good question which does catch my attention .
You should simply be aware that this was requested by our African partners , I think more likely due to a question of principles than as an actual issue .
Otherwise , I do agree with your misgivings .
They were first of all asked to talk about non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and they said : ' all right , we can talk about that , but in that case there is no reason not to talk about civil nuclear applications ' .
Well , this is all part of the current climate .
Like you , I regret it , but they did request it , and we can hardly refuse to talk to our partners about this .
It was also very low-key , and nobody is talking about developing a nuclear sector in Africa .
We agreed to discuss nuclear issues and we accepted that these are a subject to be debated between us , because it was made clear from the beginning that no subject was taboo .
Therefore I feel we do have to be coherent .
There are two other issues I wish to comment on , and then I will finish up with the EPAs .
I think it was Mrs Zimmer who said that there is particular interest in anything that can be used by major European investors .
I will come back to this again with the EPAs , but I obviously do not agree with this argument .
You can keep me here for another two weeks , day and night , and I will not accept this criticism .
I will not accept it for a very simple reason .
I have attended these negotiations for several months now , although I should say I do not negotiate , but I do attend the negotiations .
At no time did it seem to me that the ultimate objective was to assist either the European economy or European businesses .
Those who make these claims , I feel , are either mistaken or misinformed , or they do so in bad faith .
I think they are misinformed , because one never acts in bad faith .
I feel , however , that in relation to this issue the remarks are extremely unjustified .
Now I come to the economic partnership agreements .
On the subject of the interim agreements , I wish to ask : what are their aims ?
Have they been devised in support of European businesses ?
Not at all : the objective is actually to provide protection for countries with average incomes which would otherwise , as you well know , fall into a system of generalised preferences .
This is obviously much less advantageous than the system that they operate at present , which is the equivalent system for least-developed countries ( LDCs ) , in other words , Everything But Arms .
Therefore , if at the end of this year , despite all my goodwill , the countries concerned have no other agreement setting them on the same footing as they had until today , they will certainly lose markets , and I have already mentioned the example of the Côte d 'Ivoire .
This other agreement is the interim agreement .
Who have we made these interim agreements with ?
In most cases , we have arranged them with countries with average incomes which would otherwise find themselves operating a much more unfavourable system than they had to date .
Has this been done to protect our businesses , to open up channels for our companies to move into Africa or invade Africa ?
No , that is not true .
What , then , have we proposed ?
I am now coming to the heart of the agreements , because the truth should be heard .
I am willing to listen to everyone , I am willing to understand everyone , and I am even willing to agree with certain remarks and criticisms from the House .
Well then , what have we proposed ?
We have proposed transitional periods of between 15 and 25 years .
Mr Wade claims his market will be flooded with subsidised European agricultural products .
This is precisely my point .
Agricultural products can offer him protection from the 20 % that is not liberalised .
I do not understand exactly what he means .
What is more , Mr Wade is not directly affected .
It is true that he is entitled to speak on behalf of all of Africa , but he is not affected because he is an LDC and he has the ' Everything But Arms ' system .
Mr Mbeki , who I admire very much and get on with very well indeed , likes to denounce the EPAs , but this is easy to do .
He has a special association treaty with us .
This means we can ask ourselves to what extent he is unconcerned about bringing in all the other countries in that region as his competitors .
I do not speak in bad faith ; all I am saying is that we could ask him that question .
I do not think this is the case , but we could ask him .
As for Mr Konaré , the Chairman of the African Union Commission , he is a brilliant lawyer , and it is his vocation to gather up the concerns he hears from those around him .
All this is legitimate .
However , Mr Hutchinson , when you tell me ' all the African leaders said ... ' , that is not true .
It is not true of all the African leaders .
It is true that a number of them did ask us some questions .
For example : ' what will happen , Mr Michel , when the tariff barriers are removed ?
We will obviously lose money and our ways and means budget .
How will we pay our teachers , policemen , civil servants etc ? ' , and we said : ' you can set up regional funds , and we will draw up what we call contribution agreements , which means provision of financial resources at least matching the net fiscal impact of removing the tariff barriers in order to offset the losses , and this will give you the means to finance state services etc . '
This is an asymmetric system , a transitional period .
What else did we do ?
We drew up generic matrices with these countries , at their request , for it was they who provided the content for the agreements .
What is this bureaucratic term ?
Generic matrices are a kind of plan containing all the projects , all the sectors , indeed the very nature of what they want to see as accompanying measures to go hand in hand with the gradual opening up of markets if they so wish : technology transfer , increased capacities , increased expertise , work on infrastructures , interconnection or improved access , all those aspects .
I also drew up a financing memorandum by regional economic community .
This is a kind of undertaking , on paper and with figures , of the resources to be made available to them by the EU .
There is only one thing I cannot do , and that is to promise them the money promised by the Member States at Gleneagles .
They promised one billion euros , and at least half of this was for Africa .
I hope they will come through on this .
This money will be provided from 2010 and is intended as aid for trade .
It is therefore extra money .
We have doubled the regional funds I mentioned before .
This is all on the table .
I must confess my great concern is ' economic integration ' , because I feel that in relation to the ' development ' aspect , it is initially ' economic integration ' that will allow them to create wealth , wealth they can obviously use for social services and to redistribute prosperity among their people .
It is true we have made very little progress on this aspect , for the reason I mentioned previously .
We will therefore be discussing , probably all next year , this matter of regional EPAs to create , maintain and consolidate this dimension of economic integration .
I therefore admit this , but this will only occur after having given everything ...
A positive response was forthcoming on everything they asked us for .
This was true on the financial front , or in any case within the budgetary limitations , and also in relation to technical-legal issues , institutional and even political issues .
What is also true is that , when we have to negotiate in 2008 in an attempt to secure this regional integration , we must be extremely convincing , and we must of course have arguments .
Do not worry , they will be heard , and we will listen to them ...
I will certainly try to do my best to reply to their concerns , their uncertainties and their questions so that we can really specifically reassure them .
I should tell you , however , that beyond this additional sum of one billion euros , half of which must be allocated to Africa , I do not have many more arguments .
We will see what will emerge from this .
I am nevertheless a little hurt to hear we have been blackmailing our partners .
There was never any blackmail of our partners for the very simple reason that we had no power to blackmail them .
First and foremost , I would not have done this .
We cannot just force our partners to sign agreements .
Pardon me , but that is simplifying things too much .
I can see the result .
I even wish to inform you about the current status of countries that have signed up , to show you that there are many more countries than you think that have signed and have understood the mechanism .
The last item to round off concerns LDCs that now benefit from ' Everything But Arms ' and thus have complete and unlimited access to our markets .
In this case , I was asked what they stood to lose .
They do not , in fact , lose anything at all , but gain the opportunity to benefit from particularly generous rules of origin .
What are these particularly generous rules of origin ?
At the present time , for a product to be considered as originating in a partner state , the item must have undergone at least two transformations .
Henceforth this will be a single transformation .
For example , in the case of fish caught in their waters but imported here , this will be sufficient .
That will count as one transformation , and so they may enter our markets quota-free and duty-free .
This , then , is the big difference .
There is considerable potential for opportunities of which they are currently being deprived .
I wanted to tell you all this , and I am obviously willing to repeat the experience whenever you wish .
Ask me questions , or send me questions in writing .
I promise I will attempt to answer you sincerely and in full .
If it appears that my answer to one of your questions is not good enough or is wrong , I will gladly admit this and I will rectify it , of that you may be sure .
To date I have heard all the questions , I have checked all the questions , and I have involved myself considerably .
I have not yet heard a question that did not receive a precise , specific and honest answer .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The summit between European and African countries took place on the 8 and 9 December in Lisbon , Portugal .
More than 70 heads of state and government attended .
Malta 's contribution focused on the issue of irregular immigration .
It is in Malta 's interest that Africa is seen as Europe 's responsibility .
Assistance given and investment made in Africa will mean that fewer people from that continent will be forced to leave their country for a better life .
The majority of irregular immigrants that reach Malta come from sub-Saharan Africa and are economic immigrants .
The situation , however , could deteriorate when the general preferential trade agreements expire on the 31 December 2007 .
Most African countries have rejected the proposal of ' special partnership agreements ' .
Only one fifth have signed interim agreements .
Even if the expiry date is extended , it is in the interest of every country to sign interim agreements to absorb the negative economic impact following the expiry of the ' preferential agreements ' .
Other irregular immigrants who come to Malta are political refugees .
The fact that human rights issues in Darfur and Zimbabwe were omitted from the original agenda does not augur well for the voiceless who continue to suffer in silence .
in writing . - The European Council must turn its attention to Burma , where the situation on the ground remains dire .
The EU sanctions , decided on 15 October , target the leaders of the regime , their backers and those who benefit from their policies , including trade sanctions in those sectors - timber , minerals , metals , gems - from which the regime draws most of its revenue .
But is this enough ?
The European Council must assess the situation and establish what further measures the EU can take to bring about real change in Burma .
It is time to apply further restrictive measures - including a ban on new investment .
Although it is too early to determine the real impact of the decisions made at the EU-Africa Summit , and despite certain contradictions , the rejection of the EU 's free trade agreements ( known as ' economic partnership agreements ' ) by the African countries should be welcomed .
Somewhat ironically , this rejection - despite all the EU 's unacceptable pressure and blackmail - of these ' economic partnership agreements ' by the African countries constitutes a real example of what is , ultimately , the infamous ' good governance ' so extolled by the EU .
In other words , it represents the assumption and defence by a country of control over its economy .
In our opinion , effective cooperation for development requires respect for national sovereignty , for political and economic independence and for the right of all peoples to decide their present and future and to define and build their country and their development project .
Such cooperation is incompatible with the more or less hidden objectives and ideas of interference , exploitation , pillaging of resources and political and economic control .
It has been said that the EU-Africa Summit turned a ' new page ' .
For our part , we will continue to speak out so that the neo-colonialist ambitions of the EU and its major multinationals are not ( re ) written on this page .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0384 / 2007 ) .
We gave a long time to that debate because of its importance , and we hope to be able to continue over our time with Question Time to make up .
Because we are late , first of all we shall try to deal with the supplementary questions each time as a group so that we can try to get through more questions this afternoon and also , as normal , I would invite Members to come to the front to participate more closely in Question Time .
Commissioner , I am sorry you have had to wait , but it was an important debate , as I am sure you will acknowledge .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Energy - World Trade Organisation
Although the rules of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) were not formulated with energy products and services specifically in mind , they also apply to them and protect investments in the energy sector .
Accordingly , export restrictions and discrimination against products are prohibited , and free trade must be guaranteed , although there are exceptions for measures in the interests of safety .
However , in the energy trade , the distinction between production and services is not always clear .
In the run-up to the inclusion of energy policy as a competence of the European Union in the new Treaty , what measures will the Commission take to tailor WTO rules to energy investments and energy services as well ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , as the honourable Member has observed , within the framework of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) the provisions of GATT , the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , apply to trade in energy products , and the provisions of GATS , the General Agreement on Trade in Services , apply to trade in energy services , including direct investments in such services .
There is not yet an agreement that extends to direct investments in energy-related activities carried out on the investor 's own account in the secondary sector , such as mining , refining , energy generation and energy distribution .
Under Article 133 of the EC Treaty , which regulates the common commercial policy , the European Community is explicitly given exclusive power to legislate and to negotiate agreements on trade in energy products and to negotiate agreements on trade in energy services .
In addition , the Commission is empowered to negotiate on behalf of both the Community and its Member States on the liberalisation of direct investments outside the service sector in the framework of talks with non-EU countries concerning free trade agreements .
This means that the Commission can already address core issues relating to trade and investment in the energy sector and represent European interests in these matters in bilateral and multilateral WTO negotiations , and indeed that is precisely what the Commission does .
The energy policy that will be mapped out in the new Treaty will focus on matters such as the security of the Union 's energy supply and the promotion of interconnections between energy networks , and in this respect it supplements but does not replace the common commercial policy in the energy sector .
( NL ) Madam President , Mr Verheugen , that is indeed good news in the context of the new Treaty .
We have also , for instance , decided today to fund four Joint Technology Initiatives ( JTIs ) to the tune of EUR 3 billion and there is another EUR 3 billion coming from industry for clean technology , aircraft engines and so on .
On the other hand , I am still concerned that obsolete technology which is harmful to the environment is still being traded , especially with developing countries .
There is an open playing field for obsolete technology , such as coal-fired power stations from the last century .
What opportunities does the Commissioner and the Union see in the WTO to at least establish a new basis and call for a stop to some of these things ?
( DE ) At the WTO negotiations it will be very important to negotiate on the chapter under which bioethanol should actually be dealt with in future .
Will it be classed as an agricultural product , or does it belong in the category of non-agricultural products ?
How does the Commission see the future structure ?
Will the more likely aim be to discuss it in the agricultural chapter , or is it more of an industrial product ?
Bioethanol comes from a field crop and is essentially an agricultural raw material .
On the other hand , however , as a energy product it could fall under the heading of non-agricultural market access ( NAMA ) .
Has the Commission already formed an opinion on this question and , if so , what line will it pursue in negotiations ?
( DE ) Commissioner , whenever there are discussions in my constituency about trade in energy sources , energy policy , the European Commission and the new Treaty , and especially about the WTO , time and again my constituents voice the fear that we shall have no option but to import nuclear energy and that we may even have to build nuclear power stations if present trends continue .
Please put my mind at rest and tell me this is not the case , and please give me some substantiation that I can pass on .
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission strongly supports the promotion of sustainable urban development which fully respects the environment .
The Commission adopted its thematic strategy on the urban environment in 2006 .
The strategy recognises the whole of sustainable urban development in relation to the quality of life , but the strategy also recognises the diversity that exists between citizens in the European Union .
For this reason , and following extensive consultations with local authorities and the Member States , the strategy , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , assumed that local and national authorities are best placed to find and implement solutions most appropriate to the local circumstances .
Against the background of the diversity of urban situations , the Commission does not recommend a specific model of development valid for each city in Europe .
The Commission considers it essential to put in place the appropriate governance and planning tools , but is of the opinion that there is no real added value in imposing an obligation to establish specific plans , such as environmental management plans and sustainable urban transport plans .
The Commission has , however , published guidance on sustainable urban transport plans and on integrated environment management plans , with the aim of assisting local authorities to implement the strategy 's objectives .
Guidance should be seen as a description of the process , and a reminder of the key elements that could be considered when developing integrated environmental management programmes and sustainable urban transport plans at local level .
Both documents are based upon comprehensive consultations and examples of best practice developed by cities themselves .
Legislation affecting urban areas exists already , for example in the field of air quality , water management , noise and waste .
That legislation needs to be implemented better .
A noticeable and significant improvement in the living conditions in urban areas will be seen through the full implementation of existing legislative instruments .
The Commission recalls the wealth of ideas on urban development which has allowed the ministers responsible for urban affairs to reach a consensus based on the Lille Action Programme , the Rotterdam Urban Acquis , the Bristol Accord and , more recently , the Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities adopted at an informal Council meeting on 25 May 2007 .
In September 2007 it approved a Green Paper on urban mobility , which has now been submitted for public consultation .
Those documents constitute a shared background , outlining the main conditions necessary to achieve urban sustainable development .
Furthermore , the Commission actively encourages dialogue and the dissemination of best practices between cities within the framework of programmes financed by the European Regional Development Fund .
Concerning the data available on the situation of European cities , which can provide the basis for policy decisions , the Commission has put in place the Urban Audit , which contains data on the situation of European cities , and is now being updated .
The Commission has recently published a study on the state of European cities , which further analyses the results of the Urban Audit .
( LT ) Many thanks , Commissioner , for your detailed and persuasive answer .
The Commission 's input in finding ways to encourage towns and cities to seek positive initiatives and share them is most significant .
I would like to ask which regions you consider to have moved closest to the ideal , which , of course , remains unattainable .
Which EU Member States have achieved most in the implementation of the ideas recommended by the European Commission ?
( DE ) Mr Vice-President , you have just about answered my supplementary question already , but since nothing is as clear as a clear statement in our mother tongue , I would be very pleased to hear you repeat in German what you said before about the Commission not seeking to act as Europe 's supreme planning authority by interfering in every area , particularly by imposing or recommending a specific development model .
As the rapporteur on the Green Paper you cited , entitled ' Towards a new culture for urban mobility ' , I can assure you that Parliament will certainly follow you along the path of supporting diversity .
Member of the Commission . - The question raised by the honourable Member is very important for consumers , telecom service providers and content providers , and of course also for telecom regulators .
It concerns a balance between network providers ' desire to offer differential qualities of service for internet services , in order to optimise the use of its network resources , and the freedom of users to distribute or access any legal on-line content without interference such as blocking or degrading .
The Commission is committed to keeping the internet open both for service providers wanting to deliver new , innovative services and for consumers wanting to access the services they choose and to create and upload contents themselves .
The ongoing debate in the United States on net neutrality is strongly influenced by the lack of regulation in the US to ensure that access is kept open , and , combined with the concentration of network ownership , the lack of access regulation has provoked real concerns among consumers and content providers that there could be foreclosure of the internet .
The situation in Europe is that we are generally in a good position with regard to net neutrality and net freedoms , because we have effective network regulation in line with EU telecom rules , and European consumers have a greater choice of broadband services providers .
The fact that consumers have more choice and there is more competition means that , if one supplier seeks to restrict user rights , then another can enter the market with a more open offer .
The current EU regulatory framework has so far ensured that the telecom market remains open , that offers made to consumers are transparent and that competition is effective .
I understand the honourable Member 's question , because there is a risk that in the future a prioritisation of traffic may increasingly be introduced .
In the past , all information , packets and bits of data were treated equally .
But today new techniques can differentiate between packets , in order to award priority to high urgency communications or to users who have paid a premium for higher-quality services .
These techniques are legitimate in cases where service levels have to be guaranteed in order for the service to be effective .
Voice-over internet services , for example , need a basic minimum level of connection in order to be satisfactory , especially for emergency or business calls .
In addition , prioritisation creates an incentive mechanism for network operators to invest in upgrading bandwidth as demand increases .
That is the nice part of the story .
The problem is that the same techniques could be utilised to degrade the quality of service to unacceptably low levels .
Such discrimination might then lead to sub-standard services for consumers and alternative providers .
That is why , in the telecom reform package , which was adopted by the Commission on 13 November 2007 and presented to Parliament that same day , we proposed to give national telecom regulators the power to set minimum quality levels for network transmission services based on technical standards identified at EU level .
In addition , there is now a new requirement in the telecom rules to indicate to users in advance any techniques that have been implemented and which could lead to prioritisation .
That is what we call the transparency rule .
We as a Commission believe that this approach strikes a balance that will safeguard competition and user access , without unduly restricting the ability of network providers to experiment with different business models .
In addition to this , Parliament knows that the Commission is closely monitoring developments as regards net freedoms .
Following the 2006 World Summit on the Information Society , we presented to Parliament a communication which clearly stated the Commission 's intention to monitor and safeguard the neutrality of the internet .
The architectural principles of an open internet and end-to-end connectivity are also explicitly mentioned in the Council conclusions from 2005 .
These issues are under constant analysis , are constantly monitored and are discussed regularly with Member States , for instance in the i2010 High Level Group , and with third countries .
This is important , because the internet does not have borders .
The Commission will promote continuously the need for an open internet and for non-discriminatory access .
This is what underpins the philosophy of the regulatory approach under the EU telecom rules , which will be further enhanced by our reform project , to be discussed in Parliament in the coming months .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I was very happy with your answer .
It was very broad and really showed your interest and your knowledge about this important matter .
I believe that you will be closely monitoring the system , as you have promised .
I hope that , within a year , you will be able to report back to us to see whether net neutrality has been guaranteed by the transparency clause and by the monitoring system which we have installed .
I hope we can come back to this subject within six to twelve months to see if the system is functioning .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for a very comprehensive answer .
I had dialogue with members of Congress last week and gave them the same answer , so am pleased that you have confirmed it .
However , could you comment on the issue of sustaining open access , given that we are now moving into a new era of major investment in next-generation networks in fibre to the home , in which some in the industry are saying there is insufficient incentive to invest ?
Could you confirm to this House that you will sustain the principles of open access for exactly the reasons you set out in response to Ms Riis-Jørgensen 's question ?
( DE ) I , too , would like to congratulate the Commissioner on her election as Commissioner of the Year .
We really do face some formidable tasks in this area .
On the one hand , there are the public television corporations , which have been receiving a great deal of money for their output , which has enabled them , of course , to produce good educational programmes .
On the other hand , mobile TV is now reaching more and more people .
How do you assess the developments in this field ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - During its seven years of existence , the European Charter for Small Enterprises has become a core document for small and medium-sized enterprise ( SME ) policy in Europe .
Starting with the 15 Member States in 2000 , 44 countries have now adopted it as a reference frame and it is also used today at regional level .
Since 2005 , SME policy has become a key element within the renewed Lisbon Partnership for Growth and Jobs , and the Charter was integrated within the Lisbon reporting process .
This ensures the necessary priority attention at political level .
This is complemented by the yearly good practice exercise and the Charter conferences , which provide the necessary focus on implementation .
Both the good practice exercise and the yearly Charter conference continue to be very successful .
The good practice exercise has , up to now , provided more than 250 examples of proven and successful SME policy measures .
In around 80 of these cases , Member States indicated that they have been inspired by measures from other Member States in the development of their own policies .
I shall give you a few examples , although I could give you a long list .
The Greek system of one-stop-shop services was inspired by Ireland and its presentation at the Dublin Charter Conference in 2004 .
The Austrian tax exemption for invested profits was developed on the basis of a similar measure in Italy .
Denmark provides support for SMEs in the use of e-business on the basis of similar initiatives in Ireland , the Netherlands , Finland , Sweden and Norway .
In all these cases , Member States have confirmed that the Charter triggered the inspiration .
The high interest in the Charter is also demonstrated by the constantly increasing number of participants at the annual Charter conferences .
This year 's Charter conference in Berlin attracted 350 participants , the highest number of participants ever , and I was very happy that I was able to be there and to address those people from more than 40 countries .
The next Charter conference will take place from 3 to 4 June 2008 in Bled , Slovenia .
It will be co-organised by the Slovenian Presidency , and I expect an even higher number of participants .
The Commission sees that the Charter is highly useful in encouraging the Member States to improve the business environment for small enterprises all over Europe .
In its seventh year it continues to be a crucial policy instrument .
So the natural answer to your question is ' yes ' .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your comprehensive answer .
Where I am coming from really - and I know it is not in your area - is in relation to the whole development of internet services and broadband services .
Across Europe there is a 19 % take-up .
In my own country , there is something like a 16 % take-up , and it affects small enterprises in rural areas , particularly where I come from .
For instance , I fly out to Parliament from the westernmost airport in the EU , which is in Tralee .
My point basically is that the voluntary organisations of small enterprises who give support to small enterprises have been very good at giving information and I am just wondering whether we can do more with them , helping them to make information available to their members .
Thank you , Mr Verheugen , for that very encouraging answer .
I wanted to make two points in my supplementary question , on how we should move this initiative forward and build on its success .
The first concerns how the Charter will be incorporated into your ideas for a small business act , which I consider to be a very important and exciting new development .
Secondly , linking this issue to the Lisbon Agenda , would you agree with me that one of the biggest issues is how to help small businesses grow quickly , particularly those small enterprises which have good ideas but find it difficult to get capital , accelerate their growth and create new jobs ?
Is there , within the Charter programme , an opportunity for a ' mini-charter ' for high-growth businesses ?


Vice-President of the Commission . - The issue of noise emissions of four-wheeled motor vehicles - cars , vans , trucks and buses - is addressed by UNECE Regulation No 51 and equivalent Directive 70 / 157 / EEC introducing noise tests and limit values .
The limit values have been reduced several times in the past , most recently in 1995 .
The maximum allowed sound level lies today between 74 dBA for passenger cars and 80 dBA for heavy trucks .
A further allowance is given to direct-injection diesel engines , off-road vehicles and sports cars .
This latest reduction did not have the expected effect and subsequent studies showed that the measurement method does not reflect real-world driving behaviour any more .
It was therefore decided that , before reducing the limits once again , it was first of all necessary to develop a new test cycle and bring the driving conditions for the noise test closer in line with real-life driving operations .
The work on a new test cycle is now finalised .
It will replace the existing test protocol with a better measurement method reproducing the sound levels generated by heavy vehicles during normal driving in urban traffic .
With the new test procedure , it is foreseen that the existing additional allowances for certain vehicles or technologies will be abolished .
Before this method can be used for type-approval purposes , new limit values for this method need to be established on the basis of an impact assessment .
In order to obtain representative data to determine those values and establish a solid impact assessment , vehicle manufacturers are obliged to carry out the old and the new measurement methods in parallel during a period of two years .
The old method will continue to be required , in order to receive type approval , and the new method will be used for monitoring purposes until 2009 .
As soon as the collection of data is finished , the Commission will propose new legislation setting revised limit values .
A new test method for motorbikes is also close to being finalised .
The discussions in the UNECE are now focusing on additional roadside tests that would be carried out during type approval in order to provide noise values that would allow comparison with those measured at roadside checks in order to detect motorbikes that have been tampered with or that are insufficiently maintained .
It is expected that the work can be finalised in 2008 .
The Commission will then propose to adhere to the relevant UNECE regulation with revised limit values .
In addition , the Commission has recently carried out a consultation exercise on a package of measures on tyres , including the reduction of the existing noise limit for tyres .
The consultation proposes reduction of around 4 dBA for passenger car tyres and 6 dBA for commercial vehicle tyres : it is quite considerable .
The new limits would be expected to come into force for new tyre types around 2012 .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your comprehensive reply .
I certainly welcome your indication that there is a new test site now available and that new limit values will be set .
I am coming at this from an Irish perspective .
In the last few years we have had the phenomenon of what we know as ' boy racers ' , who modify old cars , take to the roads at all hours of the day and night and cause a major problem in relation to sound emissions which sound like a jet plane , causing major disturbance , particularly in urban areas .
I welcome the fact that there are two regulations , as you mentioned , Commissioner : UNECE Regulation No 51 and Directive 70 / 157 / EEC .

But the problem as I see it , in relation to UNECE Regulation No 51 , is that it applies only to new cars .
I think there should be a specification , at least in relation to the reply received from Commissioner Dimas : there should be a regulation that there should be no modification of a car and that there should be regular tests .
( DE ) Commissioner , in the case of road vehicles , noise emissions may not exceed defined ceilings .
In the case of rail transport , the ceiling is based on average noise levels , which means that extremely high noise levels have to be endured in the vicinity of railway lines simply because the average noise level does not exceed the permitted limit .
Does the Commission intend to adopt similar measures to those that apply to motor vehicles so as to provide relief in future for those who live next to noisy stretches of railway line ?
( LT ) I would like to point out that we keep referring to specific requirements a lot , but the issue of their implementation is not being covered sufficiently .
Speaking of pollution , I would like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to the fact that the mechanism for monitoring all the requirements we have just discussed happens to be very fragmented .
In my opinion the Commission should put forward a proposal ( perhaps they are in the process of preparing one ) with a view to harmonising the procedure for administering pollution criteria and assessing pollution , as it is a key problem for small countries such as Lithuania whose management bodies are weak and do not have the means to implement all the requirements .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is following closely the recent developments in prices in Member States .
It considers that those increases cannot be easily explained by one single factor , but need to be seen in the broader context of rising world demand for oil and gas .
However , increasing investment activity - and in particular the switch to more sustainable energy production - definitely plays a part too .
Moreover , the point of departure for market opening was , in several Member States , very low prices .
In the medium and long term , this failed to give the necessary signals for much-needed investment , and we are now paying the price .
As to the question of whether such price increases can also be attributed to the exercise of market power , the Commission has studied this issue and it came to the conclusion that electricity prices in certain Member States were higher than one would expect in fully competitive markets .
In this respect , the Commission , the Council and the competition authorities armed regulators to identify anti-competitive behaviour and to take the appropriate action .
The Commission is also itself investigating alleged anti-competitive behaviour by certain operators , and has launched five anti-trust proceedings in the course of this year .
The Commission is very much aware of the structural problems in the sector too .
Therefore , the third energy package makes wide-ranging proposals to remedy those structural problems , in particular by proposing ownership unbundling of the transmission system operators .
The Commission has always been of the opinion that consumers should be the main beneficiaries of liberalisation .
The Commission 's proposals for the third energy package therefore contain a number of measures which will strengthen the role and rights of consumers .
In particular , the package proposes to give consumers the right to switch supplier at any time and to have free access to their consumption data .
By increasing consumer awareness and rights with respect to their energy consumption , the Commission is providing the tools for a functioning retail market .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am pleased you are keen to allow consumers of gas and electricity to be the priority beneficiaries by applying more restrictive measures in this sector , which we hope will have some effect on prices for EU citizens , downwards of course .
I can give you an example : a 20 % increase has been announced in Belgium , and this is just impossible for the worst off .
As a humanist I cannot accept this situation .
Furthermore , Commissioner , can you assure me that consumers will in fact be involved in all phases of the implementation of liberalisation , by making them part of the various advisory committees and also by involving them in the new mechanisms for settlement of disputes ?
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to ask a question on the consumer retail forum you said you would work towards .
When do you intend to launch this forum ?
What type of participants can this forum have to allow it to actually function to the benefit of consumers ?
What will the function of this forum be in relation to everything you have just said ?
( LT ) In Germany electricity prices have recently risen by 10 % , the reason given being that electricity creates a great deal of comfort and is therefore bound to cost a lot .
Will the third energy package have any effect on regulators ?
Would it be possible to have any influence on price increases when there are no reasonable grounds for them ?
Would it not be useful to apply certain restrictions to price increases when there are no grounds for making excess profit ?
Member of the Commission . - I will start with the third question .
There are issues that could be dealt with by the market , by consumer power , but there are issues where we need structural change .
The particularity of the electricity market is that the marginal power plant decides the price level .
Here , it is very clear that we need complete transparency in the market , which is why the third regulation package really addresses the separation of transmission activities from the supply activities .
Otherwise we will never have a chance to ask whether we are paying a fair price .
Secondly , if you create the conditions for competition in the market , then the price trends are really that it is not increasing or coming down or it is increasing less compared with an uncompetitive market , because otherwise the companies which have a semi-monopoly could really dictate the price .
That means that these two issues are actually in the hands of the governments .
On consumer power , we have adopted a consumer rights charter and this definitely gives all the right information about the rights of consumers stemming from all existing legislation .
We have strengthened these rights even more .
Regarding the consumer forum , we will certainly invite the consumer organisations that are well represented in Member States and the umbrella organisation .
The best supporters of our measures to really create a Europe-wide competitive market definitely come from the different consumer organisations .
As the author is not present , Question No 41 lapses .
Subject : Energy cooperation in south-east Europe
What measures is the Commission taking to reduce the dependency of south-east European Member States and candidate countries and the Balkan states included in the Thessaloniki process on Russian energy supplies ?

Member of the Commission . - The Commission pays great attention to the security of supply situation in south-east Europe .
This was among the main objectives in setting up an Energy Community , which is based on EU legislation , for the internal gas and electricity markets , and in particular its provisions on security of energy supply and solidarity .
South-east Europe is at the crossroads of several main energy routes .
Several countries of the region produce gas .
I would mention Croatia and Romania .
New LNG terminals on the Adriatic coast and the new gas and electricity interconnectors linking to the different energy sources were recently put into service or are at an advanced phase of development .
However , for certain countries there is a significant share of natural gas from one provider for the industrial sector , for heating and also for power generation .
In the framework of the Energy Community Treaty , with the support of EU financial instruments and the international financial institutions , the Commission promotes the development of an integrated market in the region , anchored to the EU market .
But this means that the development of gas and electricity trade in the region , the development of new interconnection and generation projects and the setting up of a stable regulatory framework will considerably enhance security of supply .
Moreover , new gas sources will allow the development of the gas sector in those countries where it does not exist yet .
There is also a very clear focus on energy efficiency .
In order to strengthen energy security , the Commission favours the policy of diversification of suppliers and of transport routes .
In particular , it strongly supports the development of the Nabucco project and other gas projects and LNG developments in the region , as well as well-grounded oil projects aimed at achieving the diversification objective .
The Commission also considers that Russia will in the future remain an important energy source for south-east Europe but alongside other sources from the Mediterranean Basin and the Caspian Sea region .
( DE ) First of all , thank you very much for your very good and thorough reply .
I only have two brief supplementary questions .
Firstly , is there specific cooperation with the two candidate countries in the region , namely Croatia and Macedonia ?
Secondly , Kosovo 's energy dependence is a particular problem .
Is it not possible to provide special support for wind and hydro power in neighbouring Albania ?
As a matter of fact , there is considerable potential for hydro-electricity generation in Kosovo and Albania in particular but also in Macedonia .
( LT ) Two weeks ago news broke out regarding an agreement between Italy and Russia on the construction of a new gas pipeline in the Southern region .
This South Stream pipeline actually duplicates the Nabucco project .
Vladimir Putin commented that he was grateful to the Commission for approving this project .
I would like to hear your comments on this .

Member of the Commission . - The Commission has no competence over the siting of power lines , which is decided exclusively by the Member States authorities under the respective EU environmental law .
The Council recommendation of 12 July 1999 on the limitation of exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields establishes a framework of minimum restrictions and reference levels , but the Member States are responsible for the implementation of the measures .
As far as the possible health effects of exposure to electromagnetic fields are concerned , the scientific committee on emerging and newly-identified health risks has recently adopted an opinion which provides an assessment of the state of scientific knowledge in this area .
Overhead power lines are often the most cost-efficient solution for long-distance transmission of over 50 km .
Underground cables are also a proven technology , but until now used more for short- to medium- distances , and this is more expensive as things stand .
The construction of overhead electrical power lines with a voltage of 220 kW or more and a length of more than 15 km has to undergo an environmental impact assessment .
Furthermore , any plan or project for overhead electrical power lines that is likely to have a significant adverse effect on Natura 2000 sites is subject to the procedural safeguards set out in Article 6 of Council Directive 92 / 43 / EEC .
Can the Commissioner tell me if there is any definitive evidence or scientific proof in relation to whether or not electromagnetic fields are a hazard to public health ?
I know that the Member States , as he said , have the final competence in relation to their interconnectors and their cables etc .
Secondly , would the Commissioner not agree that , despite the fact there is resistance from industry , at the same time , from the point of view of visual intrusion , public health and the environment , it would preferable if such cables were underground ?
Member of the Commission . - I will start my answer with undergrounding .
Up until now , undergrounding cable technology has been used only in limited cases , like Madrid Airport .
In principle there is now no limitation on the length of the cabling itself .
The question is the cost .
That cost would normally be around three to five times higher than overhead lines , and , to date , it has not been used for the very reason that you have two options .
In fact , it has only been used when overhead lines are impossible .
There are some cases where municipalities are now considering the use of cables , which will be ground-breaking cases .
However , it will mean more costs for the consumer .
Concerning scientific evidence on exposure of the general public to electromagnetic fields , there is a general limitation , there are the Council recommendations that I mentioned dating from 12 July 1999 , and there are minimum framework restrictions and reference levels .
However , as concerns further scientific evidence on damage to health , I am not aware of a need to go beyond those safety recommendations originating in 1999 .
Basically , overhead lines are still a viable option and I believe that the choice between overhead lines or cables is one that should be made according to the situation , if one considers that cabling is not without its difficulties too .
One needs to be aware that a Natura 2000 site may be involved or that there may be some impact on the environment .
There is no solution that makes zero impact on the environment .
At the same time , there are technology choices that could be proposed , and companies are aware of these .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Commissioner Piebalgs stays with us but will now answer questions on behalf of Commissioner Dimas .
Subject : EU funding of European environmental NGOs
Through NGOs civil society plays a very important role in meeting the needs of the process of European integration and new kinds of European governance .
Which Community action programme is currently in force for supporting European NGOs active mainly in the environmental protection field ?
Which NGOs ( and which of their activities ) which contribute to the further development and implementation of the Community 's environmental policy and legislation have so far received funding ?
What is the amount of funding received per NGO ?
Is the scope of the existing Community programme differentiated geographically ?
Which Greek NGOs have taken part - or are taking part - in the current programme , either independently or on a transnational basis ?
What are the criteria governing the selection , monitoring and evaluation system based on impact results and indicators ?

Member of the Commission . - Funding from the Commission to support the operation of European environmental NGOs is provided through a programme that has existed since 1997 .
The legal basis for the current programme is the LIFE + Regulation .
The objective is to strengthen the participation of European NGOs in the development and implementation of EU environmental policy .
A large number of diverse NGOs have been founded during the course of the programme .
Lists of operations and amounts are published on the DG Environment website .
Time does not permit me to read them all out , but the list will be forwarded to the honourable Member .
There is no geographic differentiation in the programme , since it is targeted towards European and not national organisations .
To be eligible , the organisations should pursue activities in at least three EU Member States .
But only one of the organisations consistently funded , the Mediterranean Information Office for Environment , Culture and Sustainable Development , is based in Greece .
Many of them have Greek member organisations , for example , the European Environmental Bureau , EUROPARC and International Friends of Nature .
Grants are awarded in a yearly call for proposals .
Applications are assessed against award criteria and the NGOs that have the best potential to contribute to development and implementation of the EU environmental policy priorities are selected .
Monitoring and evaluation is ensured by the Commission , based on reports submitted by the beneficiaries as well as an in-depth audit .
In this process , the extent to which the organisation has fulfilled its work programme and contributed to EU policy development and implementation is assessed .
( EL ) Madam President , I wish every success to Commissioner Dimas , who is representing the European Union at the Bali Conference .
However , I would expect more light to be thrown on the particular questions I have asked , because the questions are specific , and the answer was given in general outline .
I would like to believe that Commissioner Piebalgs will intervene to ensure that the Commission sends me the information on the specific questions I have asked .
If nothing else , I am one of those who believe that non-governmental organisations are a form of European governance , albeit an informal one ; they play an extremely important role , and that role - this is the reason for my question - must be given greater prominence .
So I am waiting for the information , not in terms of transparency , but in terms of the democratic accountability to which the Commission is subject .
To conclude , I would like to ask Commissioner Piebalgs to use the official name which the European Union has accepted , when referring to third countries .
( DE ) Commissioner , I should like to ask you a question on this subject that has been occupying me for a long time .
I myself am a member of some of these organisations .
Recently , however , I have been wondering more and more often how democratically these organisations work and whether the Commission checks whether these NGOs are democratic organisations that hold internal elections or whether they are bodies with a command structure that is not open to scrutiny and is not accountable to the members of the organisation or to anyone else , which would mean that funds might , in certain circumstances , be channelled in directions that no one would suspect .

Member of the Commission . - Ensuring that Member States correctly apply EU waste legislation and preventing illegal waste activities are among the Commission 's top priorities .
The proposed environmental crime directive will ensure that serious environmental offences are subject to effective criminal sanctions throughout the European Union .
All serious waste-related crimes , including the illegal treatment , transport , export and import of waste , are covered by the proposed directive .
The environmental crime initiative is , however , far from being the only action taken by the Commission in order to prevent waste crime .
The Commission is taking a number of specific actions in areas where waste crime is a serious problem for Member States .
This concerns , in particular , illegal landfills and illegal waste shipments , which are covered by important EU legislation .
The Commission takes early action in order to prevent negative environmental and health impacts as a result of waste activities .
Awareness events concerning landfills and waste shipments are organised where the risk is high .
Last year , 16 such events took place and , this year , another 10 events are planned .
Multilateral meetings are also regularly held with national authorities and stakeholders to tackle bad implementation of EU waste legislation .
Guidelines are continuously developed regarding key EU waste legislation , such as on waste shipments and targeting particular problematic waste schemes , for example , waste electrical and electronic equipment and light vehicles .
Focus on such guidelines will ensure that EU legislation is uniformly and correctly applied throughout the European Union .
It is of paramount importance to know what is going on in the Member States and to verify compliance on the ground .
The Commission closely cooperates with the IMPEL network regarding , for example , joint enforcement actions on waste shipments and inspections and monitoring of landfills .
Systematic failures by Member States to respect EU waste legislation are continuously met by legal action from the Commission , including the powerful threat of fines under the EC Treaty .
For example , in 2003 Greece was fined EUR 20 000 a day for tolerating an illegal landfill on the island of Crete .
Currently , a large number of illegal landfills in many Member States are being tackled by serious infringement actions launched by the Commission .
The Commission is also encouraging Member States to make use of funding opportunities at EU level and to ensure that the waste programme expenditure under the various instruments contributes to the improved implementation of waste legislation .
The EU waste shipment regulation contains the basis for cooperation between Member States to prevent illegal waste shipment .
We are currently examining the need for further actions in order to strengthen the enforcement of EU waste legislation , including legally binding rules for inspections of waste shipments .
Specific criteria could possibly be defined in order to ensure sufficient quality and frequency of inspections .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that comprehensive answer .
I recently consulted with the Environment Agency in the United Kingdom on this directive .
While we all welcome the prioritisation of the Commission in this area , what I was hearing from the Environment Agency in my own Member State was concern that the penalties and possible fines in Member States will be pitched far too low for there to be any real incentive to obey rules where enforcement action would not actually occur .
This would result in massive fly-tipping and dumping of illegal waste .
Do you have a view on this , bearing in mind also that the Environment Agency and other national agencies welcome these proposals very much ?
Member of the Commission . - As for fines imposed on the Member States , I would mention that , for Greece , the fine is per day , and per year it is quite substantial .
In my opinion , in the case of Member States ' failure to enforce legislation , we should follow the legal infringement procedures that we follow , and it is the Court which decides on the fine .
For companies , the fines are also imposed according to national legislation if this is violated .
So it is up to the Member States to really strengthen these fines , because , from the Commission point of view , we do what is required and we cannot prescribe the fines for not implementing vigorously enough EU legislation .
It should be addressed through the Court , because that is the legal structure of the European Union .
If there is a need to strengthen the system of fines , we will definitely follow this advice very carefully , because , basically , fines should be imposed in a way that prevents violation of the law , not just so that companies can shrug them off or pass the cost on to consumers .
But , in this area , I believe that everybody shares the same objective , so I believe that the level of fines imposed today is not an issue .
The issue is that legislation is not implemented vigorously enough and inspections are not particularly frequent , and that requires that the Commission should take additional steps to guide the Member States to take stronger action on waste crimes .
( DE ) Commissioner , you rightly pointed out that the enforcement of legal provisions is at least as important as their enactment .
We have a case that you have not mentioned yet .
That is the situation in which the disposal of certain waste is made a criminal offence in one country , and the waste in question is then shipped to another country .
In such a case , in fact , two Member States are probably committing infringements of the Treaty .
Has consideration been given to this eventuality too ?

Member of the Commission . - The verification of compliance with the requirements of Directive 91 / 271 / EEC on urban waste-water treatment is a complex task as it implies the evaluation of data concerning thousands of agglomerations all over the European Union .
The Commission 's services collect and assess all information available and focus on the data included in the national implementation reports .
When their assessment shows that Member States are not complying with their obligations under the directive , the Commission initiates infringement procedures in accordance with Article 226 of the EC Treaty .
Given the thousands of agglomerations which have to be checked , the Commission has privileged a horizontal approach .
Thus , instead of randomly starting individual infringement procedures for each agglomeration , the Commission has initiated global cases addressing the situation per Member State and per core obligation .
Greece is one of the Member States which still face significant problems in properly implementing the directive .
As regards agglomerations of more than 10 000 inhabitants , Greece has designated 36 sensitive areas .
Out of the 18 agglomerations discharging into those areas , 14 comply with the requirements of the directive .
However , the Commission considers that 10 other water bodies should have been designated as sensitive areas .
There is an ongoing infringement procedure at this stage of a reasoned opinion .
The Greek authorities contest the need for the designation of those areas as sensitive .
The assessment of the information sent is ongoing and , if necessary , the Commission will not hesitate to bring the case before the Court .
As regards the specific question of the agglomeration of Thriasio Pedio , in its judgment of 24 June 2004 , the Court of Justice declared that Greece had failed to install a collecting system and to provide for appropriate treatment .
The Commission has therefore initiated an infringement procedure in accordance with Article 228 of the Treaty .
The Greek authorities have approved the construction of infrastructure required , which is co-funded by the Cohesion Fund .
According to the information available , the project is planned to be operational by the end of 2009 .
As regards agglomerations of more than 15 000 inhabitants or their equivalent , out of the 75 agglomerations , 52 meet the standards laid down by the directive as regards collection systems for urban waste water and secondary treatment .
With regard to the agglomerations that are not in compliance , the Commission initiated an infringement procedure .
In its judgment of 25 October 2007 , the Court ruled that 23 agglomerations still did not comply with the requirements of the directive .
The Commission has requested information from the Greek authorities on the measures they plan to take in order to comply with the judgment .
As regards the point raised on the reduction of the size of agglomerations , the Commission verifies the information available and addresses any inconsistency in the framework of the ongoing infringement procedure .
It should be stressed that , in order to comply , Greece uses the European Community funding available .
As far as the Cohesion Fund is concerned , in Greece 41 projects are currently open .
The absorption rate is 49 % .
Very often , such projects are combined projects which , apart from waste-water- and rainwater-related infrastructure , may also include water supply infrastructure .
The ERDF Operational Programme ' Environment ' co-finances nine waste water projects .
These projects relate to the construction and / or modernisation of waste-water treatment plants and sewage networks .
The absorption rate is 19 % .
As regards asserting regional operational programmes of the ERDF , the question of absorption rates for the waste-water sector should be addressed to the competent regional authorities .
Contrary to the case of the Operational Programme ' Environment ' , a Member State is not required to inform the Commission of the progress of each individual project .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in your answer you mentioned dozens of major cities in Greece which remain without adequate sewage treatment because of incomplete construction of the biological cleaning plants , although the great majority of them were co-financed from Community funds .
I ask you : can you give me a list of those cities which you referred to in terms of numbers ?
And secondly , what does the Commission have to say about the fact that years after implementation of the European legislation , these problems persist ?
Do you intend to take the matter to the European Court of Justice ?
And if so , when ?
Member of the Commission . - In a couple of cases we are going on with the infringement procedures .
The information that we can provide , we will provide .
However , in some cases I mentioned , we can inform you about progress on the Operational Programme ' Environment ' , but we cannot report on each project , because this information is available to each Member State .
So you will get information that is available to us .
As I made a point of saying in my answer , we are very vigorously pursuing implementation of the new acquis in this area .
Questions 67 and 83 are inadmissible .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for staying with us and , in particular , our interpreters for going over time .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20.10 and resumed at 21.05 )

European Aviation Safety Agency ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency , and repealing Council Directive 91 / 670 / EEC , Regulation ( EC ) No 1592 / 2002 and Directive 2004 / 36 / EC ( 10537 / 3 / 2007 - C6-0353 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Jörg Leichtfried ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , as a postscript to this report , since the process is apparently drawing to a close , let me take the opportunity to express my sincere thanks to all those Members who have supported me in this work over a period of more than one and a half years .
My special thanks go to Mr Becsey , Mr Degutis , Mrs Lichtenberger and Mr Kohlíček , to the Commission for its strong support and to our Secretariat , and particularly Mr Vervloet .
It was certainly very interesting to see how colleagues truly became friends in the course of that year and a half as a result of working together .
That is also reflected in the report we have produced .
Thank you all very much .
On the report itself , we are confronted with a paradox with regard to European airspace .
On the one hand , Europe 's airspace has been completely liberalised for the aviation industry and air carriers , while , on the other hand , there are still 27 different civil aviation authorities with 27 sets of rules and ways of thinking which sometimes diverge .
As a result , the skies above Europe have not become any safer but are actually less safe than they were .
This has led certain airlines to engage in a kind of licence shopping , in which they have tried to obtain their licences in countries where licences can be got more easily and where the rules may not be quite so strictly applied .
The consequence has been very many minor incidents , some accidents and some disasters in Europe 's airspace .
The idea behind this report - an idea I fully support - was to create uniform rules governing air operations , certification of aircraft and aircraft parts and licensing of pilots .
The aim was not only to create uniform rules but also to ensure that they were then jointly and simultaneously implemented .
That was the Commission 's original intention , and a large majority of the European Parliament endorsed that intention .
Our aspiration , however , was to go further and make it easier to achieve the desired aim .
We wanted EASA , the European Aviation Safety Agency , to become more efficient , to be able to act more swiftly and to be more responsive .
It was the wish of Parliament that the controlling body of EASA , the Management Board , which still reflected and asserted the national interests of the Member States or the national agencies to some extent in its deliberations and activities , should be given a somewhat more independent position .
The second idea was that , since only two options had hitherto been available to EASA for dealing with errors and problems , namely to do nothing or to withdraw an operator 's licence altogether , there was a need to find intermediate responses .
The third point , which I consider essential , was that one group of staff employed in air operations with special responsibility for safety , namely cabin crews , was still the only uncertificated category of personnel in the entire field of aviation and that this had to be changed .
What has been achieved ?
With regard to the Management Board , we succeeded in improving the situation by securing an obligation on its members to submit a report to the competent committee of the European Parliament .
We also managed to introduce a system of penalties which enables EASA to respond flexibly instead of having to choose between the so-called ' nuclear option ' and no action at all .
Above all , we also succeeded in finding a means of ensuring that cabin staff will henceforth be licensed .
In other words , a uniformly high level of training , safety standards and all the accompanying attributes will now be found among cabin crews too .
We have managed to deliver a report that has largely won the acceptance of all parties .
The industry was content with the report , the trade union was content , the employees were content , our House was content , and all but a few of the Member States were content with it .
The most important success , however , lies in the fact that passengers in Europe 's aircraft will be safer in future .
That was the most important thing we could have achieved , and we have achieved it .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Leichtfried , ladies and gentlemen , we are now on the verge of obtaining agreement at second reading with the Council on an extremely important proposal .
We owe this especially to the fine work by the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , who I wish to congratulate specifically .
We also owe this result to the spirit of compromise among all the shadow rapporteurs , and I wish to express my thanks to them also .
I wish to remind you of the approach underlying this proposal for a regulation .
On adopting Regulation ( EC ) No 1592 / 2002 , laying down common rules in relation to airworthiness and establishing the European Aviation Safety Agency , it was agreed that an optimum and uniform level of safety could only be secured by extending the scope of this text and , therefore , extending the powers of the European Aviation Safety Agency to air operations , pilots ' licences and safety of airline companies in third countries : this is the purpose of the amendment to Regulation ( EC ) No 1592 / 2002 .
Furthermore , this proposal intends to step up controls and penalties in the event of non-compliance with these rules and , in the light of experience , to improve the functioning of the European Aviation Safety Agency .
The Council 's common position generally follows the proposal made by the Commission , even though a number of provisions , such as those relating to the Agency 's governance , have been reduced .
The common position also takes account of a number of amendments tabled by Parliament at first reading .
Our three institutions have worked hard in recent months to reach an agreement at second reading .
Some major improvements were made thanks to amendments by Parliament .
This has produced a system of fines , as Mr Leichtfried has just told us , which will allow the Commission to give a tailored response in the event of minor infringements of the safety rules .
This option is in addition to the withdrawal of certificates and will add flexibility to relations between the Agency and the entities it administers .
Thanks to the persistence of Parliament , the initial Commission proposal concerning cabin crew attestations was reintroduced .
This is a major step forward in acknowledgement of this profession .
The added value of well-trained cabin crew is quite obvious .
They have solved delicate situations on a great many occasions .
Cabin crew perform a major safety function .
A pragmatic solution was also found to flight time limitations .
Additionally , in specific discussions on the Agency 's budget in relation to fees and charges , the Commission undertook to take account of the specific situation of small and medium-sized enterprises when reviewing the Regulation on fees and charges , especially the impact on their economic feasibility .
In relation to the definition of complex aircraft , I feel the compromise is balanced .
I understand the concerns of some Members not to overburden certain sectors of the market with requirements .
Here the Commission will also assess the economic impact of including aircraft with one or more turbojet engines or turboprops .
Concerning possible changes to the system for ultralight aircraft , the Commission will ask the Agency for its opinion on this matter .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think I have covered all the major points in the compromise .
The Commission can therefore easily accommodate these amendments which reflect a negotiated compromise between the three institutions .
I again thank Parliament and the Council for allowing a rapid second reading .
Rapid adoption of this text will also guarantee the Agency 's reserve for the year 2007 .
Thus , the last phase of implementation in the EU of a coherent and uniform set of safety rules will be completed with the proposal that I will make to the College in June 2008 on extending the powers of the European Aviation Safety Agency to safety of airport infrastructure , air traffic control and air navigation services .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to your determination and , I repeat , of your rapporteur in particular , we can move European skies closer to maximum safety .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs on my own behalf too , and I think that perhaps in this way we will manage to close this chapter tomorrow at the second reading .
To touch briefly upon the compromises for the second reading , which are important for my group : the first is the issue of punishment , which has cropped up many times .
The current text has already improved a lot , and I think that there is a lot of protection in it for those concerned .
It truly is progress that the licence does not have to be taken away immediately , and I also hope that the built-in system of an appeals authority established by the Commission really will work and not destroy small businesses .
The other big question for my group was tariffs , mainly on the part of the British and Czechs .
It is still too expensive for small businesses and - I think - my British colleagues will say so , and I also hope that the obligation , undertaken by the Commission , that we will mention the situation of small businesses even more at the time of the audit , will be noticeable .
I considered the composition of the management authority and management administration to be very important , and Parliament really has been given a role of political control here , which I feel is a very important step forward so that the Member States do not send to the administration whatever and whoever they want .
Financial independence is also important for this authority so that we can put the revenue into different categories depending on where it was taken from .
To summarise , I would therefore like to congratulate all my colleagues , and to say that I hope the responsibility has filtered through to everyone .
It also shows that by joining forces we have , with the Council , been able to bring the issue of cabin crews back to the original Commission level , and it shows that we have been able to find a very good compromise on restrictions of flying time .
I would like to thank the Council , the Commission and the rapporteur again for their work .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I wish to congratulate my colleague Jörg Leichtfried on his human qualities and on his ability to make friends in a complex parliamentary confrontation on such a technical issue , but also so vital an issue , in order to ensure safety in such an important sector for European economic development as aviation .
I also wish to state my satisfaction at the progress made in relation to safety , a difficult and complex issue if ever there were one , with some areas that are totally clear , as today 's report shows , and others rather darker , although I prefer not to say which areas occur to me .
Today we have certainly taken another stride towards finalising a long and complicated process , at least part of which began many years ago with the transfer of JAR-OPS requirements to EU-OPS requirements ; I refer in particular to the progress made concerning rest and flight time .
At that time both Parliament and the Commission committed ourselves to charging the Agency with moving forward on an issue which , though difficult , ultimately filled an inexplicable gap and , at that particular time , required updating .
Thus I am pleased that those involved were able to accept this commitment , which I feel was important and was what Parliament was bound to do .
All in all , I feel these issues will have to be reviewed following the study and the proposals now being drawn up by the Commission on the situation of the aviation sector in terms of social and employment issues , an important concern .
I am also very pleased at the agreement on cabin crew , whose professionalism and certification must be recognised .
As the Commissioner rightly said , it is in everyone 's interest from the point of view of safety for training to be improved .
I am likewise very pleased at the positive outcome of the definition of helicopters , which at one point had created cause for concern in the production sector .
I also feel the solutions provided on penalties are extremely important , as also Parliament 's control not only in relation to comitology , in the case of flight time , but also in relation to the right to information , in the case of the Management Board .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his flexibility and clarity in connection with the Agency 's budget , since , as a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I feel it is essential for this kind of Agency .
To end , I wish to express the hope that the Agency can develop without clashing with Eurocontrol .
In my opinion European and worldwide aviation safety needs both bodies , and it needs both to be equally effective .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) My thanks to the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , the Commission and the Council .
I have found this subject and all the work done on it not only interesting , but also useful .
Despite the fact that after lengthy discussions an acceptable compromise has been achieved on nearly all issues , the Commission 's position regarding the classification of aircraft types up to 7 500 kg according to weight gives cause for concern .
The Commissioner has briefly touched upon the subject .
This apparently very technical subject is of great importance to the aviation industry and happens to be very complex ; therefore , it would have a significant impact on the development of new technologies and their implementation in the aviation industry .
Unfortunately , discussions on this directive have been used not for the first time , to my understanding , to promote internal competition without much consideration being given to the damage caused to the whole of the European Union in terms of outside competition .
I have in mind competition with the United States , Brazil and possibly very soon with China .
Personally I am disappointed with the Commissioner 's position on this issue .
To some extent I can appreciate the positions of Individual Member States being protected in the European Council .
However , the European Commission should not have considered this issue from the narrow point of view of the corporate interests of individual countries .
The benefits for the Union and possible harm caused by the implementation of such decisions should have been given serious consideration .
In order to avoid bureaucracy , small companies and individual aircraft owners would be forced to use single-engine aircraft produced using obsolete technologies instead of modern twin-engine ones with modern jet technology .
The worst thing about it is the fact that this decision has been made under the disguise of aviation safety .
Who has ever heard of a single-engine aircraft being safer than a twin-engine one ?
Regretfully , this is the understanding of aviation safety shared by the Council and , alas , the Commission today .
Today I am not afraid to sound very categorical because , as a pilot myself , I know what I am talking about .
I am interested not in the declarative , departmental side of the issue , but merely the practical side .
I am sure it will not be long before we start to feel the consequences of this , to my true belief , very wrong position and will then unavoidably have to declare the names of its creators to the aviation community .
Nevertheless , I believe in the efficiency of the Aviation Safety Agency and in its position enough to be prepared to undertake another study with a view to assessing these conclusions and perhaps negating them .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Mr Leichtfried has done excellent work on the task with which he was entrusted .
I should therefore like to offer him my personal congratulations and those of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
Sensible compromise should allow us to finalise work on the rules relating to civil aviation in the Union and the safety of air transport .
Air transport operations , licences , training , crew and aircraft of countries outside the Union are also affected .
The work we are today involved in is a continuation of the initial 2002 Regulation .
In my view , we are dealing with a sensible expansion of the competences of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) and improving many financial and management procedures .
The question as to whether this is necessary and useful is bound to arise in such a situation .
The answer has to be yes , in view of the dramatic increase in aircraft movements over Europe and the need to coordinate connections whilst retaining maximum safety levels .
These unifying measures do not really involve restricting the sovereignty of Member States .
Instead , they amount to an acceptance by these countries of the highest possible standards in the field of civil aviation .
Safety in terms of all stages of the flight itself and also of conditions at airports has to be deemed a priority and must not be allowed to be the subject of conflicts of competence with national authorities .
I also anticipate that the competence of the European Agency will be broadened to include matters currently dealt with by Eurocontrol .
There is therefore no need for a proliferation of standards .
In this context , including third-country aircraft in the scope of EASA actions is particularly important .
It will allow checks to be made to establish ex-ante whether an operator from a specific country meets safety standards before being authorised to fly within the Union or to fly into the Union from outside .
The Convention on International Civil Aviation signed in Chicago on 7 December 1944 plays a key role in this area .
Indeed , we marked its anniversary only four days ago when we celebrated International Civil Aviation Day .
I would remind the House that the 2007 slogan for this day was : ' Global Air Transport - a driver of sustainable economic , social and cultural development ' .
I trust that it will not be long before the EASA assumes a role within the ICAO ( International Civil Aviation Organization ) , which is a UN body dealing with issues pertaining to aviation at global level .
After all , this is a problem affecting the entire world .
The issue of fees and charges requires clarification .
I very much hope that the Commission will take account of the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises in this regard .
The Member from Hungary has already spoken to this effect .
We are dealing with a very important issue that will benefit our citizens .
We therefore trust this venture will be crowned with success .
In addition , we hope the details of its implementation will not prove irritating to passengers as is unfortunately sometimes the case in such situations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would also like to begin my speech with a word of thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried .
He cooperated closely with us and always kept us informed .
That was a good starting point , for the subject was not the purely technical and administrative matter it might seem at first sight .
It ultimately became very clear that , as is so often the case , this was a struggle involving numerous competing interests .
Let me deal now with the individual points .
I believe - and I hope this reflects a widespread conviction - that a single airspace needs strict and uniform supervision .
Divergent investigation standards must become a thing of the past , and at the end of the day we must have an instrument - an instrument with teeth - to properly implement and enforce the blacklisting rules for aircraft based outside as well as inside the European Economic Area .
We learned at a hearing that blacklisted aircraft cause far more accidents than all the others .
It is , in short , clearly apparent that European rules make very good sense .
We all hope , of course , that we shall now make equally rapid progress on the issue of functional airspace blocks , which continues to be thwarted , as you know , by the national interests of some Member States .
That is a great pity as well as being highly detrimental in the long run to efforts to reduce the volume of emissions from air traffic .
Whether there should be penalties or fines was one of the most complex questions .
Yes , I am afraid there is no alternative in our world .
We saw that intermediate measures were needed for an efficient system , and these have now been put in place .
One final word on cabin crews : I am very pleased that we have now come up with a sound arrangement .
It was high time we did .
The recognition of that occupational group must be taken further , and another task on the agenda will be to cut emissions and to make aviation less harmful to the climate than it has been to date .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to express my thanks to all those whose hard work has brought about the outcome of the conciliation procedure , namely Mr Leichtfried and Mr Props of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) .
I welcome the ambitious plan of the EASA to simplify testing procedures for aircraft under 1 tonne and for aircraft with a maximum take-off mass under 2 tonnes .
The debate so far leads me to believe that Annex 2 will be retained in its present form .
I hope that together we will soon open the door to the LSA category - Light Sport Aircraft - in the internal market for all manufacturers in the EU countries .
I do not believe that any of the parties involved would like to see the demise of this promising and developing sector , which has several dozen small and medium-sized enterprises operating within it .
We urgently need a set of temporary rules for these enterprises , which are situated mainly in Germany , the Czech Republic , Italy and France .
I also hope that , following Parliament 's accommodating approach , representatives of the Commission and EASA will show similar flexibility and vision in regard to the present position of this rapidly developing segment of the world market .
I believe that their decision will support further development of the light aircraft sector in the European Union by using the recognised testing and certification procedures , mechanisms and organisations .
I hope that the representatives of the Commission and of the Council will , in accordance with the Lisbon Strategy , support further development of this branch of the aviation industry , which is so progressive both in technical and technological terms .
At this particular stage of development , premature decisions , just as much as prolonged hesitation , could have fatal consequences for the sector .
I look forward to further debate and to the proposal on the progressive lowering of contributions of small manufacturers in aviation engineering .
I would like to thank you in advance for your support and understanding in this area as well .
As a goodwill gesture , I would like to express my full support for the compromise achieved .
Madam President , there is no doubt that aviation safety is a vitally important issue and one that we cannot afford to ignore .
However , the European Aviation Safety Agency continues to display many failings , especially with regard to its ability to run in an efficient and cost-effective manner .
As a result of these inefficiencies , Parliament has in the past decided to suspend funding from the Agency .
I am therefore alarmed that , despite these problems , Parliament now appears happy to oversee an extension of the Agency 's powers .
In order to highlight the impact that the EASA is having on businesses across the EU , I wish to draw Parliament 's and the Commission 's attention to the case of a company in my constituency .
This company , with whom I have much correspondence , will see charges for the issue and renewal of maintenance approvals soar as a result of these new regulations .
According to my constituent - whose cost increases I have in writing - maintenance costs will rise from GBP 1 206 this year to in excess of GBP 3 000 next year .
This represents an increase of 150 % .
I am worried , to say the least , that an extension of powers to EASA will represent only an increase in terms of the burden of extra red tape and not the extra gain in safety that we all desire .
Until such time that EASA can prove that it is fit for purpose in a manner that is not harmful , especially to small businesses , and in a manner that does not represent yet more red tape , I , along with my British Conservative colleagues , must oppose any further extension of powers to this Agency .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my opinion is the exact opposite to that of Mr Bradbourn , but , before I proceed , may I add my thanks to Mr Leichtfried for the report and , of course , for the skilfully negotiated compromise .
Extending the powers of the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) is a step towards guaranteeing the highest possible standards of aviation safety , uniform pilots ' licences with equivalent training standards , licensing of airlines from countries outside the European Economic Area and uniform training of cabin crew as well as responsibility for the implementation of EU-OPS .
By enabling EASA to impose fines for non-compliance with safety regulations , I believe we are considerably enhancing its enforcement powers .
This , I hope , will soon put a stop to the sometimes unnecessary and unproductive rivalries and power struggles between the national authorities and EASA .
The rapid growth of aviation in Europe makes it essential that EASA should be a strong body with centralised responsibility for overseeing technical safety .
In my view , this also means that the funding of EASA must be put on a stable long-term basis .
I believe that one of the next steps will be to ensure not only that the work of the national air accident investigation authorities in Europe is coordinated but also that their findings are analysed by EASA .
That will enhance safety in Europe and prevent whitewashing by the affected Member States .
In the long term , and I emphasise the long term , we need a model in Europe that will not only make the national tier superfluous but will also deal jointly with matters relating to safety and accident prevention , as the Federal Aviation Administration does in the United States .
That is my vision .
( EL ) Madam President , the three-day discussion of this topic has already been completed and we are simply called upon here to agree on a complex issue : complex because it tries to provide a global solution to problems which are specific in their extent .
Thus , it is proposed that the Commission should be able to impose fines , as an alternative to EASA 's power to withhold an airline 's certificate in the event of a contravention .
Note that under this regulation , the agency in question will be responsible for issuing certificates .
This will entail thorough technocratic restructuring and , for this reason , the proposed regulation provides for an independent budget for the agency , so that it does not lose its independence in relation to the Member States .
Although this ambitious scheme seems to have fitted into a proper technocratic mould , I wonder who will bear the political responsibility for possible future mistakes , a responsibility which is currently borne by the competent national minister or administrator of the Civil Aviation Authority .
In this case , then , we are creating , in the name of political unification , an agency which has no reason to exist since these matters could very easily have been organised at multilateral level within the framework of existing mechanisms such as the ICAO .
Besides , if there is a problem with flight safety , there is no one to blame but the European Commission , which pushed liberalisation of the sector to the limit , with the result that small private airlines are springing up like mushrooms , without the necessary infrastructure or know-how .
Let us not start trying to salvage our mistakes by wasting taxpayers ' money !
We now have 22 external agencies of the European Union .
At some point we will have to limit ourselves to the ones that are essential .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the oft-invoked ' European sky ' is still far from being a genuine common airspace , even after more than 50 years of the European Communities .
The Member States remain fundamentally unwilling to give up their sovereign airspace for the sake of a united Europe or even to share their sovereignty with Europe .
Moreover , common European legislation is lacking in many specific technical areas too .
Our aim in establishing the European Aviation Safety Agency , or rather in extending its remit , is to forge ahead with a small but important regulatory package .
The Commission presented a balanced proposal .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism and its rapporteur have , we hope , improved it .
In the next step of the process , the report has been the subject of successful consultation with the Council , which means that we can now be hopeful of its adoption at second reading tomorrow .
Lastly , as many other Members have done before me , I should also like to mention the rapporteur and thank him for his good work .
Together with his shadows , Mr Leichtfried has done a really good job .
Let me remind the House , however , that there is still a very great deal to do .
Yesterday and today we discussed many unresolved issues relating to air safety .
I hope we shall manage to reach a consensus on the remaining key issues of funding , comitology and liquids - a buzzword , perhaps , but one with deeper implications .
We need a consensus on these matters if the dream of a common European open sky is to become a reality .
( RO ) Madam .
President , the objective of the proposal for amending the Regulation on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing the European Aviation Safety Agency is to improve civil aviation safety in Europe .
These amendments aim at extending the initial applicability of the regulation to the aircrafts used in the Community airspace as well , obviously within the limits imposed by the Chicago Convention .
One of the subjects that have created controversies is related to the certification of the on-board personnel .
The Commission has continuously taken actions to improve aviation safety ; it has regularly published a black list of companies that do not meet the safety standards imposed by the European Union .
There is already a sixth list published .
The field of air transport has experienced strong development and this development cannot be achieved without meeting the security standards .
Low-cost companies are also part of this development and we should specify that , in 2006 alone , approximately 300 new routes were created , which represented approximately 1,800 flights every week .
According to a recent survey , in 2006 alone , low-cost companies transported 140 million passengers , such companies being present in 280 European airports .
Low-cost companies provide 427,000 jobs directly or indirectly .
I believe this regulation is extremely important for air transport safety .
Although there is a possibility to punish non-observance of security rules , we must not create a bureaucratic system , but a flexible one , which would contribute to the air transport improvement .
I also consider it important to acknowledge certificates for on-board personnel .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Madam President , since its inception in 2003 , the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) has , sadly , been a benchmark for incompetence .
Now it is time to look at the agency carefully .
Evidence suggests that safety standards have sometimes been neglected and , after all , the EASA is meant to be a safety agency .
What is more important than safety ?
It is clear the agency has experienced significant difficulties in setting up and operating in a satisfactory way .
Unaccountable delays still exist in its procedures .
It is still not meeting its own objectives and the confusion and disruption are putting the EU at a competitive disadvantage .
In the UK , regulatory costs are , of course , high because the Civil Aviation Authority is required to recover its costs from the services it provides .
But this does not take into account the new increases in maintenance costs and negative impacts on the repair sector caused by EASA .
But this agency is not just affecting big commercial airlines or businesses .
It is affecting private pilots like myself .
I am worried .
Take the instrument meteorological conditions ( IMC ) rating , which I myself hold : the certification that allows UK private pilots to fly by using a plane 's instruments to fly in more unfavourable weather conditions - well , I understand that is now under threat from EASA .
Flyer magazine in the UK writes that the IMC 's case is not helped by the fact that it is designed for peculiarly British conditions .
The UK weather means pilots need more of an IMC rating than others .
The scrapping of this would be disastrous for the light aviation industry in the UK and might lead to thousands of pilots like myself having their certificates effectively revoked .
I must ask , whatever else the Commission looks at , please reassure me and so many other pilots about this important issue .
The EASA 's performance has been unacceptable .
I am afraid it is not yet fit for purpose .
A single aviation market is not going to be achieved while distortions remain , while delays in procedure persist and while common sense is not applied to the aviation sector .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I am at the disposal of Mr Kirkhope , who is an excellent pilot .
If he encounters any difficulties with the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) - and I do not believe the Agency has made any controversial moves recently - but , if this were the case , I would be the first to protest and would be at your disposal .
Having said that , I also wish to reassure you that the Agency 's regulation and control function will not involve any tasks requiring additional financial resources , insofar as these tasks are financed by public funds .
I simply ask Parliament to ensure that the Agency has the necessary resources so that , as Mr Bradbourn told us , it is not obliged to seek charges which could be excessive in certain cases .
I honestly believe the EASA 's track record has been positive .
It is of course understood that the Agency 's means of action must be perfected , but I feel we must not underestimate the potential of the EASA for European aviation as a whole .
As proof of this , I can tell you that Mrs Marion Blakey , a former Administrator of the FAA in the United States , held meetings with the Agency in Cologne to discuss cooperation since she felt EASA was a high-quality agency .
Mrs Blakey told me this personally .
I listened very carefully to the comments by Mr Degutis .
As I said , the Commission has not ignored your arguments .
It will assess the economic impact on the aircraft market , whether or not aircraft are defined as complex , and I wish to tell you that we have taken due note of your request .
I note that you are also a pilot , and we will not bring this matter to a conclusion without studying it carefully and taking appropriate action .
You were right to persist .
Madam President , it would be bad form for me to prolong the debate excessively .
I particularly wish to thank Parliament .
I feel we have made good progress on safety and , as Mr Rack said , on a single European sky imposed in functional airspace blocks .
Mrs Lichtenberger is right to say that the blocks are essential for a much more efficient and environmentally friendly sky .
Therefore , Madam President , I thank Parliament for its extremely positive work on this issue .
There will be subsequent stages in this process - everything in due course - but I believe we now have a regulation that will make European skies even safer .
Once again I wish to express my thanks to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Wednesday 12 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) I am glad we have secured a balanced agreement with the Council .
This ought to allow us to rapidly implement the text , which definitely represents progress for the EU and passenger safety .
Now all aircraft from third countries will be inspected and must obtain certification to transport passengers within the EU , and this also represents progress in terms of harmonising the protection of European citizens .
This extends the process that began with the European blacklist , allowing all passengers to be protected in the same way regardless of which airport they use within the EU .
Before I finish , I wish to mention another point that I feel is important .
In the recent adoption of the Galileo project , 50 million euros were taken from the budgets of several European agencies , and the European Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA ) was one of them .
I have always supported the Galileo project because it is especially important in my region , and I am very glad an agreement has been reached on how it will be financed .
I wish to point out , however , that we cannot simultaneously increase the powers of an agency and reduce its budget .
EASA must not be affected by this levy .
Eurovignette ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Paolo Costa on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , concerning Eurovignette - B6-0386 / 2007 ) .
substitute of the author . - ( RO ) Madam President , the subject we are discussing is a requirement that the Committee on Transport has had for some time and which it submitted to the European Commission in order to present a model for internalization of external costs , applicable to all modes of transport .
In fact , I requested the Commission to present , by June 2008 at the latest , after examining all options - including of costs related to environmental protection , noise , congestions and health - a generally applicable model , transparent and comprehensive , for assessing all external costs , which would define and act as a basis for the subsequent calculation of charges for using infrastructures .
Based upon the intermediate results obtained in developing this model , the Commission should indicate whether the global environmental costs , such as the costs related to climate changes and the recently published costs , related to health , are examined in the intermediate report and if they shall be taken into consideration as a substantial factor in the subsequent assessment and calculations .
I would like to mention the fact that the directive we refer to offers the possibility to the Member States to introduce a road tax and , for its calculation , to take into account more cost elements than before .
In fact , there is a discussion regarding the inclusion of the so-called external costs , such as those related to environment , into the road fee .
Many Member States are against the introduction of such costs into the road tax , because they think that there is no sustainable model for this calculation , but other countries believe that these taxes will generate income and that , in this way , the necessary funds for developing infrastructure will be created .
I would also want to mention the fact that it is extremely important to ensure fair competition between the various modes of transport , but also to ensure a reduction of traffic noise .
I believe that the proposal the European Commission shall submit will also help us improve transport efficiency and , especially , the efficient use of various modes of transport and , of course , thus will contribute to the overall sustainable development of transport .
24.1 % of the greenhouse gas emissions in the 27 Member States come from or are due to the field of transportation .
For this reason , it is important for us to know if the environmental costs , such as climate changes , will be a part of this proposal .
I would also want to mention that the Eurovignette directive allows Member States to include an additional tax for certain roads in sensitive areas , such as the mountain regions in the Alps and Pyrenees .
Any income thus collected should be reinvested in other alternative means of transport and related infrastructures .
I would also want to ask the Commission if it could confirm to us the fact that , after the European Union ratified the Transport Protocol of the Alpine Convention , the paragraphs in the mentioned protocol regarding the enforcement of taxes on the transport of goods will be taken into consideration in this model .
I hope Commissioner Barrot will offer us details regarding the date when a new amendment of the Eurovignette directive in force shall be launched by the Commission .
I would like to finish this presentation with two additional questions , namely I would like to ask the Commission if these external costs will be internalized not only for road transport , but also for other means of transport , in order to ensure a balance in the development of various modes of transport and , also , I would like to ask the Commission how it intends to monitor the implementation of this Eurovignette directive .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , the Commission carried out a study to collate all publications on the subject and identify the best practices for assessment of external costs .
Many of the various methodologies identified referred to research projects financed by the Commission : Unit , ExternE , and other more recent projects .
A handbook is now being drawn up and we intend to publish this shortly .
This is the first point .
Secondly , the Commission has started work on an impact assessment in relation to compensation for external costs .
Many charging options have been identified and submitted for public consultation .
The consultation will come to an end on 31 January 2007 and a high-level conference will be held in January 2008 to present the handbook and the results of the public consultation which will add to the ongoing impact assessment .
This is our work schedule .
As you can see , it is quite intense .
The following external costs are being considered : accidents , congestion , air pollution , climate change and noise .
The assessment covers all means of transport .
It envisages different systems and different economic instruments such as taxation , user rights and emission rights trading .
We are assessing the instruments using a model-based quantitative analysis .
The purpose of all this is to make our means of transport increasingly environmentally friendly .
In accordance with the results of this work , the Commission will issue a communication before next summer .
I wish to digress slightly to answer Mrs Ţicău on the Alpine Convention .
The aim of the Convention 's Transport Protocol is to establish specific charging systems that take account of actual costs and encourage the most environmentally friendly transport systems .
The system introduced by the 2006 Eurovignette Directive to encourage the use of more environmentally friendly transport systems pursues the same objectives as the Alpine Convention 's Transport Protocol .
What does the present Eurovignette Directive actually say ?
It makes provision for obligatory modulation of tolls to be paid as of 2010 by vehicles which pollute up to 100 % more than environmentally friendly vehicles .
In mountain areas , the Directive aims to internalise the external costs of environmental damage and congestion through an additional toll of up to 25 % of the infrastructure toll .
Revenue from the additional toll must be reallocated to projects that make a direct contribution to alleviating environmental damage .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to make myself very clear : this communication , in light of all the work I have mentioned , is an extremely difficult task , believe me .
It will allow us to assess the best calculation methods in this field .
It will define a methodology that can be used for the various means of transport .
In mid-2008 , before the summer , in fact , in June , I also intend to submit a report to the College on the assessment and internalisation of external costs .
I mentioned a communication , and so I will submit this report , with the agreement of the College , along with a proposal to amend the current Eurovignette Directive .
It is clear , but it must be stated , that the proposal in relation to the present Eurovignette Directive constitutes an amendment that will allow external costs to be internalised within the scope of the current Directive .
This was what I had to say to the House .
Madam President , I know all this is at the heart of our sustainable development policy .
It is in fact necessary to internalise external costs but , in order to internalise external costs , we must have a Community definition and we must choose the best internalisation methodology .
I have tried to be as precise as possible this evening , and I am willing to return to the House to report on the difficult and important tasks required by the report which I will be presenting in mid-2008 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , what you said about having commissioned studies and preparing conferences is very heartening , but let me ask you a simple question .
I do not intend to ask whether you are going to present a communication by 10 June 2008 , but I will ask whether you are going to present , by 10 June 2008 , in accordance with the third paragraph of Article 11 of the current version of the Eurovignette Directive , what that Directive calls - and I quote - ' a generally applicable , transparent and comprehensible model for the assessment of all external costs ' and for the assignment of these external costs to operators of all modes of transport .
So are we going to get a model for the assessment and assignment of external costs , yes or no ?
My first question is as simple as that .
And so to my second question .
If I read the situation correctly , in contrast to the requirement to present a model , you are under no obligation at all to present an amendment to the Eurovignette Directive in 2008 .
That would no doubt be impossible anyway , because the idea , if I understood it correctly , is to develop a model for the distribution of costs and then , at the implementation stage , to apportion external costs to operators of all modes of transport - inland navigation , sea shipping , railways , private cars and so on .
What must not happen is that you begin by undertaking an amendment of the Eurovignette Directive and apportioning external costs to hauliers but take no action to ensure that operators of barges , trains , etc. also meet their external costs .
This is why I should like to know whether you will be undertaking a revision of the Eurovignette Directive at the same time as you provide for the apportionment of external costs among the other modes of transport too .
Two simple questions , and I hope to receive two simple answers .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , let me begin by thanking the Commissioner for his remarks .
As you know , Commissioner , we have been having this discussion about the assessment of external costs since the 1920s , and we Members also proposed various models when we were adopting the Eurovignette Directive .
However , since we did not succeed at that time , for political reasons , in incorporating external costs to any great degree into the method used to calculate the road tolls for heavy goods vehicles , we reached an agreement that you - the Commission - would present a uniform method by the summer of 2008 .
That agreement assumes particular importance in the light of the present discussion on climate change .
This being the case , we now have questions to ask .
Some of them have already been aired .
Firstly , will the Commission present a universally applicable and transparent model for the assessment of all external costs by June of next year , a model that may be regarded as universally binding ?
When I hear of a handbook , it sounds good , but the term tends to suggest a pick-and-mix catalogue of good practices .
What we want , however , is a universally binding method that will not subsequently be called into question .
Secondly , will this model take account of the climatic and environmental objectives set by the EU ?
That is what my honourable colleague Mrs Ţicău asked .
In terms of method , that would no easy matter , because all the existing approaches focus purely on the inclusion of current costs and not on the achievement of environmental goals .
If the pursuit of these goals were factored in , it would create a prescriptive element - a normative dimension , as it were - whereas the debate has so far been confined to current costs .
Thirdly , it goes without saying that we want a legislative proposal at the end of the day .
May I therefore ask when the Commission intends to revise the Eurovignette Directive ?
Is that its intention , or is this still entirely up in the air ?
Fourthly , when will this method or model start to apply to the assessment of infrastructure charges for other modes of transport too ?
That precise question has been exercising us , as Georg Jarzembowski said .
We want to get rid of the distorted competition between modes of transport and raise them all to a common comparable level .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Commissioner , thank you very much for your remarks .
It was quite thrilling to hear what you told us about the process and the timetable .
The issue that will be on the table in June is crucial , and not only for the Alpine region .
I believe that you - a man of the mountains , as you have described yourself - are patently aware of this and that it is important to you .
It has major implications for all roads as well as for all countries whose transport routes , and especially roads , carry high volumes of traffic and for all who live near these busy arteries .
The huge costs generated by such heavy traffic place an enormous burden on the countries most affected by it .
This burden is more than doubled , according to numerous studies that have already appeared , by external costs .
That point must be taken into consideration , and its importance needs to be far more clearly reflected in the actions of the Commission .
We shall not be content , however , Commissioner , with a philosophical and mathematical treatment of the issue of assessing external costs .
We need implementation , but we cannot wait for twenty years until the last lobbyist has been convinced .
Nor shall we be able to wait until the environmental pollution from bicycles has been calculated too .
The bottom line is that we shall have to act immediately .
We need a proposal for a regulatory instrument in the course of 2008 , we need to discuss it , and we need to conduct this debate now , not in twenty years ' time because we have had to wait until everyone has been convinced by governments of countries which are , in many cases , far less seriously affected by the problem than those in the central part of the European Union .
Commissioner , the mountains need you to act .
Sensitive places such as cities and other protected areas need a written regulation that clearly states what is reckonable .
The Member States can no longer bear the burden of environmental pollution alone , and they should not be required to do so for much longer .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , as has already been said , you described yourself as a man of the mountains at the time of the discussion on the European toll disc , the Eurovignette , and you certainly went a long way towards living up to that name , at least in the context of those earlier discussions .
Now , however , there are more steps to be taken , steps that are probably more important .
The time has come to internalise external costs or , if I may switch from Euro-newspeak to a language that people understand , to ensure that we all pay for what we get in the realm of transport and to obtain more knowledge about who generates what costs and surely also more knowledge about how we can recoup the costs from those who generate them .
You have presented us today with a timetable which contains initial key elements of what you promised back then .
That , I believe , is good , and what you have presented should certainly be welcomed .
What is missing , however - and this has already been mentioned - is the absolutely crucial next step .
When will there be a proposal for a legal instrument which will ensure that the various infrastructure users are charged on the basis of the true cost of their operations ?
And there is a wide diversity of users to take into account .
We wait with bated breath to see if it will prove possible , and we expect it to prove possible , to achieve this goal in the current legislative term , for only if we actually set this instrument in motion will other major projects that have been approved in recent weeks and months , some of them proposed by you , become sound investments .
If we pour a lot of money into the construction of the Brenner tunnel , that will only be a sound investment if a shift in the cost structure actually leads to the desired changes on the transalpine route .
In that respect we are confident that you , as a man of the mountains , will help us on this important issue .
( ES ) Madam President , following on from the broad agreement on the need to deal with adapting transport to the challenge of climate change and other effects to make it as sustainable as possible , since this is the only way to make transport competitive in the EU and worldwide , the Eurovignette has proved a useful initial tool to deal with the problems of congestion , pollution and so on , by providing modulation that is both sufficient and quite diverse in terms of its application to a range of heavy vehicles .
However , in view of the complexity of the problem , a number of questions occur to me , and so I wish to ask the Commissioner whether , in accordance with his offer and the agreement reached with the House , the ongoing studies involve the same measuring rule for all means of transport , and I do mean all of them .
I would also like to know whether , after the methodology has been drawn up , the proposals to be submitted will also refer to all means of transport .
I feel we cannot miss out on the chance to apply such an important exercise to all means of transport , since all of them are involved , and we need credible solutions for all of them in coherence with the co-modality proposal .
I would also appreciate information on a number of matters I feel are important .
How does he intend to relate the proposed amendment of the Eurovignette and the new methodology for the internalisation of external costs to the ' green corridors ' that appear in the logistics action plan and which could perhaps represent some scope for an extension to this methodology ?
How will this financing instrument be added to the current debate on the financing of EU policies ?
Will the Commission be prepared to extend it to private vehicles also ?
Would this not be more efficient and less discriminatory ?
How can we curtail its effects on the additional problems of growing isolation in an increasing number of areas and regions ?
Finally , does he feel that this instrument , the instrument he is now preparing , will prove sufficient on its own to provide finance for public works such as the large tunnels forming part of the trans-European road systems ?
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President , you may remember that , in the discussions on the last amendment of the Eurovignette Directive , I was one of those who clamoured insistently for internalisation of the external cost of road haulage operations .
Our bid failed .
For this reason I am pleased , on the one hand , that we are now heading in that direction .
I am not pleased because I campaigned for this the last time but because I see what has happened in Austria in the brief intervening period .
It is no longer merely western Austria that is awash with heavy goods vehicles .
We have now reached the point where eastern Austria is congested too , with some of the roads there completely blocked and the area around our capital , around the city of Vienna , already bursting at the seams .
For that reason it is high time we finally managed to factor the external cost of HGV operations into the European toll disc .
I appreciate , of course , that this kind of system must be applied to all forms of transport , but we have a set of rules in place for HGVs , so that is where we must now begin ; needless to say , we must also go on from there to deal with the other modes of transport .
I would add my voice to those of my fellow Members who have asked when we are going to be presented with an actual legislative draft .
The second point I wish to address is that we should perhaps reflect on the fact that this is a problem throughout Europe , and merely prescribing high tolls in parts of certain small countries will serve little purpose .
Instead , we ought to come up with a general system .
In this context , I wonder whether we should not assess the potential of minimum tolls , at least on trans-European network routes , as a means of adjusting the modal balance throughout Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I always listen to the House with great interest , but I nevertheless wish to explain a number of points .
First of all , since this is a matter of finding the model , as you say , we must take account of the fact that there are certain practices in the Member States and that , before deciding on the model , we must first discuss the calculation methods used in the various Member States .
I regret this , but the handbook at least has the merit of opening up public debate to do just that : to find the best model .
Now , I cannot understand why the Commission is seen to be on the sidelines of the issue when it has taken the trouble to examine all the practices in the Member States , to gradually find a genuine calculation model that could be used in Europe : on the contrary , I feel we are at the very heart of the matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should tell you this is a difficult exercise .
I also feel I must defend the services provided by the Transport Directorate-General , which at present is compelled to find reliable methods , because if we do not have reliable methods , there will never be any acceptance across the EU of these methods and this model , as Mr Stockmann said .
I also wish to express my great surprise to Mr Jarzembowski .
I am told : we must act , we must take action towards more sustainable transport , transport that is more environmentally friendly , we must support the railways , we must support river transport , and we must support maritime transport .
As Mr Leichtfried very wisely said , we have to begin at the beginning , and we can rectify later .
Let us begin by improving the present Eurovignette Directive , that is my proposal , if the Commission agrees with me , in June 2008 .
We will internalise the external transport costs of heavy vehicles because that is precisely how we will encourage the use of other modes of transport .
However , Mr Jarzembowski , at some point in the future we will also apply the calculation methods to these other modes of transport as well .
Having said that , we must take one thing at a time .
We can hardly take action and do everything at once .
That is not possible .
We need a method ; if we want the EU to accept this policy , believe me , we must act intelligently .
I am most determined on this issue .
I must thank Mr Rack for praising my mountaineering abilities .
I do not stop halfway , even when the route turns into a slope or a gradient ; one must keep up a reasonable pace to get to the summit .
The debate is closed .
Your conclusion was fascinating and expressed with great passion .
( DE ) Madam President , it has never happened to me before that my name was so well pronounced by the British interpreters .
I just wanted to take the opportunity to express my warm gratitude .
That is the first time since I entered this Parliament that it has been pronounced absolutely correctly .
Thank you very much .
Information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bogdan Golik , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries - C6-0203 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Golik , for his excellent report on the Commission proposal for a single Council regulation for the promotion of agricultural products on the internal as well as the external markets .
The aim of the present proposal is to merge two existing Council regulations on internal and external promotion into one single regulation .
The overall goal of this exercise is totally in line with our simplification exercise and is intended to increase the transparency of the European Union 's promotion scheme for agricultural products .
The objective is not to fundamentally change the information and promotion policies .
The amendments proposed by Mr Golik and his colleagues address several important issues regarding the EU promotion scheme , such as , firstly , more importance and a larger budget for promotion programmes in third countries ; secondly , a higher Community share of promotion measures and , thirdly , a lower share of financial contribution by the proposing organisations .
As regards the sharing of contribution between the different partners , you know that the standard Community contribution is 50 % , and that the other 50 % is shared between the Member States and the proposing organisations , with the latter paying at least 20 % .
This sharing of the financial burden between the different partners is based on a very long experience with the promotion programmes .
If all partners contribute and become financially involved , the chances for an efficient and well-targeted programme clearly increase .
For exceptional cases , such as the recent case of fruit and vegetables for schoolchildren , it is possible to increase the Community 's share to 60 % .
Regarding your idea to emphasise more programmes for promotion in third countries , I am , in principle , sympathetic towards the idea , but it has to be put into the right context .
This proposal is simply about merging two regulations ; it is not about policy discussions or more money , so the right moment to have this discussion would be when we consider the future of our common agricultural policy , where our priorities should be well reflected in our budget allocation .
However , this does not mean that I am pushing promotion into the background .
As you possibly know , in our two recent reforms - the first on food and vegetables , and the one we will , hopefully , finalise at the beginning of next week , namely the wine reform - we have been focusing and underlining the importance of promoting programmes .
To take the example of wine , we have allocated EUR 120 million every year specifically for promoting our excellent European wines in third countries .
I think we are on the right track , but let us come back to this at a later stage - this is simply a merging of the two regulations .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , effectively , this proposal for a Council regulation on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries is intended to harmonise and achieve technical consolidation of two regulations currently in force .
This is all part of the broader process of simplifying Community legislation and making it more transparent .
I should like to emphasise , however , that in this case simplification is understood exclusively as a technical process .
The draft regulation before us does not , unfortunately , refer to the key principles of promotion and information laid down in the European Commission 's implementing provisions .
Despite these constraints , I adopted a considerably broader and more strategic approach to the promotion of agricultural products within the European Union in my report .
The European Parliament must be able to refer to the key issues linked to such an important mechanism .
This is particularly relevant if we consider the progress of multilateral negotiations at WTO level , and also the changes in the common agricultural policy 's operating conditions .
Export subsidies of all kinds are to cease by 2013 . This includes Community export refunds .
A reduction in customs duties is planned .
Under these circumstances , increased action in the area of promotion and information is the only way to maintain the export competitiveness of EU agricultural products .
Such action will also help to secure new markets in third countries and increase customer awareness of the benefits of European products , thus stimulating demand .
At the same time , none of this will affect market competition conditions .
It will not have a negative impact on world trade either .
That is why we cannot allow promotion and information action to be sidelined . On the contrary , we should accept them as a European Union priority .
Under the current system , the European Commission draws up a list of specific third-country products on which campaigns may be conducted .
This list can be reviewed every two years , whereas the programmes themselves may only be submitted once a year .
Furthermore , it is for the European Commission to make the final decision on whether a particular programme will be adopted and on the extent of the financial support it will receive .
The 2007 budget for promotion activities only amounts to EUR 45 million , and is decreasing year on year .
This is a particularly surprising trend if we consider that the number of countries in the European Union has increased , and that there has been a marked increase in the actions discussed .
Such a policy cannot effectively strengthen the Community 's position and increase awareness of European quality standards , notably on third-country markets .
Appropriate financial resources are required if these ambitious aims are to be achieved .
I therefore believe that the threshold of the Community 's financial involvement must be raised from 50 % of the real cost of programmes to 60 % .
I also propose that the minimum contribution by sectoral organisations to financing programmes should be lowered to 10 % , precisely so as to enable smaller organisations to become involved .
In addition , the Community 's participation could reach 70 % in the case of organic farming and programmes relating to action following crisis situations such as avian influenza and BSE , for example .
Programmes should be universally accessible and more flexible .
Including all products and all countries and also allowing organisations to submit programmes at least twice a year will allow swift responses to any opportunities that might arise on the markets , and to any possibilities for producers to expand in third countries .
Returning to those aspects of the regulation pertaining to simplification , it would be sensible to include promotion actions in the Regulation establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets .
This would improve legislative transparency .
It should be emphasised that there is a reference to the Community promotion instrument in the Regulation on the market in fruit and vegetables and also in the draft wine reform you referred to , Madam President .
Every effort should be made to avoid a situation in which provisions on resources for promotion are unduly dispersed .
In conclusion , I should like to take advantage of this opportunity to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture who unanimously adopted this report , the European Commission representatives I met with repeatedly , the 24 Agriculture Ministers from whom I received letters on this subject , and also the relevant national and European sectoral organisations .
I should like to express my appreciation for their active cooperation and sensible comments .
These consultations enabled me to assess the existing system and also to familiarise myself with the wishes of these countries and organisations so as to incorporate them .
Finally , I believe that if a suitably larger budget is made available , promotion and information action will allow European producers and farmers to acquire new markets .
The ' Made in Europe ' label will also become better recognised at world level , which is as it should be .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , firstly I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Golik , on his fine work , and also thank him for his splendid cooperation with us as shadow rapporteurs .
Today , as you rightly pointed out , Commissioner , the Commission is proposing a single legal framework to merge two existing Council regulations into a single regulation for the promotion of agricultural products .
The aim is to reduce and simplify procedures to allow this policy to be applied while retaining the specific nature of the action involved , depending on the location at which it is to be implemented .
This is an extremely important proposal , as acknowledged in the two proposals adopted and to be adopted on the common organisation of the market in wine .
The proposal considers it is important to promote agricultural products .
In addition , it does not merely consider promotion inside and outside the EU , but achieves a multiplier effect through national action and private action within sectors .
Courses of action have been implemented since the year 2000 to promote the virtues of European foodstuffs to consumers , their high-quality nutritional value , food safety , production processes , animal welfare and so on .
The current rules regulating promotion , however - and I mention this because I was in charge of these two regulations at the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture - have a tendency to jeopardise the system , and they must be revised with a view to simplification to allow them to function more efficiently in terms of proper use of funds .
The promotion policy must be a modern , flexible and ambitious tool if it is to meet the aspirations of operators .
I feel that is the intention of the Commission 's proposal , and that is the precise intention of the amendments unanimously adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I wish to specifically mention the amendments on the purpose and scope , since it would be beneficial for promotion to be carried out in relation to trade marks and not focus solely on generic promotion .
I hope the Council and the Commission will take this report into account , and I thank them for their attention .
in the name of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Madam President , the simplification of the Community regime for information and promotion of agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries complies with the European Parliament objective to simplify the legal framework .
This document is also extremely important because , during this period , we discuss the reform of the common agricultural policy as well and , in this context , the Community mechanisms for promoting agricultural products should play an important role .
Reforms in the field of fruits and vegetables and in the field of wines , as well , will be successful only if Europe manages to promote its agricultural products adequately .
5 % of the people who can work in the European Union are directly employed in the agricultural sector and thus contribute to the 1.6 % of the European Union GDP .
Once the new treaty comes into force , the codecision procedure shall also apply to the common agricultural policy .
As socialists , we support global and gradual market openness , yet with correct and especially mutual rules .
Our agricultural model involves high standards in the social and environmental field and quality of food products .
This also implies that certain costs are ascribed to farmers , but we should specify the fact that environmental protection must also be taken into consideration .
The quality of our products should be the main concern of international trade .
As socialists , we believe that the " made in Europe ” mark should be established , identified and also related to the quality of products according to European standards ; the promotion of European Union agricultural products is also extremely important .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , this report reminds me of Alice in Wonderland and , Madam President , it is irresistible to challenge the interpreters by exclaiming ' " Curiouser and Curiouser ! ” cried Alice ' .
What is going on ?
Does it really make sense for the EU to use European taxpayers ' money for advertising campaigns seeking to persuade the same taxpayers that they should buy goods they have already financed through subsidies .
Of course not .
One of the EU 's aims in the common agricultural policy is to guarantee consumers reasonable prices .
But , when this is done by financing from taxes instead of by productivity increases , the consumers pay just as much for their food in any case , only by different means .
On top of that , the incentive to increase productivity is weakened .
So food becomes more expensive in the long run because of this agricultural policy .
The committee advocates restrictions on competition .
When tariffs are abolished , production in the Member States is threatened by cheaper products from third countries ; and the report proposes increased spending on campaigns aimed at strengthening the Union 's brand and boosting consumption in the Union .
The proposal reeks of covert protectionism !
We have seen many examples of EU advertising campaigns before .
In 1997 advertising campaigns were run to promote cut flowers produced in the EU when imports became cheaper thanks to the abolition of tariffs .
The eminent Swedish columnist , Johan Hakelius , wrote as follows in a leading Swedish newspaper : ' When EU citizens buy the same kind of flowers all across Europe , of course cohesion and European harmony increase .
Tulips are vital to peace ' .
In this House , it is perhaps necessary to point out that this was intended as irony ...
In 2000 the EU had 450 000 tonnes of olive oil in storage , and the EU decided to run advertising campaigns in the northern countries to inform us how good and beneficial olive oil was .
In 2007 the European Parliament voted money for advertising in the milk sector in order to protect it from increased market liberalisation .
A reform of the common agricultural policy is actually taking place .
It is making slow progress , but it is making progress .
However , the rapporteur 's proposals take several steps backwards .
They seek to replace the reforms which are finally taking place with increased sales promotion measures and information campaigns .
The rapporteur puts the blame on the WTO and wants to increase the number of products which should get this support .
This is nothing more than unfair competition with agricultural producers in countries outside the EU .
The common agricultural policy must eventually be abolished and prices and production be determined by supply and demand , just as happens in all other sectors .
We are stuck with an unreasonable system because of unfortunate decisions in the past .
Hence it is all the more important that we move in the right direction .
The recommendation here is , regrettably , that we should take the wrong direction .
The money which can now be released to benefit the population of Europe through tariff reductions , removal of export restitutions and reduced national support must not be frittered away in more appropriations for sales promotion measures and information campaigns .
Promotion campaigns and advertising for goods and services must be paid for by the producers , not by hard-pressed taxpayers .
Europe is on quite the wrong track in this area , as in so many others .
The EU must be a Europe of freedom , in which people and businesses compete for the favour of consumers and not for that of the protectionists .
For Europe 's sake I wish that I could be optimistic , but unfortunately I cannot .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank Members for their contribution to this very important debate .
I hope that we can all agree on the fact that it is important that we have a budget available to explain to consumers the high quality of European products , both within the European Union and on the overseas markets .
I must say that I am a bit surprised that this should be considered a protectionist approach , because we are in a situation where all Member States within the European Union and all other players in the agricultural commodity market are promoting their products to the consumer .
On this , we within the European Union have completely clear stands , because we have high-quality products , with regard to the environment , with regard to animal welfare and with regard to the high level of veterinary standards .
On the point of underspending of the budget or the fact that the budget has been decreasing , it has not been possible to spend the money , because there has been no interest on the overseas markets from producer organisations .
I hope that this problem will be solved when we merge those two different regulations , so that it is much easier , much more flexible , to handle .
I would be open to having a discussion , maybe within the health check , on how we set goalposts for the future of our promotion campaigns for our agricultural products .
I think , at the very least , a proper time to have this discussion would be when we have the discussion on the budget for the future , meaning after 2013 .
However , I think we have sent some clear signals , both within the fruit and vegetable reform and within the wine reform , on the importance of promotion for our production .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 12 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - With the recent common agricultural policy reforms and possible future developments in World Trade Organisation negotiations , there is clearly a genuine need to enhance Community promotion mechanisms concerning agricultural production .
Moreover , the implementation of the Action Plan on Simplification calls indeed for the design of a single legal framework on the promotion of agricultural products for both internal and external markets .
Promotion instruments and campaigns should be given the utmost importance when bearing in mind the foreseen tariff cuts , the elimination of export refunds and the Community domestic support cuts .
In this respect , it is obvious that we ought to increase the scope and the budget for the promotion of our agricultural production to ensure viable competitiveness for our products on both internal and external markets .
As a matter of fact , it is essential to increase the budgetary means to ensure quality promotion instruments and transparent measures within a single and simplified legal framework .
More specifically , this morning debate on the wine common market organisation reform is an extremely good example of the urgent necessity to sufficiently invest in efficient promotion instruments and marketing measures within and outside the Union .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , we all agree that information actions and promotion of agricultural products on both the internal and the external markets are essential .
We also agree on the need to simplify and harmonise provisions and to limit administrative procedures relating to implementation of the information policy .
In addition , we realise that appropriate information and promotion stimulate trade and help to secure markets for products .
We all agree too that the sum of EUR 45 840 000 expressed as the level of appropriations for 2007 is far too low .
How should we respond to this situation ?
What should we focus on in particular ?
I believe we should concentrate on promoting healthy organic agricultural products , free from GMOs .
We should start with young people and educational institutions .
Special promotions for schoolchildren should include a range of healthy organic products in addition to fruit .
A labelling system providing important information for the consumer , for example on the origin , quality , production method , safety and nutritional value of the product , is vital to success .
This information should be provided on the packaging in the consumer 's local language .
Appropriate changes must be made to trade and labelling in supermarkets , especially in the new Member States .
The following action is essential if the desired results are to be achieved : research into new markets , improving the entire control system and good cooperation between all the Member States .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the report we are today discussing on the promotion of agricultural products should contain the word organic in its title .
After all , society can only consume a certain amount of food , so we are not so much concerned with consuming more , as with healthy eating and good-quality food .
Many mass catering establishments in the territory of the European Union provide food containing so many chemicals and fertilisers that it is hardly surprising each generation of Europeans is fatter than the previous one .
I do not wish to promote that type of food , which has caused European society to be more susceptible to illness and obesity .
If we begin to provide our citizens with healthy food , our produce will become renowned the world over .
We need to convince the world that Europe produces and sells high-quality food .
I fully support those parts of the report advocating regional self-sufficiency in the production of traditional foods for each area .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Golik for a good report .
Legal protection of designs ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 98 / 71 / EC on the legal protection of designs - C6-0119 / 2004 - .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , firstly I would like to warmly thank the Committee on Legal Affairs and the rapporteur , Mr Lehne , for the hard and excellent work he has carried out in the preparation of his report on the proposal to amend the Design Directive .
I welcome the fact that this work has eventually allowed the committee to pave the way for liberalising the spare parts aftermarket in the whole Community .
Currently , there is a situation of different , opposed regimes of design protection , where 10 Member States have liberalised and 17 Member States extend design protection to spare parts .
This situation is entirely unsatisfactory for the internal market .
In the automotive sector , which is the sector most affected , there is a single market for cars but no single market for their spare parts .
This leads to distortion of prices and obstacles to trade .
The proposed exclusion of design protection in the aftermarket for spare parts is the right and only effective way to achieve a single market in this area .
The Commission 's Extended Impact Assessment analysing the options to solve the problem demonstrates this .
The Commission 's figures suggest that , currently , consumers are paying a 6 % to 10 % premium for these spare parts in Member States which provide for design protection .
With the liberalisation , consumers will benefit directly from the increased competition and the completion of the internal market .
The independent distribution sector will be in a position to put a larger spectrum of parts on offer , including parts from original equipment suppliers , as well as the normally cheaper parts from independent producers .
This will lead to more choice and lower prices for spare parts .
Liberalisation will also open business opportunities to independent spare parts producers , mostly SMEs , and create a European market of sufficient scale allowing new entrants to emerge .
The essential purpose of design protection is to foster competition of forms through design innovation .
This can , however , not apply to spare parts which have to be identical in design to the original parts if they are to serve a purpose .
The consumer pays for the design when buying a new car or other product ; he should not be forced to pay again each time he needs a spare part .
The proposed repairs clause strikes a fair and correct balance between protecting innovation where appropriate and maintaining free trade and competition where necessary .
European citizens and businesses today need a single market for spare parts which allows for more competition .
With this directive we can provide the market with the right key to achieve this .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we come today to the provisional end of a discussion that has lasted for 17 years .
I recall that , when I was first elected to this House in 1994 , we were already trying to get our heads around this issue .
We did not reach a conclusion then .
All we managed to do in the conciliation procedure was put the matter on ice .
A few years ago the Commission presented a new proposal , which has again taken quite some time to deal with , but it can finally be brought to an end now , at least at first reading .
What is being proposed here and what is on the table is essentially what the Commission has put forward , namely liberalisation of the market in spare parts , albeit with a five-year transitional period for Member States in which spare parts are covered by design protection .
For 17 years I have been listening to arguments for and against .
Most of them are unconvincing .
Allow me to cite a number of examples .
First of all , there was the argument that consumer prices would be lower if the repair clause were introduced .
There is no empirical evidence at all for that claim - quite the contrary .
Comparative data on spare-part prices in Britain , where the market is liberalised , and Germany , where it is not , show that , paradoxically , prices for spare parts are higher in Britain than in Germany .
Besides , it is not rocket science : vehicle manufacturers must recoup their design costs somewhere .
If they cannot recoup some of them from the sale of spare parts , it is logical that they will have to pass them on through the price of new cars , and so cars will become more expensive .
In that case too , the consumer is the one who pays .
The same applies , by the way , to insurance premiums .
Some of the cost of buying new cars , as we know , is covered by insurance policies .
If premiums rise , that does not help consumers either .
One way or another , they always have to foot the bill .
Nor am I really convinced by the argument that the motor industry needs design protection to fend off competitors from the Far East that are threatening its markets , for in no time at all we shall see how the industry finds other ways to protect its spare parts : patenting intelligent car bonnets and intelligent wing mirrors , protecting other parts through trade mark legislation by simply incorporating particular logos into them , imposing conditions of warranty and other practices .
The safety argument , as our impact assessment has demonstrated , is not ultimately watertight either , because safety , as we well know , can be ensured by means of type testing .
I cite these because I believe that all the arguments that have been advanced are ultimately spurious and have not provided clear answers to the fundamental question .
When all is said and done , there remain two key arguments which I recognise .
One of them is the copyright argument , which says that exemplary protection must be given in Europe to intellectual property rights , and indeed I take the view that what we are about to adopt here will probably send the wrong signal to China and India and that our task as Europeans is actually to defend the rights attaching to intellectual property .
I shall come straight in with the counterargument , however .
We have a single European market and - as Commissioner McCreevy quite rightly observed - a situation in which two-thirds of the Member States have liberalised their aftermarkets and therefore do not protect the design of spare parts , while the other third do .
The fact is that the creation of a single market in Europe entails the creation of common legal rules , and it is not unusual in such cases to follow the majority principle .
In my view there has always been a compromise solution , for which I canvassed together with Commissioner Monti back in the nineties .
That was the idea of the compulsory licence , which would have meant that any manufacturer could reproduce parts subject to payment of a licence fee to the owner of the design rights .
Incidentally , we have a very similar arrangement in the realm of copyright , so no one can tell me that it is not an option .
It would have served both to protect the design and to create a market .
Regrettably , it did not attract majority support in the House or in the Council .
We were thus left to draw the conclusion that we should liberalise and that we should create a transitional period to protect Member States that needed some time to adapt .
Then there remained the issue as to whether five or eight years ' grace should be allowed .
My Group , like the Committee on Legal Affairs , opted for five years ; I have heard that the Socialist Group favours eight years .
The crux of the matter is that , when Parliament votes tomorrow on the question of whether five or eight years should appear in the text , it will be signalling that the Council needs to agree on a transitional period .
I know from talks with the Slovenian Presidency that their proposals will tend to aim for a longer rather than a shorter grace period .
I certainly wish the Slovenian Presidency good fortune in its efforts .
There is one thing , I believe , that we should bear in mind for the second reading .
Should the Council actually arrive at an agreement , we in Parliament should resolve not to complicate matters at second reading .
The issue does not merit protracted wrangling , and it is high time it was brought to a conclusion .
The present draft is our contribution to the pursuit of that aim .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( DE ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after lengthy debate , the Committee on Legal Affairs came out in favour of complete liberalisation of the secondary market in visible spare parts .
As we have just heard , the compromise that was reached in the Committee on Legal Affairs provides for a free market after a grace period of five years .
I warmly welcome this step , although I personally consider the transitional period to be too long rather than too short .
It is a long-overdue step .
We have just heard from Mr Lehne that this issue has been under discussion for 17 years .
Two and a half years ago , in 2005 , as rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I called for early liberalisation .
Unfortunately , the original rapporteur for the lead committee , the Committee on Legal Affairs , kept delaying the process .
I do not know whether he had some personal doubts about the point of the project or whether he was unable to resist the heavy pressure from vehicle manufacturers in his own federal state .
Whatever the reason , it is irrational that we should have a single market for new vehicles but not for spare parts .
Liberalisation of the aftermarket will strengthen competition , will tend to exert downward pressure on prices and will widen consumer choice .
It will not hamper innovation ; on the contrary , it could actually stimulate innovative activity , since vehicle manufacturers will try to design their products in such a way that makes them more difficult for independent parts manufacturers to reproduce .
I naturally support the right to intellectual property and its protection - no doubt about that - but that right is no barrier to market liberalisation .
There has , after all , been only one case in which a vehicle manufacturer has brought an action against another manufacturer for design-right infringement in the primary market , despite the fact that there have actually been some very striking similarities between models produced by different manufacturers .
Small and medium-sized businesses will also benefit from liberalisation through new market opportunities , which ought to boost employment in the EU and provide substitutes for a number of imports .
Lastly , individual consumers will henceforth be able to choose freely between several suppliers .
I am sure they will be glad to have that opportunity .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( ES ) Madam President , as the rapporteur Mr Lehne mentioned , this issue has concerned the House for 17 years .
I have had the privilege of following it from the very beginning , since I worked as rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs on the Directive on industrial designs and models .
I was subsequently draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the same issue , and have also followed its progress as the representative of the Socialist Group on the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I wish to start by congratulating Mr Lehne on his balanced approach .
I feel he has given a magnificent account of the difficulties involved .
This is no easy subject , not simple at all ; it has both legal complications and economic consequences .
I agree with him .
I recall the long night of discussions with the Council on the Conciliation Committee as to the final formula - at that time we were considering the possibility of some kind of compulsory licence , although this was rejected - but I think that both the rapporteur and myself , and also Mr Klinz , who spoke before me , are in favour of defending intellectual property rights .
From the legal standpoint , however , the problem in relation to models and to industrial designs in general lies in the fact that the protection we have to give is for the product as a whole .
The most important feature is the aesthetic value of the product overall , in other words the design , and the case arising most frequently is car design .
Repair parts , in other words , parts which have broken or come loose after an accident or for any other reason , have to be replaced and , as Commissioner McCreevy said , the normal format is a part equivalent to the part replaced .
When someone repairs a part and replaces it with an identical part , with no prejudice to the overall design , obviously this person is not committing any kind of plagiarism , but merely carrying out repairs to an object that it must fit .
This is the famous ' must fit / must match ' concept .
I feel the formula suggested by the rapporteur is the proper solution , but he has also addressed another issue : there is , of course , another aspect , which is the economic side of the matter .
In other words , at present there are a number of countries where the car industry needs this additional income generated by intellectual property rights .
As the Commissioner said , however , in order to secure the internal market we must unify the law within the entire European Union , and the crux of the matter is how to reconcile one thing with another .
The only way to do this is by means of a transitional period .
This means we must give the industry the chance to make preparations over a long period of time in order to take account of the compensating extra income from property rights on ready-made parts , a concept which makes no sense at the present time since we operate on the basis that property refers to the design as a whole .
The main issue is this period , as Mr Lehne stated .
Some feel the period should be five years - two plus three , we might say - while others think it ought to be longer , a period of eight years .
Tomorrow we will find out the positions of all the political groups , and also the various national delegations and individual Members .
It occurs to me that this is an issue which will not be discussed along the lines of political parties but rather in accordance with national preferences , individual preferences , or protection preferences by sectors .
In any case , I feel the fact that we have been discussing this matter between the Council and the Commission for 17 years is no bad thing , because there is a general tendency to use the legislative instrument to solve occasional problems , and here the two co-legislators , the Council and Parliament , have been working for some time now to find a balanced solution , a solution that acknowledges the right to protection of intellectual property , the interests of car manufacturers , the interests of consumers and also - why not ? - the interests of small repair outlets or even insurance companies .
I feel the formula proposed here by the rapporteur is the proper solution .
As I have already said , the only item to be determined - and we will learn this through the results - is the right period of time .
I think , however , that , under these circumstances , Parliament is giving the Commission the chance to draw up a new legal formula within a short space of time , a legal formula that would save us the customary recourse to the Court of Justice for matters relating to litigation .
I therefore feel that Parliament should basically adopt the report , without prejudice to any minor difficulties that might be posed by certain amendments .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I would like to start , like many other colleagues today , by stressing the importance of intellectual property rights and the protection of design in general .
We need these rights if we want to continue to be competitive , dynamic and innovative and develop our societies .
However , we also need to make sure that our markets are functioning in an efficient way .
The Commission 's proposal could not be more timely .
As many have stressed , we have already waited for 17 years , and we have to wait five more .
I think the grace period of five years is already long enough , and it certainly gives the automotive industry time to adjust their industry in a proper way .
This is a good balance between intellectual property rights and the rights of consumers .
We have 260 million vehicle owners in Europe , who are waiting to get a ' spare parts and repair ' clause which is well functioning .
This proposal for a directive , and the compromise made by the Committee on Legal Affairs , ensure that all those parts that are attached to the end product when the product is made - which are not really traditional spare parts - can still have full protection under the design directive .
I am confident that the directive will benefit European consumers .
The scaremongering by the automotive industry that this would result in the loss of 50 000 employees from the automotive sector or EUR 2 billion losses to vehicle manufacturers is absolute nonsense .
I think that it will bring business opportunities for a large number of small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe and create new jobs for Europeans .
It remains to be seen , and we definitely want to see the results in five years and not eight years .
I hope this will be the compromise tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the proposal for a directive on legal protection of industrial designs concerns liberalisation of the market in spare parts for the automotive industry .
It is estimated that , within the Union , the value of the latter is EUR 10 billion .
The common internal market currently only covers the sale of new motor vehicles and most Member States retain provisions protecting designs and must-match spare parts in their national legal systems .
This means that the production and trade of parts such as bonnet lids , doors , bumpers and mudguards is not unrestricted .
Various national provisions relating to the sector are disrupting competition .
In countries applying total design protection such as Austria , France , Germany and the Czech Republic , spare part prices are between 6 % and 10 % higher on average .
The main losers are European consumers and SMEs that would like to enter into the market and engage in fair competition with authorised agents .
The opponents of liberalisation are mainly the large motor manufacturers , who argue that independent producers will sell parts more cheaply , as they do not have to bear the cost of designing and developing new products .
The Commission 's proposal represents a further step towards complete liberalisation of the motor vehicle market in Europe .
The repair clause is beneficial to consumers .
It attacks the monopoly in the spare parts market and promotes competition between producers .
Consequently , spare parts will be cheaper and of better quality .
It should be highlighted that 11 Member States of the European Union have already implemented the repair clause , with beneficial consequences for consumers .
The countries in question are characterised by high competitiveness and fast economic growth .
They include Ireland , the United Kingdom and new Member States such as Latvia , Hungary and Poland .
In fact , packaging is generally the only difference between parts produced by independent producers and parts bearing the company 's logo .
Independent producers account for 80 % of the parts produced , and only 20 % are produced directly by the large companies .
Design protection has nothing to do with the safety of the parts , because it only concerns their appearance , as was confirmed by reliable studies conducted across the whole of Europe .
In conclusion , I should like to say that a five-year period is the maximum to which European consumers can agree .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the liberalisation of the market in visible vehicle spare parts is to be welcomed for three reasons .
The first is that consumers will benefit from more choice and competition .
The second is that we might perhaps see a fall in prices and that we can certainly expect pricing to become transparent , for design costs should be factored into the cost of new vehicles and not recouped through a downstream monopoly in the market for spare parts .
The third reason is that the job market in the European Union will benefit , as European parts manufacturers will also be able to produce spare parts for vehicles imported into the EU .
So far that has only been possible for manufacturers outside Europe .
During the 2004 election campaign I visited a parts factory near Gütersloh .
That company will be pleased with these new rules .
I also welcome the fact that important elements of the Commission 's proposal , such as the repair clause , are contained in the draft adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
As shadow rapporteur for my Group on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I had advocated the retention of that clause .
I believe the draft brings us another step closer to a genuine single market .
There are two major defects , to which some of my fellow Members have already referred .
One of them is the fact that the former rapporteur delayed the report .
In so doing , Mr Radwan did not act as the representative of the European people but as the representative of the Bavarian Motor Works - BMW for short .
That was a rather unsavoury episode .
The second defect is that the grace period of five years creates rather a long delay .
Five years until liberalisation takes effect is a long time ; it will delay competition and the beneficial effects of liberalisation .
I have heard that the German Government intends to keep stonewalling .
That is anti-competitive stupidity .
The sad thing is that it has become a trade mark of the German Government .
I hope they will desist from such action in the Council .
The bottom line is that we have a compromise with which we can live and which we ought to adopt .
I can only echo the words spoken by Mr Lehne , who I wish to thank at this point for all his work : we should bring this matter to a conclusion now and avoid any further delay at second reading .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the subject of today 's debate is liberalisation of the market in spare parts .
This would involve authorising producers , other than motor vehicle manufacturers , to manufacture these parts .
The report by Mr Lehne is certainly a step in the right direction .
I should like to express support for the report 's conclusions , both on my own behalf and on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
As a supporter of a liberal economy , I realise , as I am sure we all do , that there are two essential prerequisites to a sound and effective liberal economy .
These are , on the one hand , the freedom to produce and sell a range of products and , on the other , protection of the original producer 's intellectual property , which is equivalent to protecting his or her copyright .
The point is that complete economic freedom will not be effective if we fail to respect the property of the person who had the original idea .
Essentially , that person has a moral right to the product he or she devised and owned first .
On the other hand , there can be no economic freedom either if copyright results in monopoly of the market and restricts economic freedom .
I am convinced that in this sector , namely the spare parts sector , the situation to date in countries where the original producer 's copyright restrictions applied was de facto economic restriction .
Product prices were higher and the intellectual property owner , namely the motor manufacturer , exercised a monopoly .
If we wish to achieve a balance between free market legislation on the one hand , and the right to intellectual property on the other , we must nonetheless curtail intellectual property rights to a certain extent .
I believe this report is a step in that direction .
I therefore support it and congratulate its author , Mr Lehne .
In so doing I am basing myself on economic liberalism , which is the system generating the most efficient , effective and best quality production , provided certain guidelines are observed .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am not an old hand who has been dealing with this matter for 17 years , but I am none the less delighted that this compromise worked out by the Committee on Legal Affairs - and our thanks are due to the rapporteur for that - will finally enable us to move into a new phase .
No one should underestimate how important it is to consumers whether there is a repair clause , for example , and it is also important whether or not consumers in some Member States remain at the mercy of the monopolistic policies of major manufacturers .
It does actually seem that some companies are using high prices for spare parts to compensate themselves for the impact of fierce price competition and are then citing design protection to justify this policy .
Naturally enough , many of the lobbyists who have made representations to us have no wish to be deprived of that option , but anyone who goes on to assert that we must save the motor industry by preserving the parts monopoly has failed to understand the economy in all its complexity .
The motor industry whinges about the measures it has to implement to combat climate change , and it whinges about insufficient protection of its designs .
I do believe , however , that innovative parts of that industry are not whinging but are getting on with their innovation .
After all , it is only a matter of protecting designs , not patents .
It is high time we learned to distinguish rather more sharply between the two .
The safety argument that was also advanced by the major manufacturers was ultimately refuted in the impact assessment , and it should also be noted that the European consumer bodies have delivered a favourable response to the present compromise .
Now comes a new attempt to extend the grace period to eight years for countries where high levels of protection are currently in force .
I appeal to you that five years is more than enough .
I would not like to see this compromise package being unwrapped again .
We Greens shall stand by this compromise , and I consider it very important and very desirable that the House as a whole should do likewise .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to express my fundamental disagreement with the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 98 / 71 / EC on the legal protection of designs .
My disagreement concerns the proposal as a whole , not just some minor problems with the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal aims to deal with competition problems in the automotive industry by an unprecedented curtailment of the legal protection that industrial design rights afford to spare parts .
Such an approach flies in the face not only of the Lisbon Strategy but also of the universally accepted and frequently evoked trend towards a greater protection of intellectual property rights , including their enforcement .
It is a proven fact that there are no reasons , either economic or legal or with regard to employment , for restricting the rights of design right holders .
I should also like to point out the fact that every economy benefits from the monopoly allowed by the legal protection of designs as this promotes more growth .
In addition , account should be taken of the principle that intellectual property rights , including design rights , can only be restricted under exceptional circumstances in matters of public interest , which is certainly note the case here .
The negative consequences of this directive , if adopted , would be felt most strongly in the European automotive industry .
There are ample arguments to suggest that liberalisation of the spare parts aftermarket as proposed by the Commission would actually harm the consumer by introducing low quality and dangerous parts into the market .
If the so-called independent producers were to produce standard parts of high quality , thereby requiring advanced technology , such production would not be economically attractive to them .
The excessive nature of the proposed directive can be illustrated by the curious and incomprehensible opinion expressed by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , which on the one hand supports the proposal as a whole in the name of the sacred slogan of liberalisation of the internal aftermarket , while on the other it says that ' the abolition of design protection is contrary to internationally recognised principles of intellectual property protection and would constitute a dangerous precedent for the protection of intellectual property rights in other areas as well at a time when the European Union has undertaken , in particular within the WTO , to press for the acceptance by third countries of a protection regime for intellectual property rights which would put an end to imitation and counterfeiting ' .
That really needs no further comment .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this revision of the Design Directive revolves around the question of whether or not the protection that is rightly afforded to the design of car bodies should be extended to matching visible spare parts , such as wing mirrors and headlights .
The consequence of extending - in my opinion overextending - the protection of designs would be to give vehicle manufacturers a monopoly in a market valued at EUR 13 billion .
Design protection for spare parts would exempt about 25 % of the entire market in spare parts from the scope of the Motor Vehicle Block Exemption Regulation .
The repair clause proposed by the European Commission ensures that the Block Exemption Regulation , which is the basic law governing the motor vehicle sector , will apply to the entire spare parts and repair market , as is the case at the present time in only Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom .
The transitional period of five years proposed by the PPE-DE Group for the entry into force of the directive is adequate and , in my opinion , more than generous .
Let me sound a warning , however , against further delays , including any that might be caused by the Council , because consumers have been waiting quite a long time now for lower repair bills and cheaper insurance premiums while these lengthy discussions have been taking place here in the House and among the Member States .
Moreover , we should not leave it to the European Court of Justice to determine the inevitable consequence of further inaction but should be creative in our role as legislators .
On the basis of the standards we set tomorrow , the Council should endeavour to reach a decision too .
( PL ) Madam President , legal protection of industrial design is intended to protect the benefits of product design , but it must not be allowed to restrict competition and result in unjustifiably high prices .
The introduction of the repair clause achieves a fair balance between legal protection of intellectual property and the need for freedom of competition .
It also protects 260 million European drivers against a monopoly in the purchase of must-match spare parts for the repair of motor vehicles .
I support Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 and 8 which have been tabled .
I am opposed to Amendments 6 , 7 , and 9 .
These changes are beneficial for the single market , SMEs and consumers .
I should like to thank Mr Lehne , the rapporteur , for all his work and for the compromises he brokered regarding amendment of the Directive on design protection .
Madam President , I think this is a historic day , as we are finally going to deal with this vexed question and this anomaly in the internal market .
I think we should remember briefly how we come to be here .
I was involved , before I came into this Parliament , with the issue that has given rise to these discrepancies in the market .
Frankly , intellectual property and its sanctity are not an issue here .
In fact , this is actually a much more fundamental issue .
Intellectual property is , after all , a right granted to producers , but it is a right that they must not abuse in an anti-competitive way .
In a number of countries , particularly in the United Kingdom , where this movement started , it was quite clear to the Monopolies Commission at the time that the car manufacturers were abusing that monopoly , and that is why it was removed .
Now , that does not in any way undermine the importance of intellectual property protection .
I just want to make that clear to a number of colleagues who have made that point .
The second point I want to make is to draw the attention of colleagues to an important measure that the Internal Market Committee introduced a few months ago - and I was privileged to be rapporteur - on motor vehicle type approval .
For the first time , we now have a regime in which independently manufactured parts that are a critical part of the safety and environmental systems of vehicles have to be tested independently to the same standards as the vehicle manufacturer 's own parts .
That new proposal effectively completely removes the argument about safety that I heard Mr Strož repeat yet again .
That is gone : this Parliament has made sure it is gone .
So , we have dealt with the two crucial issues , and I think it is about time we moved forward .
I am pleased that the car manufacturers have finally accepted the fact that you cannot re-regulate a market .
Colleagues , you know we cannot re-regulate a market .
This is an extraordinary anomaly .
It has been allowed to go on for a long time .
It is something that we want to do to complete the internal market .
I think we are being very generous in offering a five-year transition period .
I hope the Council will accept that .
Let us put this issue to rest and let us go on and tackle the real issue , which is how we have a thriving car industry in the future .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after a number of amendments , Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the proposal for a directive on the legal protection of designs or models .
I regret that the text adopted makes provision in the short term for the elimination of protection of designs and models of visible car body panels .
If this decision is upheld , it will have negative repercussions on car manufacturers in the EU , with no real advantage for consumers .
The EU regularly issues reminders as to the decisive role of the protection of intellectual property in business competitiveness .
For many years the institutions and the Member States have worked hard to secure Community regulations governing intellectual property rights on the internal market .
The current proposal totally contradicts this policy and will do substantial damage to Community protection of intellectual property rights .
Protection must not be refused for spare car parts , or for many other complex products which are the result of original artistic creativity and major investment packages .
Contrary to what has been claimed , although never established , removing protection for spare car parts would not lead to any gains by consumers .
End user gains are not demonstrated by the quality-price ratio .
It even emerges in a study requested by the European Commission that full liberalisation of the spare car part market would not necessarily benefit consumers in terms of price , due to the number of intermediaries between the suppliers of spare parts and the end user .
Removing protection would actually only benefit economic operators who will not be compelled to cover the costs of creation and who , unlike manufacturers who have to preserve their image , will be less concerned with respecting the characteristics that buyers may expect from the product .
The Commission proposal could therefore lead to the emergence of parts of poorer quality , or it could at least encourage forgery .
For all these reasons , I regret the position adopted by the Commission .
I have stated this and I continue to support the two amendments that I have tabled in plenary , along with fifty of my fellow Members , in favour of a transitional period of eight years to protect designs and models .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate about design protection of visible spare parts has indeed been going on for almost an entire generation of Members of this House .
We have been discussing this for 17 years , but up to now we have not managed to reach a final agreement on this important economic law or to harmonise the laws of the Member States to a sufficient degree .
It is now three years since the launch of the present Commission proposal and finally we are going to vote on a first reading tomorrow .
Mr Lehne 's report points us in the right direction .
It has respect for the intellectual property of the design of the complex product as a whole and at the same time it gives us the scope for an internal market in spare parts to operate properly .
The present fragmentation of the internal market is no longer defensible .
It deprives the producer of the parts - by which I mean the independent producer - of the opportunity afforded by the benefits of scale of the internal market .
It deprives independent repair companies of the opportunity to choose their own suppliers , and it deprives the consumer of the opportunity or advantage of the downward pressure on prices that can normally be taken for granted when a competitive market is operating properly .
Now , with the new directive - Malcolm Harbour pointed this out just now too , the new directive on the type approval of vehicles - we have also removed the last obstacle , that of safety .
It is therefore time to take the plunge and make a final decision .
As far as I am concerned , we do not even need this five-year transitional arrangement any more , but as , throughout all these years - 16 of the 17 years of the debate - I too have learned that politics is the art of the possible , I can live with those five years , with that compromise .
To postpone it any longer , Madam President , really would not be acceptable .
Let us here choose the internal market .
This is an aspect of the internal market which we can very clearly demonstrate is to the advantage of the consumer .
Let us make a choice for the consumer .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal intends to allow companies other than manufacturers to produce spare parts , on the basis that this will reduce the price of parts and insurance .
This is the idyllic presentation we have heard from the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services .
There is nothing to show that there will be any real benefit to consumers .
The countries that have already removed protection have not observed any obvious progress .
The Commission 's own surveys confirm this , as our rapporteur Klaus-Heiner Lehne has just told us .
Removal of intellectual property for designs and models in many industries , not just in the car industry , however , conflicts directly with EU economic and commercial strategy .
This means opening the door to forgeries , and offering the chance to dangerous competitors such as China or India to embark on furious production of these items .
This is the total opposite of the Lisbon Strategy which wanted to make intellectual property the weapon of competitiveness and innovation .
We would certainly be giving our competitors the wrong message with this strategy , and it would be contrary to EU interests within the context of globalisation .
Ladies and gentlemen , this proposal is outdated .
It is inspired by an ideological attitude which , in 2007 , is precariously balanced , since we are now engaged in a crucial battle with new economic giants in order to ensure the survival of our industry .
It is hardly the time to throw down our weapons .
Commissioner Mandelson goes to Beijing to force the Chinese to respect intellectual property , while over here we are now calling this into question .
This proposal ought to be simply abandoned as unrealistic and irresponsible .
Now that we are debating the issue , we must behave as good legislators .
That is why , at the very least , we lend our support to the rapporteur 's compromise and call on the House to vote for the amendment as signed by 53 Members for a transitional period of eight years .
( DA ) Madam President , we have witnessed how the liberalisation of old monopolies in Europe has created stimulating competition within trade and industry as regards better products and lower prices for consumers .
The market in spare car parts is no exception .
For many years , car manufacturers have had a strong monopoly on spare parts ; this is a significant element of car design .
In practice , we are talking about approximately 20 % of all spare parts sold in a very large EU market .
The total annual turnover is around EUR 42 billion , or DKK 300 billion , according to the Commission 's estimates .
According to an EU directive adopted nearly 10 years ago , the Member States still have the opportunity to maintain monopolies that protect the automobile industry to an unreasonable extent .
The Commission proposal , which will mean the welcome liberalisation of this market , will have at least three major advantages .
Firstly , industry will be stimulated to invest in the manufacture of spare parts , which typically requires large amounts of fixed capital .
There is currently no such stimulation , as much of the EU market is covered by monopolies and is therefore closed to non-original after-market spare parts .
Secondly , consumers will experience falling prices for spare car parts because there will be more competition between manufacturers .
Thirdly and finally , the full implementation of the repair clause should result in falling car insurance premiums .
An extremely significant proportion of the spare parts market that is covered by design protection originates from claims that are covered by insurance policies .
I must mention Mr Harbour 's remarks on safety in connection with the manufacture of critically important spare parts from all manufacturers .
Mr Lehne deserves a great deal of praise for the work that he has done in connection with the report , which I fully support .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all MEPs who have contributed to this debate .
I have listened carefully , not only to this discussion , but to other commentary on this proposal for some considerable time .
So , in closing , let me stress a few key points .
The current situation with a mixed design protection regime is creating trade distortions , which is bad for the internal market , bad for business and bad for consumers .
The full liberalisation of the spare parts aftermarket promises net benefits in many respects .
It would allow for more competition and access and participation of SMEs in the market .
Consumers would benefit from more choice and lower prices .
Besides the legal certainty , it would also simplify the daily lives of administrations , courts , companies - especially SMEs - and consumers .
Lastly , the proposed repair clause is derived from and is in full accord with the principles of intellectual property protection .

I therefore ask the European Parliament for its support and repeat what many speakers here have said - but particularly what Mr Lehne and Mr Harbour have said - that the European Parliament will send out a strong signal in favour of a solution that the Community so urgently needs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 12 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )

in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Lehne , the rapporteur , very much for his work on this document .
I believe we should support the report before us today , as the so-called repair clause achieves a balance between legal protection of intellectual property and free competition and consumer protection .
This clause aims to prevent the emergence of unjustified monopolies , and its introduction represents a further step towards the creation of a single market .
I agree with my fellow Member that in the present global context it is best to prevent a situation arising that would be detrimental to the European Union 's internal market .
Pursuant to the Directive now in force , different legal practices exist in different Member States .
Research shows that in those Member States that retained design protection for spare parts in their legislation , spare parts cost between 6.4 % and 10.3 % more than in countries where the market has been liberalised .
Finally , I should like to point out that the market concerned has been completely liberalised in Poland .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Preparation of the European Council ( Brussels , 13-14 December 2007 ) ( debate )
As the next item we have the Council and Commission statements on preparations for the meeting of the European Council in Brussels on 13 and 14 December 2007 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming European Council will first note with satisfaction the signing of the Lisbon Treaty , which is to take place in the Portuguese capital tomorrow , and the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which will take place here today in a little while .
It will also call for the process of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty to be concluded swiftly so that the Treaty can enter into force on 1 January 2009 .
The Lisbon Treaty , as I have said , will provide the Union with a stable and lasting institutional framework that will allow it to fully concentrate on the political challenges ahead , including globalisation and climate change , as clearly underlined at the informal meeting of Heads of State or Government on 19 April .
In this context , the European Council will adopt a Declaration on Globalisation .
The Declaration will make it clear that , in view of the global challenges that confront us , the European Union has both an opportunity and a responsibility to act .
The Union 's internal and external policies need to be harnessed to that end .
I am thinking of delivery on the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs , fulfilment of the ambitious commitments on climate change and energy agreed at the Spring 2007 European Council , definition of a global response to the recent turbulence in the financial markets , promotion of free trade and openness , work with our partners to pursue vigorous and coherent development strategies , development of a comprehensive European migration policy and efficient use of instruments and development of capabilities of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the European Security and Defence Policy , so as to allow the Union to play a growing part in building a safer world .
Finally , the European Union will help to ensure that globalisation is a source of opportunity rather than a threat and that it contributes to the prosperity of the individual .
We also hope to establish at the forthcoming European Council a Reflection Group , to help the Union anticipate and meet challenges more effectively in the next twenty to thirty years .
The European Council will review the progress made in the area of freedom , security and justice .
We should mention , first , the abolition of controls at the internal borders of the new Member States , a measure of great significance and great importance for the daily lives of our citizens .
The implementation of the policy on migration will also be examined and , in particular , the progress made in the implementation of the Global Approach to Migration with regard to Africa and the Mediterranean , as well as the Global Approach to the Eastern and South-Eastern neighbouring regions .
There will be a report , in this context , on the organisation of the first Euro-Med Ministerial meeting on Migration , which will be taken into account in preparing the Joint Strategy and Action Plan for the second Africa / EU Summit , as reported here yesterday .
Other aspects to be examined in the area of freedom , security and justice will include the work to be undertaken to combat terrorism , notably as regards radicalisation and recruitment , and the progress in judicial cooperation .
On economic , social and environmental issues , the European Council will review the work that has been done in the relevant areas with a view to the preparation of the next cycle of the Renewed Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs , to be approved at the European Council in Spring 2008 .
The discussion at the informal meeting of Heads of State or Government in October sought to strengthen the external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy and confirmed that the Renewed Lisbon Strategy is still the right framework to meet the principal challenges that confront us , in particular the challenge of globalisation .
It also confirmed that Europe is making progress and that the objectives set are still appropriate , and the main focus of the new cycle will therefore be to maintain the necessary stability to consolidate gains and press on with reforms .
The European Council will emphasise the need to strengthen European competitiveness with the advantages of the single market combined with a sustainable industrial policy and promotion of innovation and skills .
Development of the external dimension and improvement of the conditions in which consumers and undertakings , particularly small and medium-sized undertakings , operate will also be emphasised .
In the employment and social policy area , the European Council will endorse the agreement on the common principles of flexicurity , underlining the role of the social partners in the design , implementation and monitoring of the relevant policies .
The European Council will also report the results of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and invite Member States to strengthen efforts to prevent and combat discrimination .
I must also stress the importance of carrying forward the Energy Policy for Europe established by the Spring European Council .
The progress achieved in the discussions on the third internal market package for gas and electricity and the debate on the Strategic Energy Technology Plan will also be noted .
The European Council will then review the implementation of the Sustainable Development Strategy and it is expected to agree that the objectives and priorities under the seven key challenges contained in that strategy remain fully valid .
It will also welcome the Commission Communication on an integrated maritime policy and invite the Commission to come forward with the initiatives and proposals contained in the Action Plan .
On external relations , the European Council is expected , on the basis of Ministers ' discussions at the latest General Affairs and External Relations Council held last Monday , to concentrate on the process of defining the future status of Kosovo , in particular , in an assessment of the period of negotiation .
Since , as you know , Belgrade and Pristina failed to reach an agreement , it is hoped that the European Council will also discuss the role that the European Union may play in the process in future and the course of action to be taken in this connection with a view to resolving the issue , strengthening stability in the region and helping to bring it closer to the Union .
The European Council will stress the importance of the various summits held in the past six months , in particular the summits with Brazil and Africa .
The summit with Brazil was , as you know , an unprecedented and brilliant initiative and the EU-Africa Summit achieved some very encouraging results , which I had occasion to mention in the Assembly yesterday .
Lastly , attention will be drawn to the progress recorded in relations with other regions , notably the Mediterranean , and in the area of cooperation for development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council 's conclusions reflect the results of the intense work done in the past six months and show that the main objectives of the Portuguese Presidency have been achieved .
The European Union will still have a highly ambitious agenda of work before it .
We believe that under future presidencies it will continue to proceed in the direction of a Europe of high growth , social prosperity and sustainable development , strengthening its role in global terms and in its relations with its partners at bilateral and also at multilateral level . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the last European Council in Lisbon in October we were able not only to reach political agreement on a new Treaty but also to launch a debate at Head of State or Government level on Europe 's interest and the best way to promote that interest in the era of globalisation .
The Lisbon Treaty will be signed tomorrow , and on Friday the European Council will start on its task of seeking concrete results for a Europe at the service of citizens in the age of globalisation .
I think it is important to stress the link between these two facts .
Europe is solving its institutional problems but it is doing so primarily because it takes the interests of its citizens into account and also because it seeks to project its interests and values at global level .
Both ways are , ultimately , ways of achieving the same objectives .
The signing of the Lisbon Treaty is no mere formality .
It signals 27 States ' agreement on a Treaty and it marks their acceptance of a common commitment to Europe .
It is , without doubt , a highly potent symbol of the long way we have come since the deadlocks of 2005 .
Similarly , the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the President of the Council , the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission , which will take place in this House in a few hours ' time , is proof positive that the European Union intends to keep the rights of citizens at the heart of its activities .
On Friday , the European Council will give us another opportunity to show a European Union that is seeking to define its position in the light of globalisation .
This positioning is partly to do with the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
The truth of the matter is that what we are consolidating today is simply the external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy , essentially the idea that Europe 's response to globalisation must be pro-active and confident , not negative and passive .
Only yesterday the Commission adopted an important package of communications and decisions preparing a new cycle of the Strategy for the period 2008-2010 .
Mr President , the Lisbon Strategy is working : it is creating growth and jobs .
We now have the best figures since the 1980s in terms of job creation .
The Lisbon Strategy is helping to position Europe and European citizens to succeed in the age of globalisation .
The Lisbon Strategy has given Europe a common , pragmatic economic agenda , fully respecting national differences .
However , complacency would be fatal to Europe 's prospects of shaping globalisation .
Much more remains to be done : progress is uneven between policy areas , and some Member States are moving much faster than others .
Yesterday 's package responds to the need for Europe to act , to face up to growing uncertainties in the global economy , and to the need for an even higher priority for the social dimension , education and skills , but also information and communication technologies , flexicurity , the need to have a common energy policy and to fight climate change .
The declaration on globalisation that the European Council is about to adopt fully acknowledges the role of the Lisbon Strategy .
The declaration should set out our conviction that the Union has every reason to feel confident about its future .
Today 's European Union is showing how the preservation of European political , economic and social values and the defence of European interests are fully compatible with a proactive approach to globalisation .
Today we are well placed to continue the internal reforms , to reinforce our ability to compete at global level and , at the same time , to maintain our values of economic and social cohesion and solidarity .
Today , we are well placed to provide the global vision that the world needs for a multilateral order , a system of collective security , open and fair trade and sustainable development , which respects the environmental balance of our planet .
Today , we are well placed to pursue European interests in the partnerships and in the relations with our allies and the world 's other great powers .
Two weeks ago , together with the President of the European Council , I was in China and India for the summits between the European Union and these two emerging powers .
It was fascinating to see the pace of economic development in that part of the world .
We need to be attentive to what is going on in Asia .
It is true that economic development has helped to take millions of human beings out of poverty .
I have no doubts their progress will have a direct impact on future generations of Europeans .
The crucial question is : what are we going to do in the face of such a structural transformation ?
We should have no illusions : globalisation also means deep changes in the world balance of power .
The truth is that , not many years ago , here in Europe , when people spoke about globalisation , they were thinking mainly about Westernisation or , sometimes , Americanisation .
Today , when we in Europe speak about globalisation , many people think , above all , of the growing , emerging economic powers in Asia .
So the world is changing , and I believe this is also making the need to adapt our common European project to the new challenges more obvious .
That is why , today , there are conditions for accepting the declaration on globalisation that European Union leaders will adopt this week .
It is more obvious than ever that even the greatest powers of Europe cannot tackle the challenges of globalisation alone .
It is obvious that , more than ever , we need a strong European Union .
I believe that the rise of the powers of Asia on one hand and the awareness about the climate change challenge on the other are , in fact , two very important driving forces for the European Union , because they show us that there is a challenge called globalisation and that there is also an opportunity to grasp .
Therefore , I think that this week 's European Council will have a very important meaning and a great significance .
Some years ago it would have been impossible for European leaders to agree on the declaration on globalisation they are about to support .
Now it is quite clear that the goals of the European Union are not just internal : the goals of the European Union are also global .
We need to promote our interests and to promote our values in the new global order that is emerging .
That is why I think we can take very important decisions this week .
We should do that with full confidence in our capacities , above all trusting the ability of European societies to rise to the circumstances .
In particular , we should not forget that , in Europe , we have impressive human skills , great traditions of knowledge and critical knowledge , the capacity to adapt .
We have sophisticated scientific and technological knowledge .
More importantly , we have free societies organised under the rule of law , and this gives us a great advantage in a world that is changing - and changing fast .
This is the European way of life .
To preserve it and to improve it is our best investment .
With the right policy agenda , we can face globalisation with confidence .
Globalisation poses specific challenges .
One of these is mass migration , which is , to some extent , a new phenomenon in Europe - at least with the dimension it has taken recently .
Last week the Commission adopted a communication on migration , which will be discussed in the European Council .
It stresses the need to see the issue in an overall perspective .
It is , of course , central to our border controls and security , but it also has huge economic and social implications , and demands to be a central theme in our relations with partners worldwide .
Migration is close to the concerns and interests of citizens .
It cannot be tackled by any individual Member State on its own .
As I have said several times , also in this House , it is completely absurd in a European Union of 27 Member States , where we have freedom of circulation of people , to have 27 policies of immigration .
We need to have a common approach to immigration , and we need to recognise that the problems some of our Member States are facing should also be considered as European problems .
( Applause )
We need an integrated policy , one which makes sense to European citizens , to immigrants and to international partners .
The goal of our document presented to this Council is to spark debate , first at the European Council , but also in European societies , including , of course , this Parliament , and launch a process leading to a comprehensive policy .
By addressing an issue that is a central concern of European citizens , just a day after the signature of the Lisbon Treaty , the Union continues its approach , one which is based on concrete results for Europe and concrete results for our citizens .
This is the right way to move forward , and I think this week 's European summit can take us a step further in our wish and our will to shape globalisation and shape it with our values .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon European Council marks a return to a Europe of achievements and added value .
For the people of Europe , this Council sets the seal on greater freedom of movement and closer integration .
Many institutional problems have been resolved and two years of stalling and uncertainty are drawing to a close .
Tomorrow in Lisbon , 27 signatures on the Reform Treaty will confirm our shared destiny in a European 21st century based on our common values , our prosperity , security and solidarity .
From January 2009 we aim to apply our new method of operation .
This is important because the Lisbon Treaty provisions will have an impact on the next European elections and thus on the appointment of the President of the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Charter of Fundamental Rights is the major innovation in the Lisbon Treaty because it delivers a clear response to two basic questions : who are we and what is the nature of our joint endeavour ?
The Charter embodies our sharing of values and , at the same time , reflects a consensus on our unity in diversity .
If we neglect either one of those elements we will incur opposition and reluctance on the part of our peoples .
I hope that both the spirit and the letter of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights will apply across the widest possible area of Europe , for this Charter truly does enshrine our individual identification with the European Union and our connection to a European Community of shared values .
The Reform Treaty also extends the scope of democracy by enhancing the power of the European Parliament , establishing a fairer voting system in the Council , giving the national parliaments a bigger role as guarantors of subsidiarity and bringing the Union closer to ordinary people , who will now be entitled to initiate legislation .
The European Parliament will have more duties and more responsibilities to Europe 's citizens .
Our Assembly must therefore be more rigorous , and it needs a higher profile .
My group is ready to contribute both in the legislative process and in bringing forward new ideas .
I also support the proposal to set up a Reflection Group .
It will have a crucially important role to play in charting our course over the next 20 or 30 years .
If we intend to build a Europe founded on prosperity and security , as well as values and a shared sense of solidarity , we need the capacity to reflect on the future of the European social model .
Once the treaty has been ratified we shall be able to focus on those policy areas where people want Europe to do more .
Issues like climate change , energy , immigration and security need to be tackled at European level .
Ladies and gentlemen , the second decision anticipated in Lisbon is of more than symbolic significance .
It concerns extension of the Schengen acquis to those Member States which joined the Union in 2004 .
Freedom of movement is a sensitive issue , particularly for people who have borne the yoke of occupation and have been deprived of freedom .
Living in a Community of shared values cannot be reconciled with the imposition of distinctions between people on the move inside the European Union .
Having said that , equal treatment also implies equality before the law .
If those principles fall by the wayside , we will never achieve social cohesion , and the people we represent will turn their backs on Europe .
I also welcome the extension of police and judicial cooperation among the Member States .
In an open Europe , it offers an effective means of combating the scourges of trafficking in human beings and illegal immigration .
Ladies and gentlemen , Thursday 's European Council brings us one step nearer to achieving a more open , more democratic Europe and one with a capacity to act .
And remember , too , that a Europe which guarantees unity in diversity contributes not only to stability within its own borders but also to peace throughout the world .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President of the Commission rightly referred to one of the core challenges of the present time , namely the question of how we should organise home-affairs policy in Europe on the basis of the Treaty that is to be signed tomorrow , on the basis of the new legal structures of the European Union .
He cited the problem of mass immigration into Europe as an example of the way in which an internal European area , by which I mean a legal area that has external borders but no longer has internal borders , can be organised .
We do that on an intergovernmental level .
No one should be under any illusions - the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement is not the law of the European Union ; it is not Community law , but an intergovernmental instrument .
That in itself shows that we still have a structural defect , for intergovernmental instruments are primarily a form of law that focuses on national sovereignty rather than on the creation of an effective European framework .
This is a fundamental distinction .
The fact is that law based on national sovereignty enables every manifestation of national particularism and every individual reservation to block the progress of the Union .
In view of the challenges facing us in the field of migration policy , that is something we cannot afford .
To that extent , President Barroso is perfectly correct , for it is wrong that some - in southern Europe , for example - should be under intense migratory pressure , while those at the other geographical ends of Europe wash their hands of the problem .
That cannot go on indefinitely .
The step we are now taking in relaunching the integration process on the basis of a new Treaty is therefore a first step that must be followed by more , by which I mean closer integration in other areas , including those of the common home-affairs policy , the common security policy and the common justice policy .
This brings me to my second point , which is of particular importance to us at the present moment .
We shall be formally signing the Charter of Fundamental Rights today .
Splendid !
An exquisite table , magnificent chairs , a congenial atmosphere , as always .
( Interjection by Daniel Cohn-Bendit : And magnificent Members of Parliament ! )
Yes , wonderful Members of Parliament too .
Some Members , however , are nicer than others , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
( Laughter )
The setting will be marvellous , as always .
Yet it all reminds me of a close friend of mine who has been married several times in his life and has also filed for divorce several times .
And every time I attended his wedding and was about to go home after the solemn celebration and the magnificent function that had been laid on , I would say to him , ' You gave us a great day , as always ' .
I feel a bit like that today .
I was in Rome - along with you , Mr Pöttering , and a number of other Members who are here today .
We experienced that in Rome .
It was like a wedding - celebratory , fine food , a wonderful ceremony , great music ,
( Interjection by Daniel Cohn-Bendit : Beautiful city ! )
a beautiful city , a splendid atmosphere , no Cohn-Bendit there , so just magnificent !
( Laughter )
We went home afterwards and experienced the divorce .
And today we are off to the next wedding , this time in Lisbon : splendid atmosphere , wonderful city , no Cohn-Bendit - everything just as it should be .
I only hope that another petition for divorce will not follow in Ireland .
In short , ladies and gentlemen , we have no reason to celebrate until the Treaty has actually been ratified in all 27 countries .
It makes sense to ratify the Treaty .
Those anti-Europeans who wanted to scupper the constitution because they believed they could halt the integration process that way have certainly been taught a lesson by this Treaty .
It is true that the Lisbon Treaty does not satisfy all our wishes , but it is better than destroying Europe by constantly opposing integration .
( Applause )
And those who rejected the draft Constitutional Treaty because they believed it was short on social policy and needed a stronger social element will not find that extra element in this new Treaty , but the proclamation of the Charter of Human Rights and its integration into the Treaty have made it possible to realise a number of fundamental social rights .
There were no doubt reasons for the rejection of the draft constitution by extremists on both sides .
I can sympathise more with those who rejected it on social grounds than with the anti-Europeans , who reject the Treaty on principle because they do not want this Union .
One thing , however , is quite clear : this Treaty can only be a stepping stone .
It is a step forward , but it does not take us far enough .
Nevertheless , it is a step that must be taken now in any event .
I hope that this marriage is for life and that the divorce lawyers will stay at home , for none of the challenges of the coming years - and my honourable colleague Mr Swoboda will shortly be speaking about Kosovo - will be surmountable unless we set Europe on firm institutional foundations .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Mr Schulz is perfectly correct that this is a week of celebration , solemnly proclaiming the Charter protecting our citizens from abuse of the great power vested inside the Union , and the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon strengthening our capacity to act and improving dramatically the quality of our democracy .
I am delighted that Prime Minister Brown has finally decided to show up , although , unfortunately , to show up late .
I am afraid that is par for the course for British participation in the EU .
Please be careful that Mr Brown signs in pen rather than in pencil !
( Laughter )
The European Council is our first chance to step forward decisively from this introspective period of reflection and start to do some serious politics .
First up is Kosovo , and here the Union is about to supervise the independence of a country without the approval of the UN Security Council .
It is crucial for the future of Kosovo and the rest of us that those who fear that such a bold step will create a precedent choose the wise path of constructive abstention and do not seek to block the self-determination of Kosovans .
The European Council should also begin to take some firm decisions on the size and shape of the ESDP mission to Kosovo as a signal of its intention .
We should also , moreover , reiterate our refusal to sign a stabilisation and association agreement with Serbia before the delivery of its war criminals to the ICC .
It is in this context that the Sarkozy-inspired groupe des sages could be put to some serious work to build up some alternative scenarios for the future of the Balkans , but it must not mess up our current commitments .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the EU 's leaders are assembled in Brussels for a European Council meeting on the day after the signing of the new Reform Treaty .
Ireland is one of the countries where the provisions of the Treaty will be put to a referendum ; if the campaign in support of the Treaty is run on a visibly professional footing , I believe that the referendum will prove to be a great success .
And , further to what Mr Schulz said about the dangers of a negative coming from Europe , it behoves me , as a representative from Ireland , speaking at this round of the debate on the future of Lisbon , to point out a number of home truths .
Firstly , to congratulate all those who have been involved in bringing about the final agreement on the Lisbon Treaty .
But that is only the written document , and we ask ourselves - and often in this Parliament we ask ourselves - what does Europe want to see ?
What do the people and citizens of Europe want to know about ?
Yes , the citizens of Europe want more Europe .
But more Europe , to them , does not mean what a lot of us inside this room might think .
It does not mean new regulations , new laws - new restrictions , as they would see it .
It means a cleverer Europe , a Europe that delivers a response to their everyday needs .
That is why the Lisbon Strategy - the continuation and the improvement of the Lisbon Strategy - is so important as regards what would be happening within the Lisbon Council meeting .
Secondly , the whole issue of migration , which was touched on by many Members , is putting enormous pressure on resources , not just in financial terms as regards the cost to countries , especially those in the southern Mediterranean who are forced to expend huge amounts of money on tackling this problem , but on the social cohesion within those countries as well .
It is creating enormous problems and drawing on the goodwill and efforts that will be there .
Thirdly , and most importantly of all , the whole issue with regard to the kind of development of a European vision that we want to see around the world as is now being played out in Bali at the Climate Change Conference , as will be played out in the future at some other conferences in New York in the coming months , and , most importantly , that we have to tell our citizens and inform them properly of what comes before them .
Finally , could I say to President Barroso and to Vice-President Wallström , as we are having a referendum in Ireland : no tax , no tax , no tax .
The Treaties do not give you the power to come up with tax proposals .
The Commission should stay away from it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have a wonderful gathering here .
The President-in-Office and the Council have been diligent , and the summary they delivered here was marvellous .
What exactly they were summarising escaped me , but the headings were certainly right .
The head manager of the Commission emphasised to us that the Commission has taken up the challenges of globalisation .
He said ' globalisation ' 87 times and ' challenges ' 82 times , so it must be true .
And so to the wedding that Martin was so keen to describe .
It is indeed an interesting state of affairs , for the bridegroom is marrying the same bride for a second time .
That is unusual , even for the weddings you frequent , Martin .
The only thing is that the bride is now a little older , a little more old-fashioned and less sexy than she was in Rome .
But this wedding is necessary .
Today we are all invited .
Because I am attending today and was not there the last time , it will go well .
That makes all the difference .
Before I say something on two important problems , let me refer to the surreal performance of the British Prime Minister in Lisbon .
He had discovered that a subcommittee of a committee of a subcommission was meeting in the House of Commons , and so he could not be present at the signing of the thing he did not want to sign but intended to sign nevertheless , but then later , at the meal , he signed it after all .
It was surreal , but that is Britain today .
It is your problem , not mine !
Now , however , I would like to address two serious matters .
The first is Kosovo .
There is an old Jewish joke which says that , if you have two options , always choose the third .
We have two options .
If we do not recognise Kosovo 's independence , we shall have a conflict on our hands .
If we do recognise it , we shall have a conflict on our hands .
Both options lead to conflict , whether with Kosovo or Serbia .
We in the European Union must now be resolute in showing how we can act , not just how we can talk .
We must develop an Agenda 2020 with a view to bolstering the rule of law in that region , and that agenda must be developed together with Kosovo , with Serbia and with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
We must reinforce the rule of law throughout that region .
We must develop an environment and climate pact .
We must devise a regional development plan with components such as trans-Balkan route networks , giving the region the prospect of accelerated convergence with the European Union with the aim of simultaneous integration of all these countries into the European Union .
The only means we have of preventing conflict is to ensure here that these countries are not only offered the European bonding agent but help to develop it too .
Then we shall see whether the 27 will be able not only to wed their brides but also to bring difficult children into the family so that peace can finally advance in that region .
I am actually talking about the wedding night now .
The second point is just as critical , namely Iran .
The Council will have to take a decision there too .
In this case we can say that the threat of an Iranian nuclear bomb has apparently subsided , if we can believe the US intelligence service .
We are all like little children , always believing what we want to believe .
If people tell us something that does not suit us , we say they are lying .
It they tell us something that suits us , we say they are right .
I do not know who is right , but it would suit me if they were right this time .
In Iran , however , the possibility of a nuclear bomb is not the only problem .
There is also the problem of freedom or , more precisely , the suppression of freedom .
The past few years have seen an incredible upsurge in the oppression of people in Iran .
I believe Europe also has a job to do there .
It is not just about averting the threat of a nuclear bomb .
It is also about the freedom of people in Iran and about how we help civil society to win that freedom .
There are heads of government who think they are clever because they give wise advice and do great and clever things for Europe .
Those who believe , however , that they can sell nuclear reactors in all parts of the world , whether to Libya - a terrorist dictatorship - or to Tunisia , Algeria or Morocco , only to discover at some later date that these nations all want a nuclear bomb , are being hypocritical .
Yesterday 's New York Times wrote something that we have all been saying for the last 30 years , namely that anyone who uses nuclear power for civilian purposes will ultimately use it for military purposes too if there is no alternative .
And we sell nuclear reactors to all African , American and other countries and think we are clever .
We are stupid to do such a thing , That needs to be said .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , the forthcoming European Council will take place in the context of the signature of a new treaty , immediately after a particularly important EU-Africa summit and also - let us not forget - during the first phase of implementation of the Annapolis process .
On the treaty , I believe the Union would be seriously misreading the situation if it thought that this summit agreement marked the end of the crisis of confidence which has dislocated entire sections of our societies from the current thrust of Union economic and social policies .
That problem remains intact .
We would do better to recognise it and prepare responses to it .
A similar reality check seems necessary in terms of our relations with Africa .
The Chair of the African Union Commission , Alpha Konaré , has called on Europe to break with paternalism .
He emphasised that Africa ' could not remain a hunting ground or become a new territory to be conquered ' .
He lambasted - and I quote again - ' the logic of the Economic Partnership Agreements with their dramatic costs for the African people ' .
Significantly , seven Latin American countries created the Bank of the South almost on the same day as the summit , as a means of emancipating themselves from the IMF and of lessening inequalities in their region .
The European Union needs to learn from that and take the measure of this general and growing demand for a fairer , more dignified partnership , including in its way of treating migrants .
Finally , the Middle East , which is apparently missing from the Council agenda : how could the Union agree in Annapolis to be completely sidelined from the structure responsible for implementation of the Roadmap ?
Does it intend to stand by and passively watch the agreement being violated - as was the case last week with the affair of the East Jerusalem settlements ?
Generally speaking , what are our true aspirations for Europe and what resources are we prepared to invest in realising them ?
This is a priority question for the next European Council .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , tomorrow at 11.30 a.m. the Prime Ministers will sign a final Treaty none of them have read .
They are signing a bundle of amendments they cannot even understand .
Yesterday the Danish Parliament refused a referendum on a Treaty they have not read .
They breached the Danish Constitution and may be taken to court so we can have a referendum .
A few of them may have read a full draft ; I doubt it .
The final edition is still impossible to read for one simple reason : it is not consolidated .
The IGC has decided that readable versions will only be printed when the Treaty is ratified by all 27 Member States .
Do not read , sign , is a cynical moral .
All negotiations in the IGC and the linguistic lawyers ' group have been kept absolutely secret so far as many Members in this Parliament are concerned .
The numbering system has been changed three times to make any comparison technically impossible before the signing .
There is not even a table for comparison with the October published edition .
First they undo two referendums rejecting the Constitution .
Then they negotiate in secret and keep the content under a new name .
I still offer a good bottle of wine for just one example of a law which can be approved under the Constitution and not under the Lisbon Treaty .
Even the most experienced legal expert in the Danish Foreign Office has admitted there is not one .
In an expert hearing in the Danish Parliament , I asked three times to have some examples of national law areas where the Lisbon Treaty , with its horizontal clauses and fundamental principles , cannot reach .
I did not get one valid example .
The Lisbon Treaty will dissolve the existing EU , establish a new state with joint citizenship , legal personality and all the tools of nation states .
Most laws will be adopted by civil servants in secret .
The democratic deficit will grow .
My group proposes the signing should be cancelled until you have read the final text .
( Applause )
Mr President , again today many talk grandly about European values of democracy .
Today we will have a pretentious affirmation of a belief in human rights yet , at the same time , the EU elite are preparing to celebrate their greatest stroke of arrogance to date as they make ready to sign the repackaged Constitution without a backward glance towards their people and what they want or what they think .
The 2005 referendums showed Europe to be out of touch , but the lesson learned was not to abandon what the people did not want but to circumvent their opposition by determining this time not to ask them .
Hence the scandal that , across this continent , national powers will be stripped away , superstate structures will be established , a new EU citizenship will be created , legal personality will be bestowed on the EU and only a handful of citizens will ever be asked .
Why ?
Because in most states , my own included , the leaders fear the verdict of their people , adding cowardice to their arrogance .
So on a day when there is much talk of human rights , I say : Give the people of Europe the basic political and human right to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to this Constitution , the right to say ' yes ' or ' no ' in a referendum .
( Applause )
( PT ) President-in-Office , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Portuguese Presidency is coming to an end and it has a number of remarkable successes to its credit .
I am not among those who place undue emphasis on the diplomatic initiatives in connection with the Brazil and Africa summits , among others : only time will tell whether they produce concrete measures or whether they were just great events with high media visibility .
But I would stress the structural measures that have been taken , for the benefit of Europe , in these six months .
Three spring to mind : the end of the institutional crisis with the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty , which will be signed tomorrow , the proclamation of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , which will be binding , the historic enlargement of the Schengen area with the integration of nine new Member States and almost 4 million square kilometres , the achievement of strategic viability and the important GALILEO programme , which some people would rather not have , preferring to leave all that to the United States , Russia and China .
I should also like to stress the useful legislative work in cooperation with the European Parliament , and the excellent understanding with the Commission and its President , Dr Durão Barroso .
The interinstitutional cooperation worked well and produced good results .
President-in-Office , I wish you every success at the Council meeting on 14 December .
We expect further important decisions , both in the area of foreign policy , with special reference to Kosovo , and with regard to Europe 's response to the challenges of globalisation .
I should especially like to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on including the question of Europe 's immigration policy on the agenda for the Council , where President Barroso will be able to underline the European Commission 's timely initiatives in this connection .
There are problems and challenges that are clearly beyond the scope of individual Member States and that call for a common approach , this being especially obvious , as already said , in an area without internal borders .
Mr President , allow me to conclude with a national reference .
Portugal has always done its best to serve the common interest when it held the Presidency of the Council .
This was the case in 1992 with Prime Minister Cavaco Silva and with João de Deus Pinheiro , then Minister for Foreign Affairs and now a Member of the European Parliament .
It was the case in 2000 with Prime Minister António Guterres , and it is the case today in the third Portuguese Presidency of the Council of the Union .
Allow me , Secretary of State , to draw attention to your personal commitment , the commitment of Minister Luís Amado and Prime Minister Sócrates , and the commitment of all those who have been actively engaged here , in Brussels and in Lisbon , in ensuring the success of the Presidency .
I should like to draw attention to the work of REPER , to mention the skills of Ambassador Mendonça e Moura and to express thanks for the effective liaison with the European Parliament provided by Dr Alexandre Leitão .
( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , it is the crowning achievement of the Portuguese Presidency that the Treaty of Lisbon is now ready to be signed , and many Members of this Parliament have certainly played their part too .
One of the functions of the Treaty of Lisbon is to strengthen the common foreign and security policy of the EU and to create an institutional basis for it .
A treaty , however , can only create the right conditions , and the will and vigour to pursue a common foreign and security policy are essential too .
It is correct , as some speakers have said , that at this particular juncture , when the Treaty is being signed , Kosovo will be a test of the Member States ' resolve to pursue a common foreign and security policy .
Whatever we decide with regard to Kosovo will pose problems in that region .
There is no new third option , as Mr Cohn-Bendit suggested , because a third option , namely devoting a great deal of money and initiative to that region , has already been pursued for some time .
There is only the option of independence for Kosovo , which will then give rise to a number of problems in the region , or else we could decide not to recognise an independent Kosovo , which would also give rise to a number of problems in the region .
It is quite clear , in my view , that we must abide by the principle that every step which is taken in the coming weeks and months must come from within the region and be taken together with the European Union .
That cannot happen , however , unless the European Union has a common position on this issue .
On the basis of my own experience - and I have been working in that region on behalf of the European Parliament for ten years now - I see only one feasible option , which is to move in the immediate future towards limited , restricted and supervised independence .
I firmly believe , however , that it would be absolutely intolerable and unacceptable if Kosovo declared its independence unilaterally and we more or less acquiesced .
Many politicians from Kosovo are also saying that this process can be jointly pursued .
I saw that at first hand during the recent elections there .
The process can be brought to fruition if the European Union opts for a joint approach .
In the closing days of this Presidency , may I also ask the Council to ensure that there is a common European line , that the common responsibility for that region is exercised by all parties and that all steps that are taken in the coming weeks and months are accompanied by an EU presence in Kosovo .
That is the main requirement .
The decisive factor will not be recognition of Kosovo 's independence but energetic representation of EU security policy in Kosovo , and the Portuguese President of the Council must play his part in making that a reality .
( Applause )
( NL ) Mr President , the new Treaty is being signed at last after years of stalemate , but the parties to it must also at last act as the owners , the real leaders of Europe .
It is high time they stopped simply crowing on the national stage about what they have achieved and started actively canvassing support for this Treaty and pushing for its ratification , so that it can come into force on 1 January 2009 .
The biggest change is in police and justice cooperation .
We need to be clear , and quickly , on how we are going to handle the relevant issues in 2008 , during the transitional period .
Where does the Council stand on Commissioner Frattini 's suggestions about applying the new procedures now , in anticipation of the new rules ?
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is also being formally proclaimed today .
And it is shameful that Member States have weakened the Charter by taking it out of the Treaty and especially by endorsing two opt-outs .
They must now prove in practice that they really mean business on fundamental rights , rather than just paying lip service to them .
Lastly , Mr President , the European Union is being made a bit more democratic and a bit more effective .
But a mature democracy must not only be vigorous , it must also scrutinise the exercise of power , and it must be responsible .
It is time for democracy , time to show responsibility - in the fight against terrorism too - so can we please have an explanation from the Council of the part Europe has played in the illegal activities of the CIA .
( PL ) Mr President , history tends to repeat itself .
Three years ago the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe was signed .
The leaders of the EU Member States were greatly pleased and sure that the document would enter into force .
However , two nations expressed determined opposition in referendums .
The Heads of Government are now signing an almost identical text and count on being able to avoid referendums this time round .
Clearly , they underestimate this fundamental instrument of democracy .
The time publicly designated as a period of reflection was wasted .
Instead of being devoted to consultation , social dialogue and discussion , it was spent in devising machinery for manipulation .
It must be emphasised that the so-called Reform Treaty is a very high-ranking document , since it leads in fact to restrictions on the sovereignty of the Member States .
It transfers many of the prerogatives hitherto reserved for nation states to EU institutions that are not subject to real democratic control .
I am convinced that if the nations of Europe were given a voice , the treaty being signed tomorrow would share the fate of its predecessor .
( ES ) Mr President , a few months ago I telephoned the Ombudsman in my country and while I was hanging on they played ' Let it be ' , which offered little grounds for optimism as regards the complaint being processed by the Office , as indeed proved to be the case .
This is a frequent sensation for those of us who still cannot see that the European Union is doing anything to incorporate the regional issue or stateless nations into its institutional structure and politics .
Every time , unfortunately , there are more people who believe that that day will never come , and the truth is that we are not given many alternatives .
As far as Kosovo is concerned , we hear about the problems here but I have not heard anyone raise the question which to me is the crucial one : what do the Kosovans want ?
With regard to the Lisbon Strategy , we think that there is too much complacency and that this complacency is due , in large measure , to the fact that the indicators for evaluating that strategy are based essentially on growth of GDP .
When are we going to have some indicators of social and environmental progress so that we can evaluate the Lisbon results meaningfully ?
( PT ) We are attending yet another rehearsal of the basic tenets of the neo-liberal policy which has been pursued during the Portuguese Presidency .
The signing tomorrow of the Lisbon Treaty , containing the essentials of the so-called ' European Constitution ' , is undoubtedly the more serious issue representing a qualitative advance in the neo-liberal integration that increasingly aggravates social problems and inequalities .
Instead of responses designed to improve working conditions , they rely on flexicurity to make work even more precarious .
Instead of responses designed to improve living conditions and address the problem of poverty which affects more than 80 million people , they present an even more neo-liberal version of the Lisbon Strategy designed to pursue the liberalisation and privatisation of public services .
So , as with the events of 18 October and the demonstration in Lisbon , the workers and the people will continue the battle against this Treaty and these policies and the campaign for binding referendums on the Treaty after properly conducted , pluralist debates .
( NL ) Mr President , when Venezuela voted recently in a referendum , rejecting Chavez 's plans for a radical change to the constitution by a very narrow majority , the would-be dictator of Venezuela bowed to the will of the people , as leaders ought to in a more or less free country .
I think that we in Europe might learn a lot from his example .
We are seeing a ' European Constitution ' , democratically rejected in two Member States by a large majority of the electorate , dished up to us afresh .
Virtually unaltered , apart from a few cosmetic changes .
There is no room for any more real debate and certainly not for a referendum in countries likely to be critical of it or to vote no .
The European Constitution - sorry , the Reform Treaty - is being signed in Lisbon amid much pomp and ceremony and will then be rushed through the parliaments that support it with indecent haste .
Europe is a sham democracy .
And the way in which the Eurocrats treat the voice of the people was again apparent very recently in what Commissioner Rehn told us about the possibility of Turkish accession .
He is on record as saying that national agreements or specific election pledges must not stand in the way of Turkish accession .
The European mandarins don 't give two hoots about the election promises made to voters about Turkey 's accession .
In Venezuela there is still democracy for the time being , but sadly a lot less of it in Europe .
Mr President , there are some important issues on the agenda of the forthcoming European Council .
I look forward to hearing about improving Europe 's competitiveness , about progress towards Europe 's ambitious goals for tackling climate change and about Europe 's commitment to working with the developing nations to alleviate poverty .
Yet the focus this week will inevitably be on the signing of the Reform Treaty in Lisbon .
As we British Conservatives have consistently said , there was no substantive requirement for this far-reaching Treaty and , just this week , one of Europe 's leading academic experts published a report on the effects of enlargement of the EU .
She has stated clearly what we have been saying for some time , namely that the EU has been operating perfectly well without this Reform Treaty .
She says , and I quote , ' The evidence of practice since May 2004 suggests that the EU 's institutional processes and practice have stood up rather robustly to the impact of enlargement ' .
This is important bearing in mind all we have been told - that the EU could not cope with enlargement without institutional upheaval or even log-jam .
All of this reinforces our view that this Treaty is all about political symbolism rather than any objective assessment of what Europe needs .
In addition to challenging the rationale for this Treaty , we have also been very critical of the process that brought us to this stage .
It beggars belief to claim that this Treaty is not in substance the selfsame European Constitution that was so emphatically rejected when it was put to the vote in France and the Netherlands .
Alone among his fellow leaders , the British Prime Minister persists in perpetuating this myth that the Treaty and the Constitution are different .
The British people do not believe him and the vast majority have repeatedly expressed their view that there should be a referendum .
Mr Brown has ignored their wishes and this has done much to undermine his Government and the European Union more generally .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , in 1981 one per cent of Europe 's population possessed 8 % of its overall wealth .
Twenty-five years on , the wealthiest one per cent has 17 % of total income in the European Union .
Meanwhile , one person in six - a total of 74 million Europeans - lives below the poverty line as defined in the individual Member States .
Were it not for social transfers , around 185 million Europeans - almost 4 % of the population - would slide into poverty .
Hence the need for an active social policy : a policy to redistribute wealth .
The Union 's effort on the social front is , however , particularly puny .
The vision that the Commission has just outlined , of a more socially orientated Europe in the 21st century , is conceptually flawless but bereft of any actual legislative initiative .
Commission President Barroso has just told us that the Lisbon Strategy is bearing fruit .
He is right .
Yet , at the same time , the economic upturn in Europe is threatened by a particularly treacherous version of globalisation , in the shape of financial markets without frontiers .
The so-called ' subprime ' lending crisis had its origins in frenetic consumerism in the United States .
The global financial industry went in for ' special vehicles ' funded through unsound mortgages , and the cream of the banking , insurance and pensions sector treated us to yet another triumph of greed over intelligence .
The financial sector itself , of course , risks nothing : it is ' too big to fail ' .
National central banks and taxpayers will ensure a safe landing for the golden parachutists , and that will not come cheap .
Economic activity in Europe has already slowed down .
Recession is looming in the United States .
The dollar is sinking and prices of raw materials , including basic foodstuffs , are soaring .
The credit crunch is already affecting small and medium-sized companies and would-be home buyers .
Reading the draft conclusion of the Lisbon Council , I find no prospect of Europe bouncing back , and I find that bitterly regrettable .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start with the apparently small victory that French President Sarkozy won by getting rid of the word accession from the negotiations under way with Turkey .
It changes nothing of course , the negotiations will continue ; however , Sarkozy , who is currently the strongest and the most political of the European Heads of State , as borne out by the speech that he gave to this House , then comes to talk to us about Europe 's borders and the Mediterranean Union and people say rather dismissively ' he doesn 't know what he is talking about , what is this Mediterranean Union , he doesn 't know what game he is playing ' .
In my view , the game he is playing is very clear and concerns Europe 's borders : the Mediterranean Union is the strategy of the Europe of nations .
In practice , if the approach were solely one of a relationship between nations , a Mediterranean Union could well be a reasonable way of solving economic , trade , and environmental problems .
It is not reasonable , however , and an alternative needs to be found , if we want something else , if we want a Europe of law , of individual rights in particular , a Europe of citizens rather than a Europe of states .
That is the alternative that the Heads of State , the Commission and the European Union must use to counter Sarkozy 's French strategy of a Europe of nations .
We have to decide whether we want the Charter of Fundamental Rights , one day in the future , to be the Charter of Rights of Turkish citizens , the Charter of Rights of Moroccan citizens , the Charter of Rights of Israeli and Palestinian citizens ; we have to decide whether or not we want to give our Europe such a future , as otherwise the Europe of nations and states will prevail .
To conclude , some people are wearing ' referendum on Europe ' tee-shirts : yes to a European referendum , no to national referendums , because referendums bring out all the populism , extremism , nationalism and communism of our Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fortunately there are still patriots in Europe and obviously we shall call for a national referendum .
We shall continue to call for referendums , because we believe in a Europe of peoples , not in a Europe of high finance which supports and funds that whole technocratic policy , that whole way of running the bedlam of the European institutions .
That is precisely the picture that emerges from the restyling of your Treaty - the confirmation of an institution dominated by a techno-bureaucracy answerable only to itself and feeding only itself .
Where in this new version is there anything , for instance , reflecting the strong call to defend the European social model which emerged from the popular referendums ; what answer have you given ?
On the borders , no answer and continuing generic waffle about enlargement , without raising the geopolitical problem of Europe 's borders which , for us , is the key issue .
An edifice such as Europe , which has its historic roots in the public law of the Holy Roman Empire , is not built by taking the value of the euro against the dollar as its spiritual horizon .
There are other points of reference , especially , in our view , Europe 's Christian roots .
You will not solve the crucial problems facing Europe through your legal subterfuges or by letting yourselves be guided by the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
States cannot be governed in that way , and nor can Europe 's future , Europe 's history .
Long live the Europe of peoples , the Europe of Christian roots !
( PT ) Tomorrow the Prime Ministers and Heads of State will sign the Lisbon Treaty in Lisbon .
After that they will call for ratification .
The difference is not in the text , which is a replica of the Constitution rejected by the French and Dutch .
The difference is in the method .
Now they are asking for rapid ratification without referendums .
A few days ago , Mr Zapatero expressed here in this House his wish to see the citizens of the various Member States pronounce that very day on the Treaty that will determine our common future .
At the summit on Friday , the governments will have an opportunity to dispel the suspicion that hangs over each and every one of them , the suspicion that they want the new Treaty to be approved behind the people 's backs .
Let them seize Mr Zapatero 's suggestion with both hands .
Let them set the day .
Today , the Lisbon Treaty is not really your Treaty .
It will never be the Europeans ' Treaty while its viability depends on not holding referendums .
Let them have the courage to meet the demand for democracy , because Europe itself depends on democracy !
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , we often discuss how to bring the EU closer to the citizens and make it more democratic without acting upon it .
Tomorrow the heads of state or government will sign the Reform Treaty and they have already been announcing in advance that they do not want referenda to take place .
It is sad that this Parliament has for most part applauded this .
It is an expression of the highest arrogance and disregard for the citizens ' voice .
I have the impression that the politicians are either too lazy to explain the new Treaty or - worse still - they are afraid of the citizens .
The politicians do not want to have to explain how the new Treaty will change the Member States ' share in decision-making within the EU .
The politicians do not want to have to explain to the citizens that they will not have ' their ' Commissioner in the Commission .
They do not want to have to defend the fact that issues such as migration , energy and transport will not be dealt with in the individual states but in Brussels .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we do not win the citizens over for the rules governing the new configuration of the EU , if we do not explain to them , on the one hand , the advantages of integration and , on the other , the issues of loss of national sovereignty , which the Treaty clearly implies in some areas , the gap between the political elite and the citizens will continue to grow wider and wider .
This is why I consider referenda to be a key aspect of the Treaty ratification process .
Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty will have a significant impact on the foreign policy of the European Union in the coming future .
Our discussions in the Committee on Foreign Affairs in this House allow me to pronounce a very positive view on the new Treaty for a number of reasons .
A single framework greatly enhances the coherence of the EU 's external action : the new Treaty implies a major step forward when compared to the existing arrangements .
It provides an explicitly legal basis for the Neighbourhood Policy , establishes a single legal personality of the Union as a whole and obliges Member States to consult one another and to demonstrate mutual solidarity .
In the institutional aspect , major improvements are made by enhancing the powers of the double-hatted High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security who is at the same time Vice-President of the European Commission and by establishing the European external action service .
Most importantly , the new Treaty enhances the budgetary powers of Parliament over EU foreign policy spending , putting the European Parliament on an equal footing with the Council .
Moreover , the new legal basis for instruments or policies related to the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) are also established , for instance the sanctions against non-state entities , space policy and energy security , combating climate change , prevention of international terrorism and protection of personal data .
In fact , the greatest improvements refer to the European security and defence policy ( ESDP ) , since the Lisbon Treaty provides in particular for a permanent structured cooperation in defence between those Member States with the military capability .
From our point of view , however , the new Treaty also suffers from a few shortcomings : the European Parliament should be consulted on the nomination of the new High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , not only for the first person to take office on 1 January 2009 , but also in the case of the interim appointment afterwards and , obviously , when appointing the whole Commission , including its Vice-President for Foreign Affairs .
Let me also highlight the need for the new , newly-elected High Representative and Vice-President to effectively consult Parliament ex ante on the main aspects of the basic choices of CFSP and ESDP .
To sum up : the Lisbon Treaty constitutes a milestone in the institutional development of the European Union in foreign affairs and , as chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I would like to warmly welcome its pending signature .
( PL ) Mr President , three years after the end of the Second World War the United Nations Organisation proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which remains the standard text in this field .
Almost 60 years later the European Union codified human rights in its Charter of Fundamental Rights , a document meeting the needs and expectations of Europeans on the threshold of the 21st century .
Why then have two States , Poland and the United Kingdom - so committed to the codification of human rights at international level - objected to the Charter ?
Why do they not wish to give it to their own citizens ?
My disappointment as a Pole is all the greater as both Poland and the United Kingdom had previously accepted the Charter .
Their prime ministers and ministers of foreign affairs signed it as the second part of the Constitutional Treaty in Rome on 29 October 2004 .
Their signatures not only obligated them vis-à-vis their European partners , but also constituted a signal to the citizens of their own states and a promise that they would abide by the Charter .
The content of the Charter has not changed since 2004 .
What has changed is the attitude of Poland and the United Kingdom .
My question is : why are the successors to Tony Blair and Marek Belka objecting to the Charter and depriving their fellow citizens of its benefits ?
I would also request the Chairman of the Council of Europe to ask the present prime ministers of Poland and the United Kingdom why they are not honouring the signatures of their predecessors .
In foreign policy the principle of continuity is fundamental , and we citizens - I refer to the Poles - need the rights embodied in the Charter .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a great deal has been said here on the substance of the Treaty .
We German Liberals have always attached vital importance to certain key points .
Firstly , the institutional compromise had to be preserved .
Secondly , we wanted an EU foreign minister , not as an embellishment but as a genuine mouthpiece of the European Union .
We agree entirely with what Jacek Saryusz-Wolski said a few moments ago about institutional improvements .
We still believe , however , that the Common Foreign and Security Policy will continue for the foreseeable future to stand or fall by the political will of the Member States , and that is regrettable .
The third point to which we attached particular importance was firm protection of fundamental rights , and for this reason we look forward eagerly to the proclamation of the Charter .
On the whole , it must be said that the Treaty of Lisbon is a success for German-Portuguese cooperation , for which both Presidencies deserve to be congratulated .
A real fly in the ointment , however , is the lack of progress in bringing decision-making processes closer to the people .
The Council 's decision not to present a consolidated text is what we would call Realsatire in German , meaning a real-life situation which is more absurd than anything a satirist could dream up .
This decision will soon be overtaken by events , however .
I am sure that the public and the parliaments will obtain copies of the consolidated text for themselves and read up on what the Treaty is really all about .
We must now enter a phase in which the European Union reverts from institutional navel-gazing to the adoption of a global outlook .
We must discharge our international economic responsibility .
The general state of the world economy raises the spectre of slower growth and job losses in Europe .
In many Member States , including my own , I am aware of a reversion to complacency and a weakening of the will to enact reforms .
That has to change .
My second point is that we must play our role in international politics responsibly .
People want the European Union to have a strong global role .
The responsibility is ours .
( PL ) Mr President , Europe is not only an agreement among elites .
It is not only the European institutions .
Europe is above all a matter of trust .
Yesterday , however , Udo Voigt , the chairman of the National Democratic Party of Germany , declared on Germany 's public television channel that Poland must immediately return Silesia to the Germans - that Poland should immediately give Pomerania , Gdańsk , Wrocław and other cities back to the Germans .
At the same time he questioned the figures regarding the number of victims of the Holocaust .
I ask myself today , when the spirit of Europe moves upon the face of the waters and above this Parliament , why Mr Schulz has lost his revolutionary sensitivity .
Why did the German Government not speak out strongly ?
This is the kind of thing that led to the Third Reich .
We demand a sharp reprimand and delegalisation of the fascist party in question , which is doing something that can inflict the greatest harm on Europe : it is destroying trust between European nations that are striving for the common good .
Germany , as a leading European state , should be especially sensitive to this kind of activity and take action immediately for the good of the European Communities .
( FR ) Mr President , I too should like to join in congratulating the Portuguese Presidency .
The signing of the Lisbon Treaty and the EU-Africa summit will take their place as landmarks in European history .
However , we cannot allow these tremendous successes to be overshadowed by coming events , and on that subject I must mention two concerns .
The first is about ratification of the forthcoming treaty .
The fact of abandoning the draft Constitution and replacing it by an ordinary treaty means there is now no impediment in any of the Member States - except Ireland - to ratification by a vote in parliament .
That is a key feature of the political agreement concluded at the June and October European Councils .
If , since then , any government has had a change of heart , the least it should do , in the interests of fairness to its partners , is to inform them before signature of the treaty and not afterwards .
Mr President of the Council , I am confident the Portuguese Presidency will ensure that basic fairness prevails here .
My second concern - and it has already been mentioned by a number of my colleagues - is the situation in the western Balkans .
For eight years now we have known that Kosovan independence must come sooner or later .
Yet today , despite the considerable efforts invested by Javier Solana and the Commission , we are no less disconcerted by the situation than we were eight years ago .
We have said repeatedly that the western Balkan region is destined to become part of the Union , and we claim to be embarking on a common foreign policy .
Yet successive Presidencies of the Union have done no more than pass the hot potato to the next in line .
Things have changed since 1991 .
Sixteen years and 300 000 deaths have intervened and it is time for the EU countries to show they have learned the lessons of that sad past .
The future of the Balkans will not be decided in Washington or Moscow , or even in New York : it will be decided here in Europe , among the peoples who are directly affected and their European neighbours , friends and partners .
Mr President , I shall speak first about Kosovo .
In the Balkans and the Caucasus , we see a conflict between European values and nationalist tendencies , between European integration and movements and ideas that are supported by Russia .
If , in the future , we look back , I am quite sure that we will never regret the efforts we can make today in order to support European integration with all the different means we have , but we might very well , in the future , regret the efforts we have not made .
I think it is important to discuss that at the European Council at the end of this week .
I wish , secondly , to speak about globalisation .
I think it is important to remember that it is globalisation that has made Europe into a leading world economy and that globalisation is a necessity if we are to be the world 's leading knowledge economy , because we will never be world leaders if we are only the best in Europe .
We can never achieve results by protectionist measures .
In the long term that will undermine the opportunities for jobs and prosperity , but it will not give us the opportunity to be a world-leading economy as well as defending European values .
That leads us to the conclusion that it is important that the European Council underlines all the efforts that are needed regarding energy legislation , telecom legislation , the internal market , trade and competition .
Competition is not a fight between different personalities or identities .
It is an opportunity for all to participate and to move Europe ahead .
That is the way we should choose , and that is how we can use the Treaty in the absolute best way to respond to the global challenge .
That opportunity has been given to us this week and we should use it .
( ES ) Mr President , President of the Council , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I feel it right that we should start by publicly recognising the work of the Portuguese Presidency on a date which is very significant for the European Parliament , as exemplified by the ornamental front to the Presidency podium depicting the solemn declaration of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Portuguese Presidency received - and I say this as a representative of the European Parliament at the Intergovernmental Conference - a draft in which the Charter of Fundamental Rights was only declaration No 11 .
It is also right to point out - as the President of the Council told me personally at the beginning - that it was virtually impossible to change that status , and I believe that in the work of the Intergovernmental Conference we jointly managed to ensure that the Charter of Fundamental Rights was a legally binding charter .
The Member States did not want to include it in the Treaty , but it is a Charter and has a constitutional status .
I think we should remember the efforts made by many men and women over the years in the European Parliament in order to achieve that Charter .
I think we ought to remember the woman who embodies the tragedy and the power to overcome of 20th century Europe , Simone Weil , not to mention men such as Altiero Spinelli , Fernand Herman and many others who worked for so many years so that , finally , we could have a declaration of rights which would express our identity .
Mr President , I also think it is time , in a Parliament which legislates indiscriminately about cows , goats , cucumbers and finance , for us to talk finally about people , about the man and woman in the street .
I find it regrettable that there are still a few States even today who are limiting the rights of their nationals as European citizens .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to add another important comment , which is that the Charter and the Lisbon Treaty strengthen the Union as a supranational democracy of States and citizens , and that is the first response in an era of political globalisation .
We are doing it at regional level , but I believe that it is an example which we should follow for our own future and for that of mankind as a whole .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are preparing the summit , and I do not expect this summit to spring any surprises .
I do expect it , however , to open doors to the future and to position the European Union on many issues .
The first door it must open is the door to ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We expect ratification to be effected quickly in all Member States and the result of the 2009 elections to the European Parliament to be taken into account in the appointment of office-holders pursuant to the new Treaty .
I also expect , however , that clearing the way for ratification will also mean that the Council and Commission finally begin to communicate and provide information on the content of the Treaty in the Member States .
Do not remain silent about the reasons why we support this Treaty .
We welcome it because it strengthens our citizens , our parliaments , democracy and the European Union .
The second door we are opening is the door to freedom .
Schengen will be discussed .
We are pleased that more Member States now fulfil the Schengen criteria , because meeting the Schengen criteria means more freedom within the European Union and greater freedom for citizens of the European Union .
Thirdly , the door will , I hope , be opened to enable the European Union to assume more global responsibility .
Let me therefore say plainly that the scope for a negotiated solution to the Kosovo question has been exhausted and that the European Union must jointly assume responsibility for Kosovo .
It is our unequivocal view that the future of Kosovo and Serbia lies in the European Union and that we must make every effort to ensure that people 's desire to be free and to live in peace with each other is satisfied .
My last point concerns the door to research and technology .
Implement the Galileo decision , which could only be taken because the European Union shouldered its financial responsibility .
( PT ) Mr President , President of the Council , the Portuguese Presidency is leaving a legacy that is highly stimulating but also fraught with responsibilities .
It is this political legacy that this week 's summit will be called upon to consolidate and develop .
The signing of the Lisbon Treaty tomorrow , the solemn ratification of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the three institutions of the European Union in a few minutes ' time , the establishment of a strategic partnership with Brazil without detriment to the European Union 's special relations with Mercosur , the resumption of regular strategic summits with Africa , and lastly the boost given to the Lisbon Strategy and many matters of decisive importance for the future of Europe : these are notable achievements but they will only be of use if they produce the policies and achieve the objectives that are essential to make Europe stronger , more cohesive , more united and more decisive for world stability .
This is , in short , the responsibility that the Member States , the European Council , the Commission and Parliament too inherit from the Portuguese Presidency .
But it is also the incentive that will enable us all to emerge from the institutional crisis that has held Europe back and impeded the process of European integration for the past two years .
To repeat what I have already said many times , my sincere congratulations to the Portuguese Presidency and I hope the forthcoming Slovene Presidency will continue on the same lines and develop what has been done .
The sole aim of the forthcoming Brussels summit should be to create the necessary political conditions for that to happen .
( ES ) Mr President , I am pleased that the Lisbon Treaty is to be signed tomorrow .
This will end a period of some uncertainty in which outsiders perceived the Union as suffering from a certain paralysis .
I therefore congratulate the Portuguese Presidency .
Once the Treaty is signed , I hope there will be no reason to sit back .
It is a time for the Union , and hence the European Council , to look outward and to be decisive in tackling the problems faced by citizens .
I will single out three .
Economic growth : the European Council must not become complacent .
The signs are not good : the euro is fairly strong , making exports difficult ; inflation is falling ; the dollar is fairly weak and oil continues to be expensive .
All the studies - the most recent being that of the OECD - are lowering their forecasts of economic growth in Europe for 2007 and 2008 .

Secondly , illegal immigration : this is a serious problem which the Conference of Euromed Ministers , among others , has been trying to tackle during this six-month period .
In the action plan approved at the Africa Summit I also saw references to readmission agreements and other instruments , but will those undertakings be honoured ?
How long has the European Union been negotiating readmission agreements with certain Mediterranean countries ?
Moreover , illegal immigration does not just depend on cooperation with third countries ; we too need to fulfil our commitments , for example with respect to FRONTEX .
Furthermore , the effective enlargement of Schengen , which the European Council is to confirm on Friday , also means extended external borders .
I hope that the authorities and officials responsible for those new borders will be up to coping with the illegal immigration network .
Finally , terrorism : the threat persists .
There are the recent threats from Al Qaeda leaders ; there are yesterday 's bloody attacks in Algiers ; and I would remind you of what happened in France last week with ETA .
I am pleased that , during the Portuguese Presidency , there have been efforts to fill the post of European counter-terrorism coordinator , which has been inexplicably vacant for over six months .
If by chance there was a lack of powers or resources , the reform of the Treaty was surely a lost opportunity to strengthen this post .
Finally , I hope that the European Council will insist on rapid processing of the recent Commission proposal to amend the framework decision on terrorism to include condoning as an offence .
( FR ) Mr President , 2007 - this year of the German and Portuguese Presidencies - will go down in the history of European integration as the year of the ultimate snub to the peoples of Europe and to democracy .
The treaty that will be signed tomorrow in Lisbon is neither simplified nor consensual .
It is nothing more nor less than a rehash of the Constitutional Treaty , to which the French nation said ' no ' .
Yet most of you , along with Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , are noisily celebrating .
To those of my French colleagues who support this Constitution-with-a-makeover I must therefore address a very solemn warning .
The provisions of the treaty create a new state .
That state is being imposed upon our people against their will and it will therefore have no legitimacy .
The consequence is quite specific , and quite dreadful : the organs of the European Union and the texts that they produce will have to be regarded as unlawful .
Soon , therefore , we shall have a pressing duty incumbent on us under international law : the duty of disobedience .
I have nothing further to say .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to refer briefly in my closing statement to an issue which has been raised several times and which is of the utmost importance , which is naturally on the European Union 's external agenda and will most probably continue to be a priority in the coming weeks and months .
I refer to the question of Kosovo .
I should like to explain briefly the Portuguese Presidency 's position on this vital issue .
In our view it was most important , after the Ahtisaari plan was presented to the Security Council , for the European Union , Russia and the United States to form a Troika in order to seek , again in very close contact with the parties , possible solutions on which the parties could agree .
There were two main objectives , the objective of trying to explore certain aspects of the Ahtisaari plan that could and should be explored .
On the other hand , we are sure , we and the European Union , that we have done all that we could to make it possible for an agreed solution to be reached on the future of Kosovo .
We had 120 days to do it .
We now know , and it is a matter of public knowledge on which the Troika too has reported , that it proved impossible for the parties to agree on the future status of Kosovo , but all is not lost .
In the first place , we must record the excellent climate , the excellent atmosphere between the parties to the Troika and in the relations between the Troika and the parties .
In the second place , as we hoped and expected , it was possible to explore some of the aspects highlighted in the Ahtisaari report and new points of agreement naturally emerged on that basis .
In the third place , a most important aspect and one which has perhaps not received due attention is the fact that the parties agreed not to resort to violent solutions to settle the question of the future status of Kosovo .
We attach great importance to this political commitment and we only hope , naturally , that it will be respected .
The process has been referred to the United Nations again and will be debated again in the Security Council .
The United Nations , let us not forget , has a fundamental role in this matter .
But if it proves impossible at United Nations level for the members of the Security Council to agree on a solution that will determine the future status of Kosovo , we have no doubt that the international community and the European Union in particular will itself have to take decisions which we all know will be complex and perhaps difficult ones .
Three observations in this connection are of fundamental concern to the Portuguese Presidency and will be of fundamental concern to Portugal as a Member State of the European Union after 1 January .
Naturally , the first concern is to preserve the unity of the Member States .
In our view , it is essential that when we are called upon to decide and if we take a decision it must be a joint decision .
We must present a united front .
In our view , this is absolutely essential .
What we would not like or wish to see , what we would do everything possible to avoid , is for Europe to be divided on the question of Kosovo as it has been in the past on so many international situations , difficult international issues carrying great responsibilities .
Unity must therefore be our watchword .
Secondly , the European Union must assume its responsibilities because Kosovo is above all a European problem , our problem , and while it is clear that we rely on all our international partners in seeking a solution to this question too , Europe cannot turn its back on Kosovo , it must fully assume its responsibilities for a European problem and , at the conclusion of the Presidency , I consider that the European Union is perfectly aware of this fact and perfectly aware that it has a leading role to play in this matter .
Thirdly , we must not be precipitate , we must consider carefully the consequences of any decisions we may take , we must naturally seek a consensus if possible in all circumstances and in all situations , and we must also naturally take a clear position on this question and convey that position in a very transparent and very obvious form to all partners who are also involved in the question of Kosovo in any way .
Finally , any solution to the question of the future status of Kosovo must always and in all circumstances respect the values and principles that are fundamental to the European Union : peace and regional stability of course and also , obviously , respect for the law , respect for democracy , respect for human rights .
There is no other frame of reference for the solution to the problem of Kosovo and we must not , under any circumstances , forget that the European Union offered the countries of the Western Balkans and Serbia in particular firm and unequivocal European prospects , and we must work with the parties to that end also .
The parties must know that their natural vocation is to be in Europe .
Let us hope that the European Union , in solving the difficult question of Kosovo - and , let us have no illusions , this is a complex and a difficult question - we have no alternative , as I say , that the European Union , in all circumstances and despite any differences there may be on particular issues , must maintain its unity .
This is fundamental and essential to the credibility of the European Union and its external actions .
That , in brief , is what I wanted to say to you about Kosovo .
Finally , Mr President , I hope you will forgive and I am sure you will understand if I end on a personal note : this is the last time I shall attend a debate in the European Parliament as the representative of the Portuguese Presidency .
This is therefore a farewell and a farewell that cannot pass without an expression of recognition and gratitude for the support I have always received in this House from the President and from all the Members .
I have learned with you and I have learned through you how important this Parliament is in strengthening democracy in our Union and also , naturally , in strengthening the legality of the decisions that we take here with a view , obviously , to creating a freer and more prosperous Union for the citizens of Europe .
So thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
I should also , naturally , like to thank the Commissioners and the members of their staff , and the President of the Commission , who often participated with me in these debates and with whom I was able to establish much common ground in our work , objectives and efforts . Thank you , Commission .
I should also , I am sure they will understand , like to thank the officials of the European Parliament and especially , if they will forgive me , my compatriots who work here .
Finally , and I hope I have not forgotten anyone , I should like to thank my interpreters , the Portuguese interpreters , of whom I am very proud .
I will end with the English expression : " I will miss you all " or , in Portuguese : " Já sinto saudades ” . Thank you very much .
Obrigado , Mr President-in-Office .
We shall see each other again in Lisbon tomorrow , of course , and next week you will be here again to accompany the President of the Council , José Sócrates , but since this was your last speech here in plenary , I should like to express our very sincere thanks to you and to reaffirm that our cooperation with you has been a great pleasure and , above all , a great success .
Thank you , Manuel Lobo Antunes .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much for this wide-ranging debate , which I think will provide valuable input to the meeting in Lisbon and to the summit in Brussels .
I would like to focus on a few areas that have been raised this morning , starting with the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter .
First of all , I think that the Portuguese Presidency , like the German Presidency before it , deserves great credit for getting us to this point .
The signature in Lisbon tomorrow will underline the commitment of all signatories to achieving ratification of the Treaty .
I would also like to use this opportunity to again thank the Parliament representatives for the important role that they have played in allowing the Union to solve its institutional difficulties .
Of course , the Commission has also actively engaged throughout this long procedure , not least through the Citizens ' Agenda and the ' twin-track approach ' , which President Barroso referred to earlier on .
Do not forget , those of you who say that , after all , the Union works even without these changes , that there are a number of new elements in this Reform Treaty that will help us and explicitly allow us to tackle more effectively climate change and the whole energy challenge , as well as providing for more openness through public Council meetings and the increased role of national parliaments .
So I think it will also help us to become more transparent , more open and more democratic .
Whatever ratification procedure is decided by the different Member States , we all have an obligation to communicate with citizens .
Of course we will have to do that in partnership and also respecting the different needs and wishes expressed by Member States about this debate .
I think today 's proclamation of the Charter is also symbolic of another important achievement of the negotiations , a symbol of the fact that - except for special arrangements in two of our Member States and as long as the Treaty enters into force - the Charter will be legally binding , guaranteeing the fundamental rights of Europe 's citizens .
The second point I would like to comment on is the ' Reflection Group ' , because I think we must make sure that it focuses on the policy challenges of the future and not mainly on the institutions .
It needs to focus on the expectations of Europe 's people , and I also hope that this group will be representative of the diversity of the Europe of today .
My third comment concerns migration .
I think that an integrated approach to migration involves a mix of European Union and national policies .
It requires coherence between our policies on legal and illegal migration .
It involves actions in development policies , social integration , freedom of movement , border security and visas , to name a few .
It is excellent that this Council will also be discussing these questions globally , but I think that Parliament can make a substantial contribution to this discussion .
The Lisbon Strategy , as the President said , is delivering , and I think this should be a cause for celebration on all sides of this House .
Equally , there is a consensus on the need for actions to address all aspects of sustainable development as part of the strategy .
This includes flexicurity , social inclusion and climate change .
If we can agree on the policy direction , we will be able to generate real political commitment to solve the real problems that have been mentioned by some of you .
Finally , let me also say , on the issue of Kosovo , mentioned by many in this House , that the Commission fully shares the concerns expressed by a number of Members on the situation in Kosovo , and the European Union has done everything possible to reach a negotiated solution , but it is clear now that the status quo is unsustainable and that the UN Security Council will have to address this when it looks at it on 19 December .
The European Council will have to take stock of the situation , and it should reaffirm the European Union 's commitment to solving Kosovo 's status and to playing a leading role in implementing a settlement , the framework being , as many of you have mentioned , the European perspective for the whole region .
Finally , this Council , together with the signature of the Treaty and the proclamation of the Charter , does not , perhaps , draw a line under the events of 2005 , but it marks the beginning of a new phase of the development of the European Union .
We have learnt the lessons of 2005 , and I hope that we can enter the next 50 years of the Union with , hopefully , much more confidence .
That concludes this item .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , preparations for the EU 's December summit in Brussels are taking place in a better atmosphere than was expected .
That is obviously due to the approval of the Reform Treaty and the prospect of its untroubled adoption in Lisbon .
The compromise reached in Poland -which consisted in maintaining the previous government 's line on the Charter of Fundamental Rights so as not to endanger the whole treaty - has played its part .
It must be stressed , however , that the atmosphere created around the new treaty has exaggeratedly linked its adoption or non-adoption with the European Union 's chances of survival .
Following enlargement in 2004 and the admission of Bulgaria and Romania - i.e. with 27 Member States - the Union functioned on the basis of the Treaty of Nice .
That it was functioning effectively was proved by the adoption of the Financial Perspective for 2007-13 .
Admittedly , it was adopted with some difficulty , but agreement was reached about money , which seems to be the most difficult issue and is therefore a test of the usefulness of the existing institutional rules .
Despite this and other agreements , an impression of crisis in the EU was created artificially .
That in turn had repercussions in terms of the declining confidence of citizens in the European institutions and the advisability of further enlargement .
This dangerous spiral , halted to some extent in the second half of 2007 , should serve as a lesson and a warning for the future .
in writing . - ( RO ) The signing of the new Treaty in the European Council of 13-14 December achieves a reform of the European institutions but , mainly , it increases the European citizens ' power to state their opinion on the European legislation .
After the new Treaty is ratified , the Parliaments of the Member States will include the legislative proposals of the Commission into their own agenda , thus increasing the degree of democracy in the Union .
We would have wished a chapter of this treaty to be the very European Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Unfortunately , it is only an appendix of the Treaty , but the legal basis for making its provisions mandatory is thus created .
The six chapters of the Charter guarantee the right to dignity , freedom , solidarity , equality , justice and citizenship .
The adoption of its provisions will make impossible any future discrimination of European citizens on criteria of nationality , ethnicity , religion , age , gender , etc .
The Treaty also offers the Union the possibility to promote the fight against climate changes at an international level and guarantees adequate social protection to all its citizens .
The Union is not based only on economic criteria .
We have to build a Social Europe , based upon solidarity , economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The adoption of the new Treaty requires unanimity in the Council and its ratification by all signatory States by June 2009 .
1 .
EC / Morocco agreement : Euro-Mediterranean aviation agreement ( vote )
- Report : Johannes Blokland
2 .
EC / Morocco agreement : Euro-Mediterranean aviation agreement , protocol following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania ( vote )
- Report : Paolo Costa
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( vote )
- Report : Reimer Böge
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , may I ask you to ensure that Members are seated for the vote , because we need the prescribed majorities .
That is very important for the next three reports , otherwise there will be a problem tomorrow with the vote on the budget for 2008 .
I therefore request that you ask my fellow Members kindly to sit down and take part in the vote , otherwise we shall have a serious problem .
Thank you , Mr Böge , you are absolutely right .
Can I ask those colleagues who are not yet sitting down to please come and take their seats .
We have roll-call votes which require a qualified majority ; they are important votes .
Please , can you go to your seats ?
4 .
Mobilisation of the flexibility instrument ( vote )
- Report : Reimer Böge
5 .
Amending the IIA ( multiannual financial framework ) ( vote )
- Report : Reimer Böge
6 .
Information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products ( vote )
- Report : Bogdan Golik
7 .
Common organisation of the markets in fisheries and aquaculture ( vote )
- Report : Pedro Gueirrero
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) I should like to begin this short statement by welcoming the decision by the European Parliament Committee on Fisheries to produce a report on the Common Organisation of the Markets in fisheries and aquaculture products .
It is known and recognised that this COM has still not realised the objectives for which it was created , namely to ensure stable markets for fisheries products and to secure a fair income for producers .
That being so , we appreciate the European Commission 's albeit tardy decision to undertake an in-depth evaluation of the existing COM and call on it to carry out its urgent revision in order to boost its contribution to guaranteeing incomes in the sector , ensuring market stability , improving the marketing of fisheries products and increasing the value-added generated , notably by a significant increase in financial resources .
Despite the fact that some of our initial proposals did not obtain the necessary consensus in the Committee on Fisheries , we consider that the report now put to the vote contains valuable measures , such as measures to determine whether the existing intervention mechanisms are the most suitable ones and whether they are sufficiently flexible to meet the relevant needs in the various Member States ; to introduce a compensatory payment for sardines like the one already existing for tuna ; to meet the need for the Structural Funds to contribute to the modernisation and creation of support infrastructures for producers in the context of production / marketing ; to provide genuine support for the creation and funding of producers ' organisations and above all for small-scale coastal and traditional fisheries ; to ensure the application to imported fisheries products sold on the internal market of the same rules and requirements as those applied to Community fisheries products .
These are matters which , though they may not mean much to some Members , are most important for fishermen .
8 .
European Aviation Safety Agency ( vote )
- Report : Jörg Leichtfried
9 .
Nutrition and health claims made on foods ( vote )
- Report : Adriana Poli Bortone
- Before the vote :
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission makes the following declaration .
The Commission , sharing the views expressed by Parliament , acknowledges the urgent need to have a scientific evaluation of children 's health claims already on the market . Therefore , it will give priority to the necessary procedure to allow for a rapid decision on claims referring to children 's development and health and will also ask the European Food Safety Authority to give priority to processing the evaluation of such claims .
Furthermore , the Commission confirms that , pending the establishment of nutrient profiles , the process of evaluating such claims can start without delay .
10 .
Legal protection of designs ( vote )
- Report : Klaus-Heiner Lehne
11 .
Common organisation of the market in wine ( vote )
- Report : Giuseppe Castiglione
12 .
Indirect taxes on the raising of capital ( vote )
- Report : Werner Langen
13 .
The fight against terrorism ( vote )
- Motion for resolution
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the oral amendment that our Group is proposing involves replacing the words ' all forms of glorifying ' by the word ' apology ' .
We consider that the word apology better reflects the type of behaviour to be curbed .
If Mr Díaz de Mera is in agreement , our Group will vote in favour .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 27 :

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the basis of Rule 151 ( 3 ) , you , as President , can decide on the admissibility of paragraph 6 , on which we are about to vote .
That recital states that terrorism can no longer be eradicated .
Can this House really make it official that terrorism cannot be eradicated ?
I feel that there must either be a translation error in some texts , or a very serious political misjudgement , and for those reasons I ask you , Madam President , to decide on the admissibility of that paragraph .
Ms Muscardini , all the admissibility checks have been done by the services , and it was open to amendments , so I am afraid we are where we are now .
- Before the vote on Amendment 33 :
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I ask whether the proposer of the amendment would agree to remove the two phrases which currently read : ' in some rare instances ' and ' which may not be lawful ' from the sentence .
If these two phrases are removed from the amendment , we would be willing to support it .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Voting time
Proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
Mr President of the European Council , José Sócrates , Mr President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure to welcome you here to the heart of European democracy , to the European Parliament , today on the occasion of the formal signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
This is indeed a happy day , particularly for the citizens of the European Union .
Fifty years after the founding fathers created the European Communities out of the ruins of a shattered continent , our intention today is to proclaim solemnly the common values that form the core of our European identity .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights that we proclaim today symbolises the momentous journey towards a Union of the people of Europe which we have been making together over the past fifty years .
This Charter is proof that , when we laid the foundations of the European Union , we had learned the most important lesson from European history , and today we continue to regard respect for the dignity of each and every human being , preservation of the freedom that has been won and of peace and democracy and application of the rule of law as the driving forces of European unification .
Freedom cannot develop without respect for the rights of others , and peace cannot flourish without fair accommodation of each other 's interests .
Freedom , peace , justice and social welfare are achievable only as an integral whole ; none of these goals can be obtained at the expense of the others .
The founding fathers understood this and established Europe as a community based on the rule of law .
The European Union is not governed by the concept that might is right but by the principle that power emanates from the law .
Therein lies the true modernity and vision of our Union , a community rooted in shared values .
Only true justice can guarantee peace for all of us .
This vision of the founding fathers has come to fruition .
Far more than that , in the struggle between two systems , in which freedom and democracy were pitted against dictatorship and oppression of the individual , it proved to be the stronger and the more successful vision .
The miracle of our generation has been the end to the division of our continent .
The fall of the Iron Curtain and the accession of twelve countries to the European Union were possible because the voice of freedom and democracy and the power of equal rights for all were stronger than those of inhuman ideologies in the twentieth century .
The Berlin Declaration , which was adopted on 25 March of this year to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaties of Rome , states an important fact when it says that ' We , the citizens of the European Union , have united for the better ' , for it is indeed our good fortune that freedom , democracy and human rights have become a reality for all of us in the European Union .
Today 's solemn proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights gives us a great obligation and opportunity to bring home the real essence of European unification to the people of the European Union , who number almost 500 million , and to future generations .
The essence of the European Union , ladies and gentlemen , transcends economic cost-benefit calculations .
While these are important and will continue to influence our lives in the EU , we are first and foremost a community based on shared values , and solidarity , freedom and equal rights are part and parcel of our everyday existence .
These common values , central to which is respect for inviolable human dignity , as enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , form the foundations of European unification .
( Applause )
For this reason , the European Parliament has regarded legally binding recognition of the Charter of Fundamental Rights as a vital component of any agreement on the reform of the European treaties , and the European Parliament has got its way on this point .
The reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Article 6 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which the Heads of State or Government will be signing tomorrow , lends the Charter the same legally binding character that the Treaties themselves possess .
That 21st-century Europe should possess a comprehensive catalogue of human rights and fundamental freedoms which are equally binding and legally enforceable for all citizens of the Union is perfectly natural ; more than that , it is the very core of our perception of the European identity .
( Applause )
People and human dignity are at the heart of our policies .
In this way the European Union constitutes a framework that enables us , as citizens of the Union , to build our common future in peace .
Without the firm foundations of our shared values , of which we must be ever mindful , the European Union would have no future .
Nor would we have any grounds to insist on respect for human rights in the wider world if we failed to recognise our own values as legally binding in the European Union .
( Applause )
Nor shall we let anyone , whether inside or outside the European Union , set limits on our resolute defence of human rights .
We in the European Parliament have a moral and political duty to defend human dignity at all times .
( Applause )
In our world of today , we Europeans must project ourselves as a community united by shared values and stand up for human dignity , and we must seek intercultural dialogue .
We can do that with confidence , and we must do it with untiring commitment - and no one will stop us .
( Applause )
In the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the new open and democratic convention method was used for the first time in the history of European unification .
That method proved highly successful , and the convention became the model and the starting point for the entire reform process .
The European Parliament has played a particularly active part in the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and has brought decisive influence to bear on the substance of the text .
The Charter is the first instrument to enshrine economic and social rights with the same status as political rights and personal freedoms .
It protects fundamental rights within the sphere of activity of the Union and in the application of Community law .
It also gives all citizens of the European Union a right of recourse to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
We hope that the day might come when the Charter of Fundamental Rights is legally binding on all Member States .
( Applause )
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible .
I therefore appeal to all Member States of the European Union without exception to subscribe , in the interests of all citizens of the Union , to this European consensus .
Today 's solemn proclamation should also be an occasion for all European citizens who can assert their own rights on the basis of the Charter to reflect on their duty to the community of Europeans , the wider world and future generations .
There are no rights without responsibilities .
Solidarity is what unites us .
( Applause )
We are creating a people 's Europe and giving our European Union a solid foundation of common fundamental democratic rights .
Today 's solemn proclamation shows that our community based on shared values is alive and growing .
Today that set of common values will be embedded in the lives and minds of the population of the Union .
This day is a great triumph for the citizens of the European Union , and all of us can rejoice at that with heart and soul .
( Loud applause )
( Uproar in the Chamber )
( Several Members protest loudly and display banners and placards . )
Please remove these placards now . Show some courtesy to our guest here in the European Parliament .
Mr President of the European Council , may I now ask you to address us .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President of the European Parliament , President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen .
Today , in a solemn sitting of the European Parliament , we are proclaiming the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and I should like to state clearly to you that this day - 12 December - will now be a fundamental date in the history of European integration .
A fundamental date in the history of Europe .
( Applause )
( Uproar in the NI and IND / DEM ranks )
Be patient , please . You should at least have the decency to let our speaker deliver his address .
Mr President , the floor is yours .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) However much some may shout to try to stop others from speaking , this is a fundamental date in the history of Europe .
And I want to say to you too that this date , this ceremony , is probably the most important ceremony in which I have had the honour of participating .
The most important ceremony of my entire political career .
I feel deeply honoured as a European to sign a Charter and to proclaim a Charter of Fundamental Rights and I feel particularly honoured that this Charter is being proclaimed during the Portuguese Presidency .
I feel honoured as a European and I feel honoured as a Portuguese citizen , especially as it was during our Presidency in 2000 that the Convention which gave rise to this Charter started its work .
That is why I want to say to the European Parliament that it is an honour for my country to be associated in this way with an important step in the project of European citizenship .
This Charter represents a commitment to values that gave birth to European civilisation , values anchored in the defence of human dignity , and we are here to proclaim that we are true to those values , values that have their source in the constitutional tradition common to the Member States of the Union and also in international legal instruments , as in the case of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights .
And to emphasise this compatibility , the Treaty of Lisbon itself provides for the Union to accede to the Council of Europe Convention and thus recognises what the protection of fundamental rights now represents in modern democracies .
This is why today is a such an exceptional day because from today on , though some may not like it , fundamental rights will be formally and irreversibly established as part of the Union 's common heritage , a moral heritage , a political heritage , a heritage of citizenship and of the best aspects of European civilization .
But this Charter is also an instrument for political action , an instrument for the institutions because the Charter will shape their activities .
They will be duty bound to respect the rights and principles set out in the Charter and promote the application of those rights and principles , but it is also an instrument for action by the citizens because it shows that the project of the Union is a project of citizenship and it shows that the Union is at the service of its citizens and that it protects and promotes their rights .
The Charter embodies , in the European context , the projection of human dignity and the rule of social rights .
This is why it also has a social component , because it projects human dignity in the world of work , in the world of employment , in the world of health , in the field of social security and welfare , and also human dignity with regard to protection of the environment .
It is the Charter of equality and solidarity , the Charter of the battle against discrimination of any kind , and it is a Charter for equality because it enshrines a special attention , the special attention that we pay to children and young people , to equality between men and women , to the role of old people , and to the substantial issues of protecting personal rights and personal data .
I must also draw attention to the freedoms that are enshrined in the Charter , the freedoms connected with European citizenship and the political rights associated with it , and the economic freedoms based on the Treaty of Rome , whose 50th anniversary we are celebrating this year .
We are therefore true to our tradition and we repeat the ban on the death penalty , and I especially welcome the decision taken by the Council last week to mark the European Day against the Death Penalty .
Finally , I should like to point out that the Charter covers the rights of citizens and the rights of people , addressing a body that extends beyond the actual citizens of the Member States , and this is no less important because it represents , as of today , a fundamental element in our conviction that a better world is a world in which these rights and freedoms are universally respected .
This Charter , as of today , will be at the service of the external policy of the European Union which aims to establish a world in which all these rights and freedoms are universally respected and guaranteed .
It will therefore act as a pointer , a pointer to the position of the European Union on the international stage and in any action that is proposed to secure global respect for fundamental rights .
This is why the citizens of Europe can , in this way , recognise themselves in a Union that is their Union .
They can recognise the rights that the Union guarantees them and realise that Europe is a project of peace and democracy , a project in which the rights of the individual are fully respected .
It is our moral authority and it is the sentiment of this ceremony that unites the three institutions .
We are proclaiming this Charter on the eve of the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon , a Charter which has the legal status of a basic law and a legal status which is equal to that of the Treaties , for the benefit of many and to the displeasure of some .
This Charter is in the Treaty .
( Standing ovation )
( Renewed uproar in the NI and IND / DEM ranks )
You should at least have the decency to let our guest finish speaking .
Loudness is not an argument .
Leave the Chamber !
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) In this globalised world , in which many claim that economic and financial rules are absolute , the fact that twenty-seven European States are reiterating in the context of the Union this firm commitment to values and objectives designed to protect and safeguard fundamental rights is a signal contribution to the regulation of globalisation itself .
Fundamental rights are a common tradition of democratic states under the rule of law , ways of limiting the power of the authorities and fundamental instruments for the protection of the individual .
In binding the institutions and states of the Union , the Charter limits the power of the authorities in the name of protecting the interests of the citizens and their organisations .
And in formalising this limitation on the power of the authorities , the limits on its application will strictly observe the principle of subsidiarity and strengthen the eminently democratic nature of the Union itself .
The defence of fundamental rights is clearly a value that is essential to the European identity , that is part of our genetic code , an element that structures the whole European project and enables Europe to be defined as a Union of values , and the unconditional affirmation of these values is what the world expects of Europe .
This is the Europe I want to belong to , a Europe that defends these values .
And we are well aware , I and all the Members , that the battle for fundamental rights is a daily task and probably an endless task , a task for states , a task for civil societies , a task for industrial undertakings and trade unions , a task for each and every citizen .
That is why , in proclaiming the Charter , we rejoice in the agreement reached on the Charter , in the recognition of its legal value on an equal footing with the very Treaties establishing the Union .
But in addition to marking a day for rejoicing , the proclamation of this Charter represents an agreement by the institutions of the Union to be respected and applied daily in its actions .
Only in this way will we live up to Europe 's history , only in this way will we be worthy heirs of the best features of our collective identity and our common tradition : a collective identity and a common tradition that do honour to a Europe that fights for the rights , the freedoms and the guarantees of its citizens . I thank you all .
( Renewed standing ovation , with the exception of the GUE / NGL , the NI and the IND / DEM )
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to convey some information to you , and I ask you to provide now for the necessary calm .
The King of Jordan is in the European Parliament and will address us immediately after the solemn proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Please ensure , not least out of consideration for our guest from Jordan , that we have no more interruptions so that we can complete this proclamation in a dignified manner .
President of the Commission . - ( PT ) Mr President of the European Parliament , Prime Minister of Portugal and President of the Council of the European Union , ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Presidents of the three political institutions of the European Union - the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission - are signing here , in Strasbourg , the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is , for me , a great personal honour to participate in an act of such high significance .
The proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights enshrines a culture of law in Europe .
In the European Union , which is above all a community under the rule of law , institutional changes require the reinforcement of respect for fundamental rights .
Honourable Members , today the three European institutions reaffirm their commitment - the commitment they made in December 2000 when the Charter was proclaimed for the first time .
But , seven years later , we go a crucial step further .
The Charter of 2000 was not legally binding .
With tomorrow 's signing of the Treaty of Lisbon , and then ratification , the Charter will be part of the Union 's primary law and will have the same legal value as the Treaties themselves .
This progress will have very concrete benefits for European citizens .
Let me illustrate this point by looking briefly at the content of the Charter .
The 54 articles cover rights that until now had to be recognised by the Court of Justice on a case-by-case basis .
Now they are brought together .
The Charter , recognising the basic principles of human dignity , incorporates first of all the classic civil liberties already included in the European Convention on Human Rights : freedom of speech , freedom of assembly , freedom of religion , equality before the law and the principle of non-discrimination .
The Charter also confirms economic and social rights .
It includes the right to property and the freedom to conduct business , but , at the same time , the rights of workers and of social partners , and it enshrines topics such as social security and social assistance .
The Charter also covers the new challenges facing society today .
It therefore includes guarantees on data protection , on bioethics and on good administration , known as ' third-generation rights ' .
These will be highly relevant in many of our areas of activity , be it in research policy , in the area of freedom , security and justice or in our permanent quest for good governance .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Charter of Fundamental Rights will help to anchor the European Union within a genuine culture of fundamental rights .
By signing the Charter today , we - the Presidents of the Union 's three political institutions - are undertaking , as a priority , to respect those rights in all that we do .
That commitment might , on the face of it , seem easy to uphold , but in reality it will be an ongoing challenge to ensure that civil liberties are fully respected in all EU policies , whether in legislating for the internal market , managing immigration or endeavouring to combat terrorism .
The Charter is the first legally binding document ever produced at international level which brings together in a single text not only civil and political rights but also economic and social rights , making them all subject to the same system of legal supervision .
It is undoubtedly a major achievement and one that the European Union should be proud of .
It is , I believe , particularly significant that this should be possible now in the new enlarged Europe , a Europe formerly divided by totalitarian and authoritarian regimes which disregarded human rights , whereas the Europe that we have today is a Europe united around the values of freedom and solidarity .
( Applause )
If we work together to promote the culture of human rights , we shall make a crucial contribution to achieving a Europe genuinely rooted in values - tangible values that are credible in the eyes of ordinary people .
Strengthened by the Charter , Europe has become more determined to promote its values at world level .
Ever since the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , Europe has led the way in the fight for basic rights .
From now on it will be better equipped to pursue that fight successfully in the interests of freedom , peace and democracy .
( Standing ovation )
( Several Members loudly voice their opposition , waving flags and banners and chanting : ' Referendum ! ' )
( The President of the House , José Sócrates and José Manuel Barroso proceed to sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights )
Formal sitting - Jordan

Honourable Members , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a particular honour for the European Parliament to welcome to Strasbourg today His Majesty Abdullah II , King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
We bid Your Majesty a warm welcome to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
I also welcome the high-ranking delegation accompanying King Abdullah , particularly the Speakers of both Houses of the Jordanian Parliament .
( Applause )
Today 's visit by the King of Jordan is the third since 2002 , when His Majesty first addressed the European Parliament .
In November 2004 the King visited the Conference of Presidents in Brussels .
His visit and his speech in the European Parliament today are both a sign of the strong partnership between the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the European Parliament and an encouraging signal for our common future in the Mediterranean region .
Your Majesty , I had prepared a far longer speech , but since we had to ask you to wait for a while , I shall cut my speech short and simply say that it is wonderful to have you here with us , and it now gives me great pleasure to invite you to address us .
( Applause )


King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan . - Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim , Mr President , Members of Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your warm welcome and , on behalf of the people of Jordan , I am honoured to come before this distinguished institution again .
My friends , a changing Europe and a changing Middle East are here today .
A Europe of expanding membership and a visionary mission : for cooperation across borders and growth without barriers .
A Middle East of new horizons and growing hope : for peace among neighbours , opportunities for our people and a future for our youth .
These trends do not take place in isolation .
The achievement of the hopes of our regions will advance stability and create new possibilities for security and prosperity worldwide .
It is deeply in our interest to succeed .
And a critical opportunity is before us .
Two weeks ago , with the support of the European Union and nations from both our regions , Israelis and Palestinians met at Annapolis .
They pledged all-out negotiations toward a peace treaty in 2008 and immediate steps to implement their obligations under the Road Map .
For the first time in years , we see movement towards a permanent settlement and an independent , sovereign , viable Palestinian state .
( Applause )
This progress is the work of many friends of peace , including leaders in Europe and the Arab states .
We believed that , after years of worsening crisis , a change of strategy was required .
We urged a new commitment to the two-state goal and a targeted process that could achieve it - with tight timelines , measurable requirements and milestones for action .
Second chances are rare , but I believe we have come to one .
Very real challenges lie ahead , but Annapolis has created a new spark of hope .
We can and must fan that spark into a blaze of confidence , action and tangible results .
As our near neighbour , Europe shares our interest in solving this , the central crisis of our age .
All sides respect Europe 's neutral role and model of regional progress and peace .
For years , you have been our partner in the search for solutions .
And you will be our partner , too , in the benefits of success : a vibrant zone of peace and prosperity throughout our shared hemisphere .
These realities give Europe an important and prominent role in the future of peace .
I speak especially of the European Union , and you , the voices of Europe , here in the European Parliament .
And I have come here today to urge your active engagement , to seek your specific , practical skills and investment in the future , and to offer Jordan 's own commitment in the days of work that lie ahead .
My friends , there are major areas where action must begin now .
The first is to support the negotiations and their goal : a final settlement creating an end to conflict , security for both Palestine and Israel , and at long last , a sovereign , independent and viable Palestinian state .
( Applause )
We must not underestimate the difficult days ahead .
The issues are complex and decades old .
Real grievances must be faced - and left behind .
On the positive side , Israelis and Palestinians understand their deep , shared stake in ending the conflict .
And a great amount of work has already been done .
From Oslo , through the Road Map , through the Geneva Accords , and other initiatives , the parameters of the solutions are in focus .
I believe the parties can get to the endgame .
But for this to happen , it is vital that the international community be engaged .
Europe has a unique experience of the mechanisms and process of post-conflict recovery and reconciliation .
This includes creating a security framework that can offer assurance to both sides .
European peacekeeping forces have played a constructive role in Lebanon .
Your commitment can help bring great trust to a Palestinian-Israeli settlement .
On the ground , there is a need , not only for resources but for partnership - to boost economic opportunities , create confidence that the political process works , and help create the conditions that will sustain peace .
Both Palestinians and Israelis need to see tangible results , and quickly .
That means security from violence and an end to occupation ; but it also means better conditions of life .
In the occupied territories , the humanitarian situation for Palestinians remains dire .
People need access to jobs and education , effective public services and more .
Such action will provide a major infusion of hope and be a powerful counter-argument to extremist predictions that nothing can change .
Next week , donor nations and institutions will meet in Paris to make commitments and plan the way forward .
European nations and the European Union are already providing help , a commitment respected by people throughout the region .
A second and related imperative is to understand and articulate the potential of peace .
We must begin now to re-envision the future : a region where conflict has given way to cooperation , where a regional economy brings together the capabilities and resources of 22 countries - more than 300 million people , from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean - and where cross-border partnerships advance development , health , the environment and more .
It is a future that empowers people to be full participants in global progress .
And it will unleash a new scope of partnership with our European neighbours , in science , technology and trade .
This promising future is why we must move swiftly on a comprehensive settlement , with action on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks .
Indeed , the entire Arab world has recognized the importance of moving forward .
The Arab peace initiative was affirmed , unanimously , last spring .
And it has received the support of Muslim countries beyond the region .
The opportunity is here , at long last , for a sovereign , independent , and viable Palestinian state and full , normal relations between Israel and 57 Arab and Muslim nations .
This means acceptance ; acceptance by key countries , with billions of citizens , representing almost a third of the membership of the United Nations .
And that opens a shared future of security , peace and new partnerships .
Achieving such a peace will also make a substantial impact on other issues .
Within the region , it will create new strategic space , allowing the resolution of other serious issues , from poverty to proliferation .
Aggressive forces will no longer be able to exploit the Palestinian cause to serve their own ambitions and interests .
( Applause )
Resources and attention will be freed to advance the region 's potential through development and reform .
We in Jordan are ready to meet that future .
We have pressed forward with our reform programme , despite regional instability .
In the last decade , we have achieved significant gains : strong economic growth , rising per capita incomes , and a model education system .
And Europe has been an important partner , through private-sector investments , as well as official assistance .
Allow me to say that we deeply appreciate the support and friendship of this Parliament and the European Union .
( Applause )
And we believe that in the days after peace , our partnership can only soar higher .
My friends , today we can think of a larger neighbourhood , one that stretches from north of the Baltic Sea to south of the Mediterranean , one that is shared by Europe and the Middle East .
It is the basis of the Euromed partnership , our region-to-region platform for cooperation and development .
It is a relationship with great shared interests and unlimited potential .
And it is up to us to develop our partnership to its fullest .
Today , young Europeans are coming to adulthood who never knew a divided Europe .
Their young counterparts , Palestinian and Israeli , have no such positive experience .
They have grown up in a world of division and conflict .
Now , together , we have an opportunity to remove the barriers to their future , and leave the past behind .
Today , the European Parliament represents significantly more Member States than when I spoke before Parliament only five years ago .
That is the result of a region-wide commitment to increase the zone of partnership and progress .
The Middle East is tackling the same important task .
Now , together , we can help that work succeed .
Today , a renewed peace process has begun .
We have seen such beginnings fail in the past .
But this time , a unique confluence of events has created new openings for success .
Now , together , we can and we must , fulfil the promise of peace .
( Applause )
My friends , we in Jordan know that when an olive tree takes life , planting is only the first step .
A hundred processes are then activated to create the cells and structures of life .
Roots emerge , growth occurs , and a core of strength ensures survival .
From outside comes water and support to sustain life and create new fruit .
In the arena of the Middle East , a new olive branch has just been planted .
Now the real work must begin .
It is in our hands to create the process and structures that will give peace roots , help it grow and sustain it into the future .
I urge you to share in this effort .
Our partnership can create an historic transformation and a rich harvest - years of peace and prosperity that will benefit our peoples and our world .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
Your Majesty , we thank you for your visit to the European Parliament .
We thank you for this great speech .
We are all - and the applause showed this - deeply touched by your convictions .
There are few personalities , few leaders , who are as committed as you to peace in the Middle East .
You call us friends , and I say to you , on behalf of the European Parliament : We are at your side to create a Palestinian State that can live in safety ...
( Applause )
... and to have a State of Israel that can live in safety .
We in the European Parliament believe in the dignity of the human being , and the dignity of the human being applies to each human being in this world .
( Applause )
Your Majesty , we want close cooperation with your country and you are one of the very few who have visited the European Parliament more than once .
We in the European Parliament and the European Union want a strong partnership , relationship and , if possible , friendship with all countries in the Middle East .
We are at your side .
Let us work together .
Shukran jazilan .
Thank you , Your Majesty .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in consideration of the formal sitting with the King of Jordan , all my fellow chairs of the political groups have no doubt been unable to take the opportunity to make a statement under our Rules of Procedure about the preceding occurrences .
I should like to do that now .
I believe I speak on behalf of many Members when I express my thanks first of all to the President of this House , to Mr Barroso and to Mr Sócrates for the dignified way in which they defended this solemn act , the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
They had the overwhelming majority of this House behind them .
( Applause )
There are , however , two things I wish to say to the House , and I say them entirely in a personal capacity and not on behalf of my group .
I speak for myself .
I should like to draw the attention of the House to a matter to which I am privy as chair of a political group .
It is not normal practice to report on the deliberations of the Conference of Presidents , but you should certainly know , ladies and gentlemen , that the only group chairman who asked at the meeting of the Conference of Presidents for an invitation to attend the formal signing of the Treaty in Lisbon was Mr Bonde .
I believe the House should know that .
No other group chair made that request .
Mr Bonde , who makes such a racket here , was determined to be there at the signing of the Treaty .
These are the kind of double standards we have to live with here .
Another comment I wish to make is that I learned at grammar school in Germany about the way in which the tactic of collective chanting was used to shout down political opponents in the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic .
The political group that introduced the practice was the one led by Adolf Hitler .
Today 's occurrences reminded me of that .
Thank you .
( Loud applause )
( FR ) I shall be quite brief .
I too was extremely shocked earlier today .
This is a debating chamber where democracy rules , and there is no need for a carry-on such as we witnessed this morning for the benefit of the TV cameras .
Communication is something to which all of us here are entitled .
To those responsible for this morning 's commotion in a chamber dedicated to democracy and freedom , I would simply say that they behaved disgracefully .
We will discuss it again this afternoon in the Conference of Presidents , with a view to preventing any deterioration of the situation .
( Loud applause )
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express - both in a personal capacity and I hope , given what we witnessed , on behalf of my entire group - the strongest possible condemnation of the disgraceful , chauvinist , anti-European demonstration that was staged here earlier today .
( Applause )
My group is certainly in favour of a referendum on the new treaty and it has questions and misgivings about certain articles of the Charter .
But all that is quite unrelated to what took place here this morning and it is important that there should be no confusion .
For our part , we support a Community of values , we support the promotion of fundamental rights , we support a Europe of democracy and there is no place in our vision for chauvinism and bad behaviour !
( Loud applause )
Madam President , on a point of order , I wish to make a formal request to safeguard the dignity of our House .
The behaviour of certain Members of this House in shouting down representatives of Parliament , the Commission and the Council during the signing ceremony was intolerable and must not be tolerated .
It brings the worst of the football stadium into Europe 's highest Chamber and recalls the actions of the Communists in the Russian Diet and the National Socialists in the German Reichstag .
( Applause )
My formal request , Madam President , is this : my group demands that in future the Presidency use the powers granted to it under our Rules of Procedure to evict from the Chamber Members behaving in that fashion .
( Loud applause )
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , I think I need hardly add that we , like all our colleagues , were quite appalled by the demonstration earlier .
I would say this , however : ' Do not over-dramatise !
There may be 50 nutcases in the chamber but there are 700 Members who oppose them , so do not inflate the fact that 50 lame-brains disrupted the signing ceremony into an affair of state .
Let us calm down and , Graham , let us not insist that those responsible be thrown out .
In my view , a free Parliament is a Parliament that can tolerate a few nutcases , irksome though they might be .
( Applause )
Madam President , on behalf of my own Group , whilst we all welcome the opportunity of a robust engagement , which should be allowed within any parliamentary assembly , what happened this morning went beyond what should be allowed to take place in any democratic institution .
However , rather than prolong this argument , could we please get on with the vote and get to our lunch as soon as possible as well .
Madam President , I was attacked personally by Mr Schulz ; therefore , I think we should go to the vote .
I took part in a peaceful manifestation against a celebration of a Charter which was part of a Constitution where I cannot even get the consolidated text and see the relevance and the meaning , and you cannot either .
What you are going to sign tomorrow is a Treaty none of you has read it , simply because it is not possible to read it .
You take over our voting time to celebrate a victory over democracy , and , therefore , I will not attack my colleagues , but I have to say to Mr Schulz that I did not take part in a crime .
I understand it entirely , but we have a different tradition in Denmark , so I was there with my T-shirt , calling for a referendum , and I think all of us should call for a referendum .
This is the democratic norm you are defending .
( BG ) I am taking the floor pursuant to that provision of the rules which gives me the right to personal explanation because Mr. Cohn-Bendit insulted people in this hall .
These are personal insults for which , Mr. Cohn-Bendit , you have no right to hide behind your parliamentary immunity .
Say that you relinquish your immunity and then insult Members of Parliament !
As to what happened here , it is only the freedom of expression which every Member of this Parliament has .
I would like to address Mr. Daul .
Mr. Daul , if you want Members of Parliament to be forcibly taken out of this hall , aren 't you like Hitler who did exactly the same in the German Reichstag ?
The greatest democracy is direct democracy .
And we raised our voice , we exercised out right to free expression , to direct democracy rather than circumvent the European nations as you did .
What is going on here is the dictatorship of the new proletariat taking shape in the new Union .
Which , this time , is not Soviet but European .
( FR ) Madam President , my name was cited in the call for the lifting of parliamentary immunity and expulsion from the Chamber .
May I suggest , ladies and gentlemen , that you begin by getting Members ' names right before you address the House .
I am now going to move to the vote , but I would just make one comment before I do so .
On 29 November 2007 this House approved the Charter of Fundamental Rights by 534 votes to 85 , with 21 abstentions .
( Loud applause )
1 .
Commission legislative and work programme for 2008 ( vote )
- Motion for resolution
2 .
Economic Partnership Agreements ( vote )
- Motion for resolution
3 .
European contract law ( vote )
- Motion for resolution
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Madam President , today we finally saw the introduction of a transitional period for existing nutritional and health claims on the labels of food intended for children .
The Commission had forgotten that and tried to leave Parliament holding the baby .
We have prevented it from doing so .
We have compelled the Commission to make a statement acknowledging the need to introduce transitional periods for claims relating to children 's health and development too .
The only problem , however , is that the Commission 's long-standing refusal to present a proposal to this effect has distorted competition .
Products have already been taken off the market because the Regulation has entered into force in the meantime .
It has been a seriously botched job on the part of the Commission .
In addition , I tabled a motion on behalf of my group for the deletion of Article 4 .
That was a political demonstration .
We stand by our opinion that this Regulation is senseless .
It is not possible to produce nutrient profiles for all foodstuffs .
Almost half of the Members of this House share that view .
EFSA , the European Food Safety Authority , has now stated that it cannot see itself being able to provide nutrient profiles for all products .
Nonsensical red tape - a superfluous piece of legislation !
( FI ) Madam President , I think it is very important that we should try and have health claims on products , but it is right that we need to ensure that they are true and based on knowledge .
It is not appropriate for a company to produce the research and ' commercial arguments ' itself , as if that were enough to win the arguments about health .
In other words , the research and knowledge must be found to be proper and correct and therefore reliable .
It is very important to ensure that nutrition and health claims are correct and that this would also enable someone to switch to a healthier diet .
This is especially important with children and young people because we know the serious problems which there are at present in Europe with obesity , type II diabetes and other related conditions .
We need to make sure that the nutritional value is good and that the health claims are true .
( CS ) Madam President , I voted against the report on the liberalisation of the secondary market in spare parts .
It is an inconsistent strategy .
On the one hand we insist that the industry develop cars that are increasingly safe and we combat industrial piracy .
However , in contradiction to this Parliament has today legalised the production of copies of spare parts , which allegedly makes them cheaper .
Consumers , however , will not be guaranteed an uncompromised standard of safety in the repaired vehicle .
Liberalisation supporters , mainly from the UK , affirm that SMEs will benefit from this policy .
The majority of cheap copies of patent spare parts today , however , are produced in Asia , not in Europe .
In spite of this , in the 10 Member States where design has not been protected to date , the cost of spare parts is 7 % higher than in the remaining 17 .
The latter continue to protect design like Japan and other major car industry leaders .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that in the case of an accident both car users and pedestrians will be now be more at risk because of non-original spare parts of a lower quality .
This directive is unfortunately an example of inconsistent EU strategy .
( CS ) Madam President , I would also like to express my disagreement with limiting legal protection of industrial design for spare parts .
We are witnessing an unprecedented level of interference in the area of industrial rights .
If there are abuses of monopolies by industrial rights owners , ordinary legal instruments such as licence requirements can be applied .
The creation of an industrial design incurs significant costs , which is why legal protection is pertinent from an economic point of view , too .
Its abolition will not lead to liberalisation of the spare parts market as expected by the Commission , but in all likelihood to an increase in the price of the end product .
The foreseeable reaction of producers to the presence of independent producers in the spare parts market will be to offset their losses through higher prices .
It is also of concern that the lower cost of independent producers ' spare parts will result in lower levels of safety and quality .
What troubles me is that in the final analyses it will be the customer who will be placed at risk .
( DE ) Madam President , I wish to say that I voted for the Castiglione report and that I believe it to be a very balanced report , particularly if we consider the way it started out , with 800 amendments tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The efforts of both the rapporteur and numerous Members have undoubtedly borne fruit in a sector beset with severe difficulties ; it is absolutely essential that we give winegrowers the prospect of better times ahead .
I believe this report lays the foundations for progress , and I hope that the European Commission , acting in the spirit of the new Treaties , will take due account - full account , if at all possible - of the decisions of the European Parliament .
( EN ) Madam President , today 's vote on the reform of the wine market is a resounding success for the European Parliament and for the various vine-growing regions and wine producers .
For example , we were able to ensure that it will remain permissible to enrich wines with sucrose .
Parliament also rejected the Commission 's plans to enact provisions at this stage prescribing the lifting of the ban on new planting in 2014 .
In this case we proposed a practicable solution whereby the decision on liberalisation would not be taken until a study had been presented in 2012 .
With regard to the labelling of individual wines , we also reached an agreement that takes due account of the various designation systems used in Europe .
We succeeded , moreover , in incorporating a safeguard into the wine-market regulations which protects the Bocksbeutel , the specially shaped bottles used in my home region of Franconia .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have presented a very balanced framework today which will be a good basis for the forthcoming negotiations in the Council .
The ball is now in the Council 's court ; we in Parliament have performed our task and performed it very well .
( PL ) Madam President , I am delighted that the European Parliament has supported the Committee on Agriculture 's proposal , and especially the Polish Members ' amendment authorising the use of sales designations such as ' fruit wine ' , ' apple wine ' or ' currant wine ' .
Such wines have been produced in my country since the 13th century - for almost 800 years - and I am pleased that the European Parliament has recognised the reality and the fact .
In conclusion , I would congratulate the President on her excellent conduct of the proceedings , especially in today 's heated - sometimes over-heated - atmosphere .
Madam President , I pay tribute to you as a true representative of the British school of parliamentary behaviour .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the vote on the common organisation of the market in wine , I should like to point out that I voted for Amendment 294 , tabled by Mr Lavarra of the PSE and of which I am co-signatory , because I consider that consumers have the right to know whether saccharose has been added to the wine they are drinking and because product traceability is now a general principle advocated by the Union and I do not see why it should not be applied in the wine sector .
For the same reason , I voted for Amendment 310 , tabled by the UEN Group ; neither has an impact on the compromise that Mr Castiglione has worked so hard to achieve .
Lastly , as to the differing line that I have taken on these issues with respect to the Group to which I belong , citizens ' interests mean that the only political stance which I feel I have to obey is one of accepting any proposal which protects those interests , whatever the Group from which it comes .
( LT ) The Commission 's position on the Council regulation on the Common Market Organisation for Wine discriminates against certain countries , especially the new Member States .
The project to promote EU wines in third countries is intended to boost trade , but for some reason it happens to be linked to the areas of previously exploited vineyards and data on average wine production over the last three years .
The Commission intends to support wine exports and certain labels .
Producers and exporters in the countries supported would benefit from competitive advantage .
The fact that wine producers in Lithuania and some other countries with no vineyards are not receiving any support is unacceptable .
I voted against the report .
( CS ) I supported the reform of the wine market , which will improve the quality and competitiveness of European wines .
This primarily concerns Italy , where illegal vineyards should be grubbed-up and subsidies for overproduction of poor-quality wines should be discontinued .
The reform , however , must not favour Southern producers over Northern ones .
I am categorically against any grubbing-up of vines in Moravia , where everything that is produced is used and where traditional wine production is of great importance both culturally and for tourism in the area .
I object to a ban on sugaring in Eastern Europe , including Moravia , unless wine acidification , practised in Southern countries , is also banned .
I do not understand why Moravian winegrowers should buy expensive must from Southern countries , only to replace a 200-year-old tradition of sugaring , thereby changing the traditional bouquet and taste of their quality wines .
This is contrary to the principles of competition in the internal market and I cannot but disagree with it .
I thank those colleagues who during voting time stood behind us and in doing so let common sense prevail .
The Commission will now have to conform .
( CS ) We have seen the southern European states that have a strong viticulture sector defend tooth and nail their wine surpluses .
In the meantime , due to excessive subsidies , the low prices of surplus wine are pushing quality wines from other Member States out of the market .
I object to the fact that while the Commission treats the European wine industry leaders with kid gloves , countries like the Czech Republic are treated in a strict and even harsh manner .
How else can we interpret the proposal to maintain the frequent use of must in the southern parts of the EU , while banning the addition of sucrose .
I am therefore very pleased that Parliament approached the reform responsibly and brought to it an element of equal and just treatment .
By supporting the addition of sucrose , Parliament benefited the Czech Republic among other countries , demonstrating its impartiality and resistance to influences based on conflicting national interests .
I understand that a reform of the wine market is necessary .
I do not doubt the fundamental goals , rather the manner in which they are being achieved .
I highlight the importance of maintaining the principle of equal treatment and non-discrimination .

( CS ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against Mr Castiglione 's report like the other Members from the Czech Republic who belong to the Czech Civic Democratic Party ( ODS ) .
A reform approached in this way will be of no benefit to Czech , Moravian or , for that matter , European wine-growing .
Instead of liberalisation and a reduction in regulation and the administrative burden , which would be of real help to the wine sector , there is a tendency towards more regulations , restrictions and orders .
Central planning has never shown to produce positive results ; nor will it do so in the wine sector .
That is the reason why I did not support this report .
Madam President , my constituency of south-east England is the fastest-growing wine-producing region in Europe .
The consequence of climate change is that a greater acreage of England is now given over to viticulture than at any time since the reign of Henry II , during the last period of European warming .
Home Counties winegrowers have never looked to the EU for subsidy .
Kent and Surrey , Sussex and Hampshire , Oxfordshire , Buckinghamshire and Berkshire are planted with commercially viable vineyards that stand or fall by the quality of their produce .
Yet their very success now threatens to count against them as they approach the limit of permissible commercial cultivation .
Having remained outside the European regulatory regime and having eschewed the handouts , they now find that they are to be regulated anyway .
Just as we do not ask Brussels for money , so we do not want Brussels restrictions .
All English wine-producers ask is to be left free to compete .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I gave a definite ' no ' to a document further impaired by the adoption of various amendments which have made it worse , and in particular because of the introduction of sugaring which we had managed to stave off for years , taking the view that sugaring is no more than a way of making up for nature .
The majority of this House rejected must aid which , even though it is no more than a financial measure , would nevertheless have mitigated the damage brought about by allowing sugaring .
This is a victory for the countries of the North and a defeat for the countries of the Mediterranean area which have been unable to defend the highly vocational nature of their territories .
This CMO is detrimental to the quality and the typical and genuine nature of products , and damaging for wine growers , producers and consumers .

( ES ) Madam President , I think that it has been very positive today , the fact that we have given a charter of rights to the alliance of civilisations which were supported in their time by President Zapatero and the UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan .
I believe that this is a good start .
Moreover , I believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights which we have signed today enshrines the true nature of our civilisation and not the integrismo of those who came here today to oppose it , an attitude which is regrettable and violent .
It is also regrettable and violent when Islamic radicals adopt this same dogged adherence to ingrained traditions .
These two forms of radicalism , are what we need to eradicate in order to have peace and not terrorism .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to point out that I voted against , although in error I voted for - and I give official notification of that - the report on terrorism .
A hypocritical report , a report which shows the cowardly attitude of the Europe of institutions towards terrorism .
It does not even have the courage to call it by its name : Islamic terrorism .
Then , this House voted against an amendment tabled by myself and other UEN Members in which we called Europe 's attention to Al-Qaeda 's infiltration of the Maghreb .
We obviously tabled it a few days ago , and unfortunately yesterday 's events proved us right beyond our most pessimistic forecasts .
The Islamic butchery of Al-Qaeda has hit the poor people of Algiers , and also causes the Islamic butchery of those people , who are probably themselves Islamic .
It is shameful that this is happening at Europe 's door and this House throws out an amendment which calls for retaliatory action , because Europe cannot close its eyes to the threat on its doorstep .
( BG ) I abstained in the vote on the resolution against terrorism because , of course , I do not support the development of terrorism but I cannot support such a document either , which , to my mind , only spreads further panic among European citizens and further contributes to the attainment of the ultimate goal of terrorism , i.e. terror itself .
Still , I was satisfied with the proposed amendments by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , which were adopted , stating that everything has to be treated from the cause , as the ancient proverb goes that each illness has to be treated from the cause .
Therefore , if , for instance , we fail to exert pressure on Israel to stop its segregationist policy and the building of its wall separating the Arabs and depriving them of basic human rights they have , we shall contribute much more to the fight against terrorism than we could by tapping telephones and organizing surveillance of web sites .
Still , the amendments proposed against by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group should not have been rejected as it called for attention to the development of terrorism inside Europe because in my country banned terrorist organizations develop under the umbrella of the ruling MRF party .
( FI ) Madam President , I think this resolution is fine but slightly inconsistent as you get the impression in some places that one is , as it were , surrendering to terrorism .
In other words , it does not seem to accept the idea that terrorism should be eliminated entirely , that it should be pulled up by the roots ; and Mrs Muscardini of the UEN Group raised this point in her oral amendment .
To me this is one of those issues which perhaps should have been examined in more detail when this report was being discussed .
I think the European Union line should be absolutely clear on terrorism .
We promote democracy , human rights and freedom of expression , and can under no circumstances approve of terrorism .
I would also have liked to see more weight given to the importance of education when addressing its causes .
For example , the fight against terrorism in the Palestinian Autonomous Territories should mainly be based on education , so that future generations can be educated and brought up free of hatred and can therefore learn to live in peaceful coexistence with their neighbours .
( DE ) Madam President , in the fight against terrorism , we must deploy all means that are effective , available and compatible with the rule of law .
If the Union wants to win that fight , it must cooperate with partners .
I voted against this resolution because of its anti-American tone .
Instead of standing up against terrorism , the author and many others take a stand against partnership with the United States in the fight against terrorism .
Another reason why I voted against the draft resolution is that it calls on the Commission and the Council to bring detainees from Guantánamo to Europe .
That would amount to importing terrorism into Europe .
It would be a misguided act .
The third reason why I voted against the resolution is that it rejects measures which are demonstrably usable in the fight against terrorism , namely the extension of passenger name records to Europe and a reinforcement of Europol .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) The Aviation Agreement with Morocco is the second agreement relating to the so-called ' common European airspace ' and the first concluded , in this context , with a country outside the continent of Europe .
On a more prominent political note we regret the fact that this agreement - as also unacceptably happened in the case of fisheries - does not explicitly make it clear that ' territory under the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Morocco means territory under Moroccan sovereignty in accordance with International Law ' , thus ensuring respect for international law and the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Saharan people .
Moroccan sovereignty over the territory of Western Sahara is not legally recognised under international law , as the International Court of Justice at The Hague emphasised in its opinion delivered in October 1975 .
Morocco , which is occupying the territory of Western Sahara illegally , consequently has no sovereignty or jurisdiction over that territory .
Moreover , this agreement is based almost exclusively on support for two aims which we oppose : the opening of markets and the harmonization of regulations to promote competition in air transport .
in writing . - ( PT ) In June and July this year , the Commission received the third and fourth applications for mobilisation of this Fund .
The applications related to two German undertakings and a Finnish one , all operating in the telecommunications sector , in the manufacture of mobile phones to be precise .
Both applications are connected with the relocation of production to third countries , causing 4 211 workers to be laid off .
So far , in addition to these two applications and two French requests which have already been approved , the Commission has received further applications from Italy , Malta , Spain and Portugal .
These applications will have to be approved early next year .
As we have mentioned , the existence of this fund cannot serve to ' cushion ' the unacceptable social and economic costs of relocation of undertakings and the associated redundancies .
We therefore insist that a regulatory framework must be established to prevent and penalise relocations of undertakings .
We consider that any grant of public aid to undertakings must be conditional upon long-term commitments by those undertakings in terms of regional development and employment , and they must not be granted any aid that may be used to promote relocations .
Equally , it is essential to strengthen the role of workers ' representatives on the boards of directors of undertakings and in the taking of management decisions of a structural nature .
in writing . - ( CS ) The total funds taken from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund represent around 3.6 % and involve only three countries .
Globalisation , however , affects all human activity to a greater or lesser extent .
The low level of use of these funds invites at least two questions : first , are the effects of globalisation so limit , and second , do we know how to obtain resources from the Fund ?
In other words , firstly we can ask whether we need this Fund .
If we think we do , then , secondly , we need to provide a better definition of the potential effects of globalisation and review the rules for obtaining funding so that the Fund becomes accessible and intelligible to other countries and their more problematic regions .
Indication of economic , social and other elements would also help in this regard .
Justification , such as ' unexpectedness ' on the part of the Commission , is difficult to accept .
Based on the above doubts , I voted against the proposal .
in writing . - ( PT ) The mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument , along with the amendment of the Interinstitutional Agreement , is an integral part of the draft Community budget for 2008 .
Thus , in addition to the correction of 1 600 million in the multiannual financial framework , with the mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument it is also proposed to supplement the funding for the European global navigation satellite system programmes ( EGNOS-GALILEO ) by approximately EUR 200 million .
Moreover , through the mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument , the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) is also to receive a further EUR 70 million in funding .
It should be noted that the rapporteur emphasises that ' external actions in general , and the CFSP in particular , are not sufficiently catered for in the long term compared to the demands now identified ' .
He explains that the ' demands identified ' include reinforcement of the EU ' missions ' in Kosovo and Afghanistan .
In this way , added impetus is given to the EU 's increasing interference and military intervention in support of NATO operations , both in the Balkans - an example being the preparations to support the ' unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo ' , in violation of international law - , and in Central Asia , notably by funding these ' missions ' out of the Community budget .
These are political and military objectives with which we clearly disagree .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument , like revision of the financial perspective , is the natural outcome of the conciliation agreement of 23 November concerning the budget for 2008 .
The Flexibility Instrument is intended in principle to safeguard the budget plan in exceptional circumstances that are difficult to foresee .
In my modest experience , however , use of this exceptional instrument rarely meets the criteria laid down in the interinstitutional agreement .
Such is the case with the draft budget for 2008 .
Both the EUR 200 million to finance the Galileo programme in 2008 and the sum of EUR 70 million under Heading IV , to cover increasing needs in the CFSP area , are solutions to problems that were foreseeable .
Despite the reservations of the European Parliament delegation , which pointed to a lack of adequate funding for satellite navigation and insufficient funding in relation to the European Union 's international ambitions , it did not succeed in convincing the Council of the need to increase the relevant budget allocations .
In its final form , the financial perspective boded difficulties that manifested themselves in preparing the budget for 2008 .
The truth of the matter is that , in the course of the conciliation procedure , Parliament resolved problems created by the Council .
Given the misrepresentation of this situation in the media , we should draw the right conclusions for the future .
in writing . - ( SV ) We cannot endorse a system in which taxpayers ' money is used to market European agricultural products in third countries .
We think that restraint should be exercised in such ventures , particularly in developing countries , since we risk damaging domestic industry .
We think that the EU should be encouraging local agriculture in these countries , not undermining farmers there .
Thriving local production can mean a chance for these countries to develop economically and a way forward for democratic development .
in writing . - ( PT ) Simplifying the European legislation on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries is most important for the development of a simpler and more manageable CAP .
I approve the Commission 's proposal to improve the system , in particular the regulatory consolidation involving the merging of the two regulations relating to the internal market and to third countries .
I am voting for the Golik report , and would highlight the reference it makes to the need to pay more attention to the issues of information and promotion in the WTO negotiations .
in writing . - ( EL ) In view of the fact that the discussions at the WTO and the commitments will result in the abolition of export refunds , cuts in Community aid amounting to EUR 20.1 billion , and price cuts of 48 % - 73 % for most EU agricultural products , there will be severe repercussions on agricultural income .
With the proposal for a regulation , the Commission aims to counteract the negative consequences arising in the past from GATT and the previous CAP reforms , which will be intensified to a greater degree with the WTO and expected CAP reforms .
The consequences will be felt mainly in the distribution of agricultural products , both to third countries and to EU countries , since import duties and internal aid for Community agriculture will be drastically reduced at the same time .
Promotion and information programmes are therefore being proposed .
However , the funds allocated to those programmes can do nothing to counteract the consequences .
The result will be an aggravation of the problems of distributing Community agricultural produce to third countries and also within the EU , a reduction in prices paid to the producer , and outright disaster for small and medium-sized farmers , who already earn only a borderline agricultural income .
On the other hand , the programmes will be of benefit mainly to large agricultural enterprises with competitive production costs .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Common Organisation of the Market ( CMO ) in fisheries and aquaculture products , one of the four pillars of the Common Fisheries Policy , is to be the subject of in-depth restructuring .
The priorities are revision of aspects relating to consumer information on fisheries products and a more equitable distribution of the value added to the products along the whole marketing process ( with special emphasis on the initial point of sale ) .
The EU is also to find solutions to counteract the ' social dumping ' which is now common practice in some third countries and which is reducing our fisheries products ' ability to compete .
National interests are protected in this report and it therefore deserves to have my vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) We welcome the approval of the report on the CMO in fisheries products , which sends a clear signal to the European Commission that an ambitious revision of this CMO is urgently needed in order to increase its contribution to guaranteeing incomes in the sector , improving the marketing of fisheries products and increasing the added value of these products , notably by means of a substantial increase in funding .
Given that the CMO should provide an effective response to the objectives for which it was established and that the insecurity of incomes in the fisheries sector is attributable largely to the form of marketing in the sector , the price formation at the initial point of sale and the irregular nature of fishing , we regret that the Committee on Fisheries rejected our proposals which really go to the heart of the matter , including among others :
the introduction of maximum rates of profit ;
the need for public aid and the establishment of effective market intervention mechanisms ;
the consideration of production costs in the definition of guide prices ;
the introduction of financial compensation for voluntary temporary reductions in the catch or the fishing effort .
We shall nevertheless continue to put the case for these fair measures .
in writing . - The common organisation of the market in fisheries products is intended to ensure stability in the market and security of income for those involved in the sector .
These aims and , indeed , the aims set out in the EC Treaty are worthy and should have led to prosperity in Europe 's fishing communities .
Unfortunately , the past two and a half decades of centralised Brussels control in the form of the CFP have been disastrous for those communities .
A thriving market with job security are not achievable within the context of the CFP , and control of fisheries management must be returned to the nations dependent on fisheries .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we have pointed out , the national authorities have long complied and ensured compliance with the requirements in force under international agreements in the area of civil aviation .
Cooperation between the EU Member States and between those states and other countries is already a reality , a reality that could be further encouraged and developed but which already ensures respect for each country 's sovereignty , for workers and their rights ( guaranteeing social harmonisation , in particular , by the application of the most favourable conditions ) , and for the rights of users .
However , the powers of each Member State in the area of civil aviation are gradually being transferred to the EU , a process that is particularly negative when it occurs in an area in which there are no clearly defined limits .
Essentially , the establishment of the European Aviation Safety Agency signifies another ' step ' in that direction .
It should be stressed that this agency will be responsible for exercising powers that are at present exercised by each of the national authorities .
Basically , this is a measure designed to bring about what has been called the ' single European sky ' and the liberalisation of air transport and air navigation at EU level .
This liberalisation for the sake of financial profitability calls into question workers ' rights , quality of services and safety levels .
in writing . - The Leichtfried report marks the culmination of complex negotiations involving the Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The extension of the powers of the EASA is an important development for aviation safety in Europe and my group was able to support the final compromise .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I confirm my previous vote for the Leichtfried report .
The negotiations between Parliament and the Council , with the assistance of the Commission , have led to this text which , although it does not completely satisfy some of the demands which I have supported , is a good compromise .
I should like to stress the important role that the European Aviation Safety Agency will play as regards the monitoring not just of aviation but also of company practices .
The Agency will be responsible for renewing and issuing certificates and licences and for monitoring the application of uniform safety standards .
It will also be able to impose fines if safety is not properly implemented .
I am therefore pleased by the compromise reached with Amendment 15 which makes the Agency fully independent and impartial , including in matters relating to the revocation of licences and the imposition of fines .
I should also like to stress that staff will have a major role to play in the development and the work of this body .
As a result , I fully share the rapporteur 's concern to improve the status of this work , possibly by drawing on the potential offered by the European Union 's Staff Regulations .
in writing . - I shall be voting for this report and I must congratulate the rapporteur on what is a technical issue of great importance .
I would however like to make a few points .
Regarding cabin crew licensing , clearly this issue causes some concern in certain Member States and has resulted in a determined lobbying effort by the cabin crew trade unions .
I believe the rapporteur has found a compromise that allays fears held by some Member States , yet recognises the importance of the role cabin crew play .
Some airlines frankly abuse cabin crew by not only treating them as mere ' waiters in the sky ' but by employing them on contracts that pay minimum rates , for maximum hours , after paying for their own training .
Secondly it is important to recognise that EU-OPS , as approved by this Parliament , now come under EASA competence .
But I would take the opportunity to remind the Commission and EASA that flight and duty times as contained in Subpart Q of the EU-OPS Regulation cannot be changed until a study into fatigue has been commissioned and the wider industry consulted .
Finally I hope now that other aspects of aviation safety and security can be introduced EU wide , including cockpit door and baggage hold surveillance .
in writing . - ( PT ) As is generally the case with regulations in this area , the specific objectives of this report are based on harmonisation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States in order to promote the development of the European internal market , in this case with respect to nutrition and health claims made on foods .
The proposal consists of two amendments to Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on nutrition and health claims made on foods , and the purpose of the proposal is to provide for an adequate transitional period for health claims referring to children 's development and health .
Nutrition claims which have been used in a Member State before 1 January 2006 in compliance with the national provisions applicable and which are not included in the Annex to Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 may continue to be used for three years after the Regulation comes into force .
Health claims other than those referring to children 's development and health also benefit from transitional measures detailed in Article 28 ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) of the Regulation .
Similar transitional measures are now provided for claims referring to children 's development and health .
in writing . - I voted to approve this report because of the checks that need to be made to ensure the health and nutritional claims made .
Whilst healthy eating for many is essential for a prolonged and active life it is also essential that adequate information is provided to the consumer .
For too long claims made by some manufacturers of popular consumer products have led to consumers being misled over the nutritional and health properties of these products .
I call on the Commission to devote as much time as needed to ensure adequate clarity for European citizens .
in writing . - ( NL ) Liberalisation of the market in car parts has been the subject of heated debate ever since 1993 .
I think the abolition of design rights in respect of visible car parts is long overdue .
So I wholeheartedly support the Commission proposal , because at present there is no properly functioning single market in these parts .
When functional items such as wing mirrors and lights have to be replaced , the parts needed to restore the car to its previous condition must be readily available .
I am for European liberalisation as swiftly as possible , so I favour a transitional period that is as short as possible - five years .
I shall of course be voting against amendments which make it possible for Member States to drag their feet over liberalisation during the transitional period .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report contains some amendments to the proposal for a directive to liberalise the secondary market in spare parts , applicable to the motor vehicle industry , the machinery industry and the capital goods and consumer goods industries .
The Commission proposal advocates unprotected markets , whereas this report advocates a transitional period of 5 years for countries where there is market protection , as in the case of Portugal .
We know that , on the one hand , protected markets lead to large undertakings having a monopoly on the trade in spare parts since , in protected markets , the consumer has to buy a replacement for a defective or damaged part from the original producer .
The argument used is that the design of the product must not be altered , the best known example being that of the motor vehicle industry , although this proposal for a directive also applies to other industries .
But there are practical cases where the replacement of a simple part requires a whole combination of parts , with the associated costs for the consumer .
In the meantime , on the other hand , there are factories in Portugal connected with the motor vehicle industry in particular , which continue to operate thanks to their production of spare parts for the well-known makes and for which the ' liberalisation ' of the market could cause serious problems .
in writing . - ( FR ) In the Lehne report on the legal protection of designs , I decided to support and lend my signature to an amendment proposing an eight-year transition period before complete liberalisation of intellectual property rights on component parts of complex products , such as motor vehicles , used for the purpose of restoring their original appearance .
So far , impact studies have not shown any significant reduction in the consumer price of these parts in the Member States where the system has already been liberalised .
I am also convinced that the European Union is undermining its own interests here .
Other parts of the world are engaged in protecting their manufacturing by means of industrial property rights , and the European Union - while declaring its desire to protect consumers and to combat counterfeiting - is making the wrong choice .
The issues at stake are economic balance in the automotive sector and the safety of European vehicle users .
in writing . - ( FR ) The directive on the legal protection of designs and models , as submitted to the House , proposes complete liberalisation of the market in component parts , notably in the motor vehicles sector .
The rapporteur 's text alters the proposal significantly by advocating that Member States be permitted to retain legislation strictly protecting designs and models for a further five years .
Retaining the manufacturers ' monopoly on the production of component parts is a means of preventing the loss of Community jobs to countries like Turkey , Brazil and Korea , where production costs and quality are lower .
Over-hasty liberalisation of this sector could also entail major risks , notably in terms of safety .
If vehicle manufacturers are to have no responsibility for the production of component parts , there will be nothing to guarantee their compliance with specifications and no assurance of quality .
Surely we must put vehicle users ' protection and safety before any economic or political considerations .
So , having attacked the postal service , the railways and the energy and electricity sectors , Brussels now has vehicle manufacturers in its sights .
There would seem to be no limit to the logic of ultra-globalism and forced deregulation for ideological reasons .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the internal market is a highly complex structure that has balanced the interests of the various groups dependent on it for many years in succession .
The aim of this directive is to achieve complete liberalisation of the secondary market in spare parts .
On the one side , therefore , we have broad groups of manufacturers of spare parts who are demanding that their rights in respect of free competition and the prohibition of a market monopoly be taken into account ; on the other , we have car manufacturers ( and here we are obviously focusing on the automobile industry ) who base the defence of their spare parts production on the legal protection of designs .
In this situation , which at first sight seems insoluble , I support the approach of the rapporteur , who proposes a system under which designs would be protected for a limited period .
In practice , the protection period would be closely based on the life cycle of the complex product .
I also agree with the rapporteur that upon the introduction of a new protected design , the protection of spare parts involved in the old design should lapse .
It should also lapse when a design that does not have a replacement ceases to be manufactured .
That proposal seems to me the most suitable arrangement and the one that will best protect the interests of the groups involved .
I also support the proposal for a transitional arrangement whereby Member States under whose legislation design protection exists for component parts may retain such design protection for five years after the entry into force of the directive .
in writing . - I supported the compromise package and rejected those amendments seeking to extend the transitional period for the " repair clause " .
in writing . - I support a competitive European market for spare parts .
This will help drive down costs for consumers and boost business for small and medium enterprises .
As a result , I support the Commission proposal , which would open spare parts markets to competition .
As such , I am unable to support amendments which increase the time allowed for the market to be liberalised for up to 8 years .
This would slow the progress of achieving our goal of a competitive market for spare parts .
in writing . - ( SV ) We vote against the report and the Commission proposal for the following reasons :
We had hoped that the reform would mean a saving for the Union 's taxpayers and that the wine industry would be decoupled from financing through the common agricultural policy .
In the long term , we think that Community subsidies for European wine manufacturing financed by taxes must cease .
We think that it is reprehensible to use taxpayers ' money in order to market European wines .
It is in conflict with Parliament 's alcohol strategy , which promotes a restrictive view on the marketing of alcoholic beverages .
In that context , to increase spending on marketing measures is an unfortunate reflection of double standards .
We are also opposed to the proposals which advocate the use of European taxpayers ' money to market wines in third countries .
We think that caution should be exercised in the marketing of European wines , particularly in developing countries , since it poses the risk of stifling domestic industries .
The Union should not undermine local producers in developing countries but , instead , support them .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , I am voting against this report , not because of Mr Castiglione 's general approach which includes some positive points such as imposing quantitative limits and environmental compatibility on grubbing-up , banning the use of must from outside the EU and extending measures which can be managed independently by the Member States .
In my opinion , however , endorsing the practice of sugaring and the provision under which this practice does not have to be indicated on the information label for consumers are critical points .
The passage on the so-called fruit wines is also entirely questionable , as is the report 's general approach in relation to must .
I hope , as an Italian , that Minister De Castro and his colleagues will be able to negotiate a legislative reference framework that is more respectful of quality and consumers ' rights .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , I fully support Mr Castiglione 's report on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common organisation of the market in wine .
The creation of a wine market governed by simple and effective rules on production and principles of healthy competition on the Community market will not only improve the quality of European products ; it will also raise the fruit farmers ' standard of living .
It is also important that consumers should be aware of the production cycle of a given product and its precise origin .
Furthermore , these arrangements will be decidedly beneficial for the production of fruit wine in my own country , and that is the main reason why I support the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are voting against this report because it does not significantly alter the most important aspects of the European Commission 's bad proposal for the vineyard and wine sector .
As we have always said , we disagree with this liberal position , which claims to be a move towards dismantling the common organisation of the market in the wine sector .
The European Parliament itself examined this and went so far as to allow the addition of sugar and increase the possible rate compared with the levels then in force .
But one of the most serious aspects is the fact that it leaves the whole question of liberalisation of planting rights from 2013 open , although the rapporteur recognises that this will only serve to concentrate production in the hands of the biggest wine-growers , who already enjoy the benefit of substantial public aid and other privileges .
Equally , we regret that the proposals we made to maintain planting rights and support the restructuring of wine-producing areas , especially family farms , small and medium-sized wine-growers and wine cooperatives were not adopted , although we note with satisfaction that some proposals were approved , notably the proposal advocating the distillation of alcohol intended for drinking .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although I agree with the need to reform the CMO in the wine sector and broadly speaking support the European Commission 's proposal , I consider that the Castiglione report has made an important contribution , proposing some amendments which substantially improve the Commission 's document .
I note , among other positive aspects , the introduction of the possibility of continuing aid for the distillation of alcohol intended for drinking .
I voted for Amendments 33 and 223 because I consider that the liberalisation of the sector should not be abrupt , and I rejected Amendments 314 , 347 , 293 and 217 because I do not agree with the introduction of the possibility of continuing the procedure of enrichment with sugar , a practice that could cause imbalances between producers , and I therefore support the European Commission 's original text here .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the general thrust of this report with its thorough overhaul of the European Commission proposal , which had included , by the way , a massive grubbing-up operation affecting 400 000 hectares of vines .
That proposal ignored the social realities of the wine-growing sector and would have resulted in further land lying fallow , to the detriment of the landscape .
The report views grubbing-up as a potentially useful measure , to be proposed on a voluntary basis .
Another positive proposal concerns the possible implementation of restructuring measures in the wine industry .
The European wine industry needs powerful , successful operators in order to withstand international competition .
On the other hand , the proposals on crisis prevention , while necessary , do not go far enough .
Given the extent to which production fluctuates , the proposed measures would be merely palliative .
What is lacking is a proper crisis-management mechanism that adds something new to the existing measures .
Lastly , I am sorry there is no provision for indication on the label of enrichment through the addition of sucrose : this would have been a straightforward , transparent means of information for the consumer .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the common organisation of the wine market , the Commission seeks to take account of the special characteristics of wine-producing regions by delegating more responsibility and creating more scope for initiative .
Today the European Parliament has set down these very aims on paper .
We have absolute confidence in our proposals , which were adopted by all Members of Parliament from all Member States .
Viniculture in Europe is part of our heritage .
The cradle of global wine production is here in Europe .
Viniculture means business , income and jobs .
It is not the task of the Commission to seek market balance by limiting our production or by changing the rules to make production impossible .
It is , however , the Commission 's task to safeguard our share of global markets and to ensure that our products enjoy the international prestige they merit .
The aim must not be to restrict the market but to open up new markets .
Why should we alter winemaking methods for wines that are selling well ?
Our winemaking methods are rooted in ancient cultures and traditions .
Today the European Parliament has clearly reaffirmed its support for more market measures , national budgets and scope for regional initiative , for socially sensitive phasing-out of intervention measures and for the preservation of existing oenological practices , in other words the addition of sucrose and rectified concentrated must ( RCM ) , with these additives being placed on an equal footing by means of additional RCM subsidies .
I hope that our proposals will be incorporated into the new common organisation of the market in wine .
in writing . - ( DE ) In years when conditions are unfavourable for vine-growing and when there is too little sunshine , the fructose content of grapes is insufficient to produce the volume of alcohol required for fermentation .
For this reason we add sugar , which does not alter the taste of the wine .
The crucial point is that the sugar is added before fermentation and not afterwards , which means that it is not a matter of sweetening sour wine , and the addition of sugar is only permissible for table wines and vins de pays .
This should remain the case in future .
The Commission 's plans to replace beet sugar , which has hitherto been the standard additive , with grape must from the southern regions with production surpluses , do not stand up to scrutiny .
Apart from the impassioned debate among experts regarding variations in flavour , there is also an environmental argument .
It does not make sense to me to transport grape must all the way across Europe to areas that already have their own supply of sugar beet .
in writing . - ( SV ) The amendments to the report which we had to consider in today 's vote are quite ludicrous .
An example : the amount of sugar to be contained in different kinds of wine should in fact be left to the consumers who buy the products themselves to decide .
It should not be determined in decision-making processes between the EU institutions .
Producers in other parts of the world have managed to produce wines which appeal to the tastes of European consumers and at the same time are cheaper than European wines .
According to the majority in the European Parliament , this must be combated by pumping more money into the agricultural policy and by conducting various campaigns .
There is no doubt that excellent wines are produced in Europe .
The question of principle is whether it is right for poorer countries to be crowded out in order to favour European wine production .
It is important to have a perspective which takes all factors into account , including the public health interest , when wine production is discussed .
This is lacking in the report .
For these reasons I have voted to reject the Commission proposal and the European Parliament report on the matter .
Wine producers should operate in a free market and not , as at present , receive huge subsidies from the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) The wine-growing people of Languedoc and Roussillon - of the red-grounded Cross of Toulouse , symbolising the century of revolt that began with Marcelin Albert in 1907 and continued with André Castéra in 1976 , the people whose land stretches from the Rhone to the Garonne - are under threat from the European Commission .
It wants to remove them and plant their lands instead with colonies of retired Brits .
Tea drinkers are to oust the men who live by harvesting grapes and making wine in the Minervois , in Corbières and Costières and the Picpoul vineyards .
This is a crime against civilisation !
And it is being perpetrated under the mendacious cover of alleged over-production .
But what is the truth ?
The truth is the 150 000 hectares of illegal vineyards in Spain and Italy .
It is those illegal vines that ought to be grubbed up , because what is being talked of as excess production is , in fact , excess importation - amounting to 12 million hectolitres every year .
Moreover , for every vine that we grub up , a new one will be planted on the Pacific Rim ; and when China develops a taste for wine we are likely to find ourselves with a worldwide shortage .
in writing . - ( DE ) With its proposal for the reform of wine production , the Commission seems to have come up with yet another pièce de résistance .
On the one hand , it is trying to dry out Europe 's wine lakes by giving financial rewards for reductions in the total vineyard area , while on the other hand it intends to allow vine-planting everywhere after 2013 .
If the growing restrictions are lifted , however , labour-intensive hillside vineyards will become unviable .
As if it were not enough to make these wine producers fear for their existence , the planned sugaring ban would deprive the whole of northern Europe of its harvest in years with relatively little sunshine , while the abolition of aid for concentrated grape must would ultimately make wine production impossible in southern Europe too .
Add to that the mooted ban on the designation ' table wine ' , which would inevitably result in a surfeit of varietal wines of the lowest category , and it becomes impossible to avoid the notion that the planners of this reform simply lack the necessary expertise and sensitivity .
The Castiglione report is an improvement on these proposals , which is why I have voted for it .
in writing . - ( FR ) My colleagues and I backed Giuseppe Castiglione 's report on the common organisation of the market in wine by a large majority .
In particular , I supported four amendments that I consider essential not only for safeguarding the European wine-growing industry , especially in Burgundy and Franche Comté , but also for making it more competitive .
I voted in favour of Amendment 271 , opposing the Commission plan to put an end to chaptalisation .
It is , in fact , vitally important that we should maintain the wine-making traditions of chaptalisation that are carried on in many regions of Europe , including Burgundy and Franche Comté - which I happen to represent .
I also supported Amendments 33 and 223 , opposing complete liberalisation of planting rights from 1 January 2014 : the interests of wine-growers dictate that we should wait until the end of the grubbing-up scheme , to see how effective it has been , before we contemplate liberalisation .
Finally , I voted for Amendment 107 , seeking to maintain compulsory distillation .
In general I am satisfied with the amendments that Parliament has made ; I supported this report and I hope it will have a positive influence on the Agricultural Council on 17-19 December , where the interests of our regions will be at stake .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting for the report by our esteemed colleague Mr Castiglione .
There has long been a need for a reform of the wine sector that restores the profile and competitiveness of Community wines and enables European producers to recapture former markets and capture new ones .
European , especially Italian , producers are experiencing fierce competition from new producers .
This is due not so much to a downturn in internal consumption as to exaggerated production costs , to over-rigid and complex regulations , which often limit the possibility of adjusting production to suit changes in demand , and to over-timid promotion and marketing policies .
We need to make the most of the quality of European and Italian wines .
To enable the European Union to consolidate its leading position in the wine sector , the reform of the CMO in wine should focus on improving quality , and that means promoting , safeguarding and reinforcing regional , designation of origin and geographical indication wines , which represent quality European products on the world market .
in writing . - ( DE ) In years when conditions are unfavourable for vine-growing and when there is too little sunshine , the fructose content of grapes is insufficient to produce the volume of alcohol required for fermentation .
For this reason we add sugar , which does not alter the taste of the wine .
The crucial point is that the sugar is added before fermentation and not afterwards , which means that it is not a matter of sweetening sour wine , and the addition of sugar is only permissible for table wines and vins de pays .
This should remain the case in future .
The Commission 's plans to replace beet sugar , which has hitherto been the standard additive , with grape must from the southern regions with production surpluses , do not stand up to scrutiny .
in writing . - I voted for this report but there are still many areas of concern that Parliament has chosen not to address , notably to make the sector more competitive against third country imports , and to improve the quality of wine produced at EU level .
Sadly national and regional priorities have got in the way of a lasting reform programme .
In Europe we must protect our quality wine , and we must also address the issue of producing quality wines at an affordable price .
There is no doubt the Commission 's proposals have been watered down .
Thankfully , however , my amendment to lift the de minimis criteria , and those amendments to allow chaptalisation have been accepted by Parliament .
These amendments are crucial for northern countries and my own wine producers in the United Kingdom .
The European wine industry still faces many threats , and in the EU we are seeing our own market share disappearing to New World countries .
But why ?
It is because they can produce excellent-quality wine at an affordable price and with a marketing strategy that is based on what the consumer wants in the 21st century ; not what the Romans planted in the third .
We need quality , not quantity , and we need to produce wine that offers value for money .
in writing . - The wine market in the EU depends upon the widest variety of choice and upon local production which is sustainable .
For many , the issue of wine is as close to a cultural issue as language itself .
This is why this vote today was such a contentious one .
The impact of sugar labelling or of denying wineries from using sugar additives would have had a prohibitive effect on wine production in northern Europe .
Many excellent wines now originate from the UK and particularly in the south-east of England .
This has been the case since the Romans first brought wine to the UK .
I voted to maintain this tradition and for an open market .
in writing . - Conservatives voted against this resolution for the reasons that , firstly , the motion calls for more EU involvement through the proposed Reform Treaty and would thus extend the competence of the EU into the highly sensitive area of national security .
Conservatives believe in a strong partnership at a global level with all those nations fighting the war on terror , and especially with our American allies .
This motion fails to recognise the need for cooperation rather than harmonisation on this issue .
in writing . - The British Socialist Delegation ( EPLP ) welcomed and voted in favour of the resolution on terrorism .
Whilst the final version of the resolution adopted by the European Parliament is not perfect , we recognise the importance of sending a clear , unequivocal signal to those who threaten our way of life that we shall not succumb .
The EPLP is convinced that the EU can and will do all it can to defeat terrorism and that with neighbouring Member States and international allies working together we are more likely to achieve this ultimate goal than by isolationist policies .
We take full responsibility for our role as parliamentarians to extensively scrutinise Commission proposals in this field to ensure that any legislation which is adopted is appropriate , proportionate and respects the fundamental rights of our citizens .
We will continue to be critical of allies ' policy where there are policy differences , however we recognise and welcome the on-going co-operation between the EU and democratic states , especially the important relationship between the EU and the US , in the field of Justice and Home Affairs .
We remain convinced that it is through co-operation with our allies not antagonism or retaliation that we will defeat those who seek to destroy our values and principles through violence and hatred .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the EU Member States have a duty to combat terrorism in all its forms , while remaining within the bounds of law and respect for human and civil rights and freedoms .
The fight against terrorism transcends national frontiers , and the need for international cooperation is obvious .
It is absolutely necessary that all institutions and authorities given special powers in the fight against terrorism be subject to full democratic control by an independent judiciary .
The fight against terrorism must not - as the resolution adopted today attempts to do - serve to increase the police and judicial powers of Brussels at the expense of the nation states .
That is why I did not support today 's resolution on terrorism in the EU .
in writing . - ( FR ) Terrorism has become a greater threat than ever before to the security of all European Union citizens .
The EPP-ED Group has therefore made combating terrorism a priority and it had hoped to see the adoption of a resolution to that end .
The resolution tabled highlights how hard and how necessary it is to strike the right balance between security and respect for individual freedoms .
In our European democracies we certainly do need to ensure that anti-terrorism measures are proportionate to their purpose , so that they do not compromise the personal freedoms of any of our citizens .
At the same time , we have to remember that the Union 's primary aim is to defend the right of every European citizen to life and to security , and it pursues that aim by preventing and opposing terrorism .
It is unfortunate that a large number of distinctly disproportionate and , in some cases , unjustified provisions have upset the balance in this text .
Despite the amendments that our group introduced , the resolution ultimately adopted in plenary reflects neither the spirit nor the letter of our position on this matter , and that is why I voted against it .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although it contains aspects that criticise , albeit mildly , the violations of human rights committed in the name of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' - violations which we clearly and firmly condemned from the outset - this resolution does not dissociate itself from the fight or seek to challenge it when international law is flouted and State terrorism is practised in its name .
Yes , it certainly calls for criticism of the violation of the right to a fair trial and data protection , the lack of transparency and democratic control , the refusal of the Council to answer ' allegations of abuse of powers under the pretext of counter-terrorism , in particular in the case of CIA extraordinary renditions and black sites ' .
Nevertheless , we cannot accept that , under cover of the so-called ' fight against terrorism ' , Parliament should ' warmly welcome the adoption of the new Reform Treaty ' and call on ' the Member States to ratify it ' ; that it should highlight , once again , that ' the US is an essential partner in this field ' , adopting US foreign policy lock , stock and barrel ; or that it should call for ' the powers of Europol to be reinforced ' and for it to be accorded ' independent power to conduct investigations ' .
in writing . - I could not support today 's motion for a resolution on the fight against terrorism for a number of reasons .
Firstly , its enthusiastic welcome for the Reform Treaty ( Lisbon Treaty ) is not one I can share in .
I believe the Reform Treaty will not make Europe a safer place for citizens of Member States .
I also have concerns regarding the civil liberties aspects of this motion for a resolution .
This motion for a resolution , although it has some excellent points , is unbalanced with too great an emphasis on legislation and security cooperation .
in writing . - ( DE ) Europe has become more of a target for terrorists because it has allowed itself to be reduced to the role of an accomplice in the breaches of international law and human rights committed in the name of US foreign policy and also because it has not managed to act as an honest broker on the Palestinian question .
It is high time the EU recognised that mass immigration from the Islamic world is a potential security risk , particularly since emigration to Europe has become a means of acquiring martyr status and the infiltration of the Christian West by Muslim immigrants has been declared a religious objective .
Instead of acting accordingly and pressing for an immediate halt to immigration from Islamic countries as well as getting to grips with the repatriation of illegal immigrants , the EU is adopting a softly-softly approach to avoid vexing the Muslims who are here already .
It is chiefly because this report seems to regard the EU Reform Treaty , with its disdain for democracy , as the cure for terrorism that I have voted against it today .
in writing . - ( IT ) We asked the European Parliament to deal seriously with the problem of terrorism at the July part-session .
Some clever person decided , however , to talk about it in September and vote in December : another five months wasted and yet more words aiming more to defend the rights of freedom of expression of terrorists , who are making increasing use of information networks , than to protect the safety of European citizens and the other countries attacked by terrorism .
We award the Sakharov Prize to Mr Osman and we leave him alone to fight to defend the lives of millions of people in Darfur , we continue to ignore the violence of the Islamic fundamentalists in Somalia and we weep crocodile tears for the 50 victims in Algeria .
Shame !
For that reason I cannot support your resolution and I shall vote against it .
in writing . - ( EL ) The European Parliament resolution matches and in many respects outstrips the reactionary policy and anti-democratic measures of the EU , which , on the pretext of fighting terrorism , restricts the fundamental personal rights and democratic freedoms of workers .
It calls for still greater strengthening of police and judicial cooperation between the enforcement mechanisms and secret security services of the Member States , Europol and Eurojust , and for greater effectiveness in the operation of the SIS II and VIS databases , in order to extend and increase the effectiveness of the monitoring and filing of information on workers throughout the EU .
Not only does this resolution align itself fully with the new dimension which the EU is giving to its ' counter-terrorism strategy ' , i.e. combating and preventing so-called ' violent radicalisation ' , but it demands that the strategy should be fought for and that it should be aimed , amongst other things , against ' incitement to commit violent actions ' .
This strategy against ' radicalisation ' reveals the real target of this so-called ' counter-terrorism ' policy of the EU and its enforcement mechanisms : all those who resist and challenge its reactionary policy .
However , no matter how many resolutions are passed by the political mouthpieces of the monopolies , they will not stop the opposition movements and the steadily growing groundswell of opinion challenging the EU itself as an imperialist inter-state union of European capital .
in writing . - The Fine Gael delegation in the European Parliament voted against paragraph 16 of the resolution on the Commission 's Legislative and Work Programme 2008 as we are vehemently opposed to any EU initiative to establish a European Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) .
We welcome the fact that the Commission does not intend to propose legislation on this matter in its programme for next year .
Tax competition is vital for promoting growth , attracting investment and enabling Member States , especially those in the Eurozone , to manage their economy .
The ECB sets interest rates and the Stability and Growth Pact sets borrowing and inflation requirements for the Eurozone , tax policy is therefore one of the most important instruments left to Eurozone Member States under the Treaty and must be safeguarded .
The Fine Gael MEPs believe an EU CCCTB would lead eventually to the establishment of a single tax rate in Europe and are strongly against it .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are voting against this resolution because the proposals expressing our serious concern over the acceleration of the process of liberalisation and deregulation , which is occurring in many sectors and which poses a threat to employment , the quality of services provided and the future of public services in the EU , were not accepted .
What remains is biased against the State as a supplier of services of general interest , since the whole emphasis is on liberalisation .
Monetary and fiscal policy in the EU has also been restrictive , the prime objective being to stabilise prices and consolidate the budget in accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact even though we know that the process of nominal convergence has an adverse effect on economic growth and employment , economic and social cohesion , real convergence between the EU Member States , and public investment .
It also lays emphasis on the neoliberal Lisbon Strategy , which has been the principal instrument used in the EU to promote the liberalisation and privatisation of services and public facilities , flexibility and adaptability in labour markets , wage reductions and the opening up to private interests of most social security provisions , including pensions and health .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the work programme for 2008 adopts a complex approach aimed at implementing a vision of Europe that meets its citizens ' future expectations .
The European Commission 's main priorities for the coming year are activities to promote economic growth and employment , sustainable development , and the management of migratory flows .
They also concern climate change , energy , future enlargement of the EU and action on the international scene .
It should be stressed that the work plan was elaborated in the light of detailed discussions with other institutions , including the issues discussed recently in the debate on globalisation at the Council 's informal meeting in Lisbon .
The programme also includes priorities in the field of communications that are a further step by the Commission in its efforts to improve the flow of information about the EU to the citizens of Europe .
I was pleased to see the announcement of a new approach to implementation of the principle of subsidiarity and independent assessment of the consequences of proposed legislation to avoid mistakes in future .
The proposals for new legislation to improve the situation of women , especially in reconciling the demands of family and working life - which is an important step towards combating the decline in Europe 's natural increase rate - are also very welcome .
in writing . - ( PT ) Among the many aspects that warrant criticism on this subject , I would like to focus on one of the priorities for 2008 , described by the President of the Commission as one of the most significant : the ratification of the proposal for a Treaty on European Union .
The majority of the EP ' welcomes the Commission 's commitment to supporting the ratification of the Reform Treaty ' , ' urges the Commission ... to intensify its efforts to develop a more effective communication policy in order to achieve a better understanding by citizens of EU action ... with a view to preparing the way for ratification of the Reform Treaty and the European elections in 2009 ' and ' calls on the Commission to set out clearly how it intends to put into practice the content of its ... priorities , particularly the priority relating to the Reform Treaty ' .
In view of the inadmissible role played by the Commission during the referendums on the so-called ' European constitution ' conducted in 2005 , such intentions , long proclaimed and now reaffirmed , will , if they are carried out , represent a genuine interference in the process of ratification which is a matter for each Member State .
What a contradiction on the part of the President of the Commission who , when asked about the process of ratification , replied that it was for each Member State to decide , but who specifically makes it one of his priorities to meddle with that decision !
in writing . - ( PT ) Since it was impossible to secure private funding , as originally planned , to supplement the financing of the ' Galileo ' project , the European Union ' decided ' that it should be financed entirely with public capital , notably from the Community budget .
This is the reason for the amendment to the Interinstitutional Agreement ( IIA ) - which established the Financial Framework for 2007-2013 - increasing the ceiling for authorisations granted under subheading 1a ( competitiveness for growth ) for the years 2008 to 2013 to a total of EUR 1 600 million at current prices , at the cost of under-budgeting and under-implementing the items under heading 2 ( ' preservation and management of natural resources ' , namely agriculture , fisheries and the environment ) in 2007 .
With this revision of the IIA and the mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument , the EU is securing the future of its great ' priority ' by guaranteeing its funding .
It still remains to be seen whether , once the ' Galileo ' project is completed - completed , it should be noted , with public funding - it will not be ' offered ' at some later date to private capital , on the basis of some public-private partnership for example , with the public party bearing the costs and private capital making the profits .
in writing . - Do not support the creation of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base .
in writing . - ( RO ) I am in favour of adopting the European Commission 's legislative programme for next year and I believe it reflects the political priorities of the European Union very well .
Nevertheless , the legislative proposals the Commission is preparing regarding the legislation of private companies and small and medium-sized companies should not affect the Member States policies that have significantly contributed to the economic growth over the last years , such as the single tax rate .
Also , the recent communication of the European Commission regarding the " Health Check " of the Common Agricultural Policy is a good basis for interinstitutional negotiation .
For this purpose , the European Commission must suspend legislative proposals fundamentally amending provisions of the European Commission until the conclusion of debates between the European institutions and Member States .
Last but not least , I regret the absence of legislative initiatives in the field of common visa policy , as regards the reciprocity of granting free movement of persons between the European Union and third countries .
I remind the European Commission that 12 Member States , representing over 100 million citizens of the European Union , are still excluded from the Visa Waiver Program for the United States of America .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a member of the ACP-EU Parliamentary Assembly , I wish to support the results of last week 's EU-Africa summit meeting in Lisbon .
At the Parliamentary Assembly 's last session in Kigali we called for prudence and the avoidance of hasty further regulation of relations between the EU and Africa .
Clearly , the Joint EU-Africa Strategy must take account of the interests of both partners , and cooperation should not take place at the expense of either of them .
The fact that the European Union is the African countries ' most serious economic partner - and that most aid to Africa comes from Europe - also imposes a special responsibility on the Union .
That was made clear in the Joint Statement of the European and Pan-African Parliaments , which rightly called for greater involvement of both bodies in shaping future relations between the two continents .
The European Parliament has clearly stated its support for the Kigali Declaration of 22 November 2007 , calling for extension of the deadline for concluding negotiations on a new EU-ACP trade agreement , for the agreement to be a prudent one , and suggesting that the rigorous demands of the WTO need to be relaxed .
It is good that the priorities set until the next summit in 2009 refer not only to peace , security , human rights , energy , climate change and migration , but also to combating poverty through employment , investment in health care , and education .
in writing . - ( PT ) If there were any doubts about the EU 's real intentions with regard to the free trade agreements it proposes to establish with the ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) Group of States , agreements which are described as ' economic partnership agreements ' ( EPAs ) and which were much in evidence at the recent EU-Africa summit because some African countries refused to sign them , a reading of the resolution that has now been approved would suffice to explain them .
However , João Cravinho , Portugal 's Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation , as President of the Council , had already made things quite clear at the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly at Kigali on 21 November .
Although obliged to retreat ( for the moment ) , the EU sought to counter the resistance by coming up with a ' proposal to negotiate ' the EPAs ' in two phases , starting with trade in goods ' and proceeding later ' to include other areas , such as services and investment ' , at the same time promising millions and millions of euros as a pledge of the ACP countries ' sovereignty and independence ( economic and , soon , political ) .
That is the object of the ' General Affairs and External Relations ' Council decision of 17 November 2007 .
The majority of the EP applauds and supports the decision .
As for us , we denounce and oppose such intentions and policies , by which the EU seeks to recolonise the ACP countries economically .
in writing . - ( DE ) I welcome the fact that a large percentage of the European Parliament supports the substance of the Kigali Declaration on Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) which was jointly formulated in Rwanda by Members of Parliament from European , African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
I am disappointed , however , that a jointly negotiated text which was approved by the Members of the European Parliament and the parliamentarians from the ACP countries at the ACP-EU meeting in Kigali has suddenly been rejected by the EPP-ED and Liberal Groups in Strasbourg .
I firmly believe this sends entirely the wrong signal in the context of negotiations on an issue which is of vital importance to the ACP countries .
in writing . - ( FR ) EPAs must not be seen merely as free-trade agreements in the WTO sense and , above all , they must not undermine the already vulnerable economies of communities overseas .
These agreements must constitute proper partnerships that will make for the establishment of a new economic and trading environment to promote development in all the territories concerned .
I am grateful to the Members of the House for adopting my amendment , which points out that the interests of overseas communities lie at the heart of these preferential , reciprocal agreements with the ACP countries .
It is essential that we take more consistent account of the particular circumstances of the outermost regions in the negotiations , on the basis of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Overseas Countries and Territories adjoining the ACP also merit special attention , in accordance with the association agreements that already link them to the Union under Article 299 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
Even if the current discussions are problematic , especially on the issues of local markets and the list of sensitive products , I would urge the Commission to seek compromises that respect the particular interests of the outermost regions and the Overseas Countries and Territories in question .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.50 and resumed at 15.00 )

Corrections to votes : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes : see Minutes
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
EU / China summit - EU / China human rights dialogue ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the EU-China summit .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome today 's debate about the EU-China human rights dialogue .
As you know , the human rights issue was raised and discussed at the very recent summit meeting in Beijing and the joint statement also explicitly refers to it .
I think it is fair to recognise that , although serious concerns remain and need to be addressed , China has also made remarkable progress in the human rights field over the last year .
This is particularly true in the field of social and economic rights but also in some other areas .
There are moves afoot to reform the ' re-education through labour ' system .
In this respect we welcome the new legislative initiative that is under consideration and we also hope that concrete reforms will be put in place soon .
It is a fundamental principle of human rights not to deprive an individual of his or her liberty without due justice and a fair trial .
China is also working to implement the recommendations of the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture .
For example , the Ministry of Justice has recently directed courts not to rely on confessions on their own as sufficient evidence of guilt , as such confessions can sometimes be made as a result of torture by police or detention personnel .
Similarly , China is initiating specific training measures targeted at these groups of public order personnel .
We are also pleased to note the progress made with respect to the Supreme People 's Court now exercising full review power over death penalty sentences issued by lower courts .
And we understand that the result is a reduction in the number of effective death sentences and executions .
This is gratifying for the European Union .
As you know , it has long been a priority area of intervention .
Nevertheless - and now of course I also have to say a few negative things - the Commission remains concerned by the situation of human rights in China in general and more specifically in the field of civil and political rights .
We particularly have in mind here freedom of expression , religion and association and the protection of the rights of minorities , for instance in Tibet and in the province of Xinjiang .
In this context , the repression of human rights defenders remains a key concern .
Exercising the right to speak freely often leads to beatings , to house arrest or even to terms of imprisonment .
Access to the internet - the right to information - is closely monitored and restricted and those , for instance , who speak up in favour of greater autonomy for Tibet receive disproportionately long terms of imprisonment .
The use of state secrecy legislation as well as other loosely defined criminal provisions facilitates the prosecution of those who speak or publish freely .
The Commission therefore urges the Chinese Government to permit expressions of all forms of opinion .
This is also , we think , a very important factor for how the international public views China , particularly next year in the run-up to the Olympics , when all eyes will be on China .
History shows that allowing freedom of expression leads , in the long term , to a far more stable society .
We all know that .
All these issues are regularly addressed in the EU-China human rights dialogue .
Therefore , we welcome the fact that the most recent dialogue which was held in October in Beijing allowed a sincere and an in-depth exchange of views on all topics of our concern , with several of the discussions leading to follow-up activity .
It is important to recognise that this dialogue provides an important forum where both parties can openly speak about their genuine concerns while contributing to a better understanding of our differences - and our differences remain notable .
In this context we regret the Chinese decision to withdraw from the Human Rights Seminar in Berlin over the participation of two NGOs and that , for similar reasons , the Seminar could not be held in Beijing recently .
We consider that civil society has a very important role to play and the Seminar provides the appropriate forum for NGOs to make their valuable contributions .
I trust we are able to find a mutually agreed solution so that this important exercise will continue its successful path in the future , as underlined by the EU-China Summit .
Let me close by saying that there are two more important human rights issues which we regularly raise with the Chinese side as a matter of high priority .
One is the ratification by China of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the other one is the release of those who were imprisoned at the time of the Tiananmen Square demonstrations or who later commemorated the 1989 events .
Decisive action on both sides would send a clear positive signal and would be highly welcome .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I should like to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner for that statement .
I think it is very important , following the EU-China summit - and particularly the EU-China human rights dialogue - that there should be an opportunity for Members of this House to examine the outcome .
I do not want to spend time on the EU-China summit .
I want to talk about the human rights dialogue , because that was what took me to Beijing last May when , jointly with Ms Flautre , I was preparing a report on the reform of the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
I want this afternoon to speak for those who cannot speak for themselves .
That , of course , is the vast majority of people in China , who want change and reform .
But that movement is led by , among others , Gao Zhisheng , a Christian lawyer who has disappeared from his home in Beijing , where he was being held under house arrest following his conviction for ' subversion ' this time last year .
While I know that his name was among those raised in the dialogue , I think that one of the problems that we find in this House is in relation to the dialogue .
While I note that the Commissioner says that it was a sincere and in-depth exchange of views - and I am sure that was true on the side of the Europeans - I am not convinced that would be the case on the side of the Chinese .
In my experience - since the time when I was EU-China rapporteur back in 1997 , 10 years ago when this process began - there has been absolutely no product in human rights terms from China in the sense that people 's lives have been improved or prisoners have been released or torture has stopped or the massive imprisonment reported by Harry Wu from the Laogai Foundation has ended .
He estimates that there are 6.8 million people in one form of detention or other in China today , many of them there for religious convictions - and we think especially here of the Falun Gong practitioners , who are blameless but who are tortured for their beliefs and , in many cases , are dying .
I would like also to reflect on the imminence of the Olympic Games .
One should not forget that Article 1 of the Olympic Charter states that countries should enjoin ' universal fundamental ethical principles ' .
That means only one thing : that China cannot be held to be an appropriate host for these Games , especially since nothing has fundamentally changed since 2001 .
I hope all Groups will support the joint motion , which calls for an assessment by the IOC of China 's compliance with the terms which were agreed back in 2001 .
I fear they will be found wanting .
My view is that the Olympics should be transferred forthwith to Athens and remain there forever .


on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , to come straight to the point , I believe the Olympic Games should go ahead in China , because we have a good opportunity to use these very games to step up our dialogue with China .
That is in the joint statement too , Mr McMillan-Scott , and if you hold the opinion you have been expressing , you are against the joint statement .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , one of your former opposite numbers , Madeleine Albright , observed when she was US Secretary of State that it was naturally far more difficult to raise human rights issues in China than in Burma , because in China geopolitical factors were part of the equation .
It is a fact that we need China as a partner in the quest for a solution to many global problems .
That , however , must not prevent us from raising the question of human rights and discussing it in great depth , though not necessarily in the tone of schoolmasters or schoolmistresses who know it all .
I am very pleased that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been signed today , because many speakers have made the point that we have no right to speak about human rights issues unless we ourselves have a very good record of respecting human rights .
We , indeed , are firmly convinced that it is in China 's interests not to trample human rights underfoot but to respect them properly .
China wants stability .
How is China to remain stable if the question of human rights is not raised more emphatically ?
We do not want China to crumble .
It makes no sense to build up Europe while seeking to destroy China , but failure to respect human rights puts China 's stability at risk .
We want China to be governed in accordance with the principles of social justice .
In the context of a monumental growth process , to which Mr Barroso also referred , the only way to safeguard stability is to take full account of social factors .
It is impossible , however , to strive for social justice if human rights are not respected , if people cannot form trade unions or launch popular initiatives .
We want China to focus more sharply on environmental matters , because the environment is a major common global asset .
We know that many initiatives are taking shape in China for the purpose of mass protest against the violation of minimum environmental standards .
It would be a good thing for China if the nation listened to those voices .
It would be a step forward for China .
For these reasons I believe it is not a matter of European arrogance but of protecting our common interests .
In the interests of China we shall raise the question of human rights , and enlightened representatives of the Chinese political system would do well to listen to us and to this resolution , which is in China 's interests and which would help China to advance , something it cannot do unless it respects human rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I much admire the contribution of China to the development of world civilisation .
In terms of technology , in terms of society and in terms of culture , China has probably contributed more than any other country to the development of humankind .
I regret that China 's growing economic maturity is not accompanied by a growing political maturity .
But I regret , too , that the European Union is not doing more to push China in the right direction .
Two days ago , on the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Union proclaimed its commitment to the ' promotion and protection of human rights throughout the world as a cornerstone of our external action policy ' .

And yet , two weeks ago , Messrs Barroso and Socrates left the summit early , having secured Europe 's economic interests , leaving officials to negotiate the conclusions - conclusions which , unsurprisingly , made little mention of human rights , supported the lifting of the arms embargo and opposed Taiwan 's bid to join the United Nations .
They did much to undermine Mr Solana 's carefully crafted words the previous month .
I wonder what the world is coming to when the European Union , the self-styled protector of universal , interdependent and indivisible human rights , fails to speak out clearly against one of the world 's worst human rights abusers .
I suspect that both the Chinese and others may come to regret the decision to host the Olympic Games in Beijing .
The Chinese authorities themselves promised that they would bring a greater climate of freedom and openness .
And yet figures from Human Rights Watch suggest that abuses have increased in the last seven years .
Not only does China continue to execute more people than the rest of the world combined but it has clamped down dramatically on internal dissent and media freedom in advance of the Games .
These developments violate the spirit of the Olympic Charter .
They are in direct contravention of commitments made by the Beijing authorities themselves in the Host City Contract which they signed with the International Olympic Committee .
That contract has not been made public .
Why ?
Because , if the world saw the complete and total disjunction between Chinese promises and Chinese practices , we would have no choice but to boycott Beijing in the same way that we boycotted apartheid South Africa .
I do not believe in boycotts .
I have also maintained that engaging with a China committed to reform and opening would bring greater fruits than empty threats .
But President Hu Jintao has to accept that a deal is a deal .
The Host City Contract , the human rights clause in the Chinese Constitution , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - these are promises made to China 's citizens .
If China wants the Olympics to prove its legitimacy and credibility to the world , then in return it must prove that it is willing to honour its human rights commitments : by improving media freedom in line with the Olympic pledges , by suspending the death penalty in line with United Nations demands , by ceasing its support for military dictators from Burma to Darfur and by allowing elections by universal suffrage in Hong Kong .
That is how China can win its place at the heart of the international community .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the People 's Republic of China is a country to be found on every list of infringements of human rights , whether it is a matter of freedom of speech and association , compulsory abortion , disappearances , torture , religious freedom or threats of aggression against Taiwan .
China continues to persecute followers of the Catholic Church .
A report by David Kilgour , the Canadian Government 's former secretary of state for Asia , shows that one of the most persecuted groups since 1999 is Falun Gong , whose members have organs forcibly removed in Chinese work camps .
People whose only crime was to meet with a vice-president of this Parliament , Mr McMillan-Scott , have recently disappeared without trace .
Meanwhile , our trade relations are blooming . China is extending its influence in Africa and will soon be inviting millions of guests to the Olympic Games .
I cannot understand the absence so far of the most obvious response : the free world must boycott the 2008 Olympics .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , we are talking today to Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , and that is welcome .
However , at the 10th EU-China summit in Beijing on 28 November , the European Union was represented by its President , by the Trade Commissioner and by the Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner .
It is true that , since 2000 , trade between the European Union and China has increased by 150 % ; it is also true that it has become much harder to produce statistics on the deteriorating human rights situation in China .
There is nothing taboo about discussing human rights issues at the same time as trade issues .
There is an obvious link between them , for example in relation to the freedom to join a trade union , and the ability of workers in China to mobilise and demand better working conditions .
The general attitude we encounter is deplorable , all the more so because its effect is to make us waste time : the decision taken in 2001 promised a new openness in China and progress on human rights and democracy ; the Chinese people are waiting for that promise to be kept and they are looking to us .
They have been disappointed in their hope that openness would result from China 's staging the Olympic Games , and the sense of disappointment is bitter .
Not only has the run-up to the Games so far brought harsher repression but - even more regrettably - the organisation of the Games has itself had unforeseen effects and has been used as a pretext for serious human rights violations .
I am thinking here of the cases of forced expropriation and of the exploitation of migrant labour .
All this may not be surprising , for the dissident Hu Jia informs us that the head of security in Beijing is also the person in charge of organising the Olympic Games there .
Perhaps we shall get round to expressing surprise or even dismay about that state of affairs when the intimidation and repression of foreign journalists - which has already begun - becomes even more drastic , for they are already being prevented from working .
The arrest of two Agence France-Presse journalists on 12 September , for example , shows that the rules introduced in January 2007 are being applied only patchily and only insofar as the persons concerned cause no embarrassment to the regime .
The undertakings given by China are a dead letter ; indeed , it is falling so far short of its commitments that it has resorted to compiling blacklists .
There is currently a blacklist of 42 categories of people regarded as persona non grata during the Olympic Games , ranging from the Dalaï Lama to followers of Falun Gong and including dissidents .
In January this year , negotiations began on a new EU-China framework agreement .
That is welcome because a new agreement also means a new ' human rights and democracy ' clause .
It creates fresh scope for discussing human rights concerns with the Chinese authorities .
However , 2007 was also the year that saw the cancellation of a legal seminar to prepare for the human rights dialogue because the Chinese authorities refused to allow two particular NGOs to participate - one of them the well-known organisation represented by human rights campaigner Sharon Hom .
It was certainly salutary to find the Union taking a firm stand on that occasion .
At the same time , of course , we have to ask whether seminars like this can continue .
Our position is that the two things must not be mutually exclusive .
It is very important to go on holding legal seminars .
Equally , however , we cannot permit the Chinese authorities to dictate who may take part in them .
( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , in past decades this Chamber has been the scene of many ringing declarations on human rights .
The proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights has once again made us focus on what the essence of Europe really is .
We are a community of values , based on solidarity , tolerance and respect for human rights .
At least , that is the theory , but the reality is rather different .
And the European Union 's watchword on human rights should really be rather different .
In the last few weeks it has been abundantly clear that those who are sick of hearing about human rights are often the same people who apply that other principle of Realpolitik , namely erst das Fressen , dann die Moral , or ' food first , then morality ' , as Bertolt Brecht put it .
In Paris Nicolas Sarkozy , in exchange for lucrative contracts , is rolling out the red carpet for a mass murderer who just a few days ago sought to legitimise terrorism , boasting that he did not waste words talking about human rights in his country .
In Lisbon a bloodthirsty tyrant like Mugabe is received with full honours , because in Africa too we have to look after our commercial interests .
In China we are pursuing the same course .
Last year Amnesty International reported that Beijing was lagging behind on crucial issues such as the death penalty , judicial procedures , press freedom and freedom of movement for human rights activists .
In the meantime the Chinese capital is undergoing a slick clean-up , says Amnesty International .
Re-education by forced labour and imprisonment without charge are now being used to punish offences like the unauthorised posting of bills , driving an unlicensed taxi and begging , to name just a few .
The human rights activists will be silenced , but the stadia will gleam and sparkle next year , ladies and gentlemen .
A lot of European worthies will be jockeying for front seats at the opening of the Games .
And when they get home they will doubtless continue the fight against extremism in Europe .
It is enough to make you sick .
( LT ) It is impossible to deny that since 1998 , when we saw the start of the summit meetings between China and Europe , relations between the EU and China - at political , economic , trade and scientific research level - have been developing intensely and have grown into a strategic partnership .
However , strategic partnerships , as we understand them , are based on common values , respect for democracy and human rights .
Respect for human rights has always been and continues to be the foundation on which the EU is built .
It is not a short-lived declaration , as the EU 's history over more than half a century has undoubtedly proved .
It is time that all the countries , the EU partners , understood that there are some things that the EU would never give up and would never abandon .
I would therefore like to point out that several hours ago in this very room a historic document - the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights - was signed .
At this point I would like to mention the fact that certain issues have a negative impact on the development of EU-China relations and the key to resolving these problems is in most cases in the hands of the Chinese authorities .
During our talks with the Chinese representatives , even during negotiations on trade and economic cooperation agreements , we have always remembered and will never forget the fact that people in China are continuing to suffer in prison for their political views , for their religion or for belonging to ethnic minority groups , and for economic crimes , such as tax evasion , they receive the death penalty .
In recent years , with the approaching Olympic Games in Beijing , we have learned of other ' developments ' such as the fact that people 's accommodation is being demolished without compensation being awarded , in order to make way for the construction of Olympic structures , and the existence of a list of 42 categories of people not to be allowed to attend the Olympic games , including the Dalai Lama , his followers and human rights defenders .
I can say only one thing : this is absolutely out of line with the traditions and spirit of the Olympic Games .
My suggestion would therefore be to cancel these lists , which do China no credit at all , and ensure that in honour of the Olympic Games all political prisoners and prisoners of conscience are released and a death penalty moratorium is declared .
I regret the fact that the EU-China summit meeting in Beijing has failed to become a historical event and that the participants were not the sort of politicians capable of taking EU-China relations to a new level .
Just one thing was missing : greater consideration and respect for people and their rights .
Madam President , I speak in this debate on the EU-China summit and the EU-China human rights dialogue , although from some of the resolutions tabled by political groups in this House you would not have known that the first half of this debate existed .
It is quite right that we raise with the Chinese the issue of human rights .
The human rights situation in China is far from adequate .
China continues to use the death penalty , as Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner stated in her opening statement .
They repress campaigning organisations for Tibetan autonomy , religious groups outside a very narrow range of officially permitted groups , as well as others who promote their regions , promote press freedom and try and organise trade unions .
We also have the insurmountable barrier with respect to the hundreds of millions of migrant workers in China who try to organise themselves to end exploitation and to promote decent labour standards .
Yet there is a complete refusal on the part of many in this House to acknowledge any of the progress that China has made over the past two decades .
The human rights situation in China in my view , although far from adequate , is far better than it was back in the days of Tiananmen Square .
As the Commissioner stated , the death penalty , for example , now requires confirmation by the Chinese Supreme Court .
My own experience is that in China now there is a large degree of freedom of thought but not freedom to organise , because that still is the sine qua non in terms of what China and the Chinese authorities actually forbid .
We must continue to press China on these issues , but a refusal to recognise any progress positively discourages those progressive and liberal forces within the regime who are trying to push further , because they get no recognition for what they have done already .
China is now a global economic , industrial and political power .
The EU needs to have a critical engagement that rightly criticises China where it has gone wrong , where it must go further , at the same time as we engage in a dialogue on tackling global warming , the negative impacts of globalisation , African development and the fight against terrorism .
( NL ) Madam President , I very much welcome a strategic partnership with China .
I am very glad that we now have more than just economic ties alone and that cultural exchanges between us , for example , have grown enormously in recent years .
I am very happy to see so much attention being given to the political dimension , and I will cite one example .
Africa : we must keep up our liaison with China on its Africa policy and we now have a forum in which to do so .
I am pleased that Mr Michel is shortly going to Beijing to discuss that and other matters .
And I find it a very good thing that we are increasingly working together on economic issues .
But I am very concerned by imbalances in our economic relationship .
For example I find no hint of the fact that we should do more to pass on our experience of our Single Market to the Chinese who , in this regard , might improve their own market considerably .
The same goes for regional policy , for the elimination of regional differences .
We have experience in these areas .
We have learnt a few lessons .
But I do not think the Chinese are so keen to play ball here .
Mr Mandelson has said that there is a fair bit of uncertainty about investing in China , and that this damages our exports to China , and Chinese economic growth too .
He is right , I think .
You need the rule of law , certainty , in order for the economy to prosper .
On matters of intellectual property , product safety or capital management .
But you also need the rule of law when it comes to individual human rights , of course .
That is just as important , if not far more so .
I am glad we are to have a report on the human rights dialogue .
I think we should have one every time .
Like you , Commissioner , I see a number of hopeful signs , but the European Parliament must maintain the focus on one or two things which have not yet been resolved : freedom of expression , policy on minorities , forced labour which regrettably still continues , abuse of power of which regrettably there is too much , and the death penalty which still exists .
We as the European Parliament must continue to emphasise these things , and it is something we must do day in , day out .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are faced time and again with the question of the right way to proceed in our political dealings with China .
Mr Sterckx has just spoken again of strategic partnership , and rightly so .
I find that an absolutely desirable aim .
But we must be realistic , and we are clearly not yet on that level at the present time , because we do not have a foundation of shared values - human rights , fair treatment of minorities , rejection of the death penalty - on which a genuine strategic partnership could be built .
I believe it was absolutely right - and I say this advisedly as a Green German MEP - for Angela Merkel to meet the Dalai Lama , because it shows that we mean what we say about respect for human rights .
On the other hand , there is something I do not find at all right .
President Sarkozy , when he recently spoke here , told us that human rights must be the hallmark of the European Union , only to travel to China three weeks later and not make an issue of human rights there .
These are European double standards , and they are something we must not tolerate .
I fervently believe that our dialogue with China , which I support and which we must have the political will to pursue , cannot be all fawning sweet talk but must also include confrontation .
If we combine these and negotiate with China in a self-assured manner , we must also express unveiled criticism .
In the context of the Olympic Games too , the Chinese have to achieve the goals they set for themselves , and we Europeans should be bold and frank and confront the Chinese with our criticism when the need arises .
Madam President , a few hours ago the President of the European Parliament signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights and declared that ' we have a moral and political obligation to defend human dignity .
This applies to each human being in this world . '
And the Portuguese Prime Minister stated that ' the Charter is part of the EU foreign policy ' .
Let me turn to China . We understand that , by becoming the host of the Beijing Olympics , the Chinese Government committed itself to fully respect both the Olympic ideal of human dignity and internationally guaranteed human rights .
The European Parliament now has to conclude that there has been a recent increase in political persecutions related directly to the Olympics .
In addition , more people are being executed in China than in the rest of the world combined - up to 10 000 a year .
Defenders of human dignity are being arrested , and up to seven million people are being tortured in the notorious Laogai camps .
What should we do ?
I think the answer was provided here yesterday by the Sakharov Prize Winner Osman , who told us to put more pressure on the respective governments : to do something concrete .
There is an understanding of the sin of omission - responsibility for what we could and might have done but failed to do .
It is not enough to voice our concerns ; it is time to apply the principle of conditionality and to declare , as our colleague , Mr Watson , told us : a deal is a deal .
The only way to make the Communist dictators in China respect their citizens more is to send a signal that we take our own values of solidarity and human dignity seriously enough to make dictators feel real pain for their abuses and arrogance .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Parliament has stressed the infringement of human rights in China , and the lack of democracy in that country , on many occasions .
These are obvious matters .
Only yesterday , in discussing the European Union 's human rights report for the past year , we spoke of the lack of human rights , democracy and the rule of law in China .
On the other hand , it does not seem right to me to ignore the changes for the better that are taking place in China .
In particular , the coming year of the Olympic Games should be used by the European Union to pressurise the Chinese authorities towards liberalisation , democratisation , the rule of law and the release of all political prisoners .
On 20 November a delegation of the European Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights to the United Nations Organisation in New York met with Liu Zhenmin , China 's representative to the UN .
I consider it to have been a constructive meeting .
The Chinese side showed signs of openness and sensitivity to pressure on human rights and democracy - a fact that was also emphasised by representatives of Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International in talks with the Subcommittee 's delegation .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , billions of people are awaiting 8 August 2008 , the opening of the Olympic Games , with great interest .
Not only sports lovers will be watching , but also those who are expecting progress from China in the area of human rights .
Unfortunately , we cannot be satisfied with the results to date .
The Chinese Communist Party can rejoice , since it must have achieved a lot of success for the legitimisation of power .
But we also have the opportunity to make the most of the period running up to the Olympics and sternly to demand an explanation for the unlawfulness appearing in the area of human rights .
The European Union-China dialogue on human rights has been going on for 24 years .
Unfortunately , its balance is not at all favourable .
There is some progress , for example in the area of application of the death penalty , but in many areas there is a strong sense of backing out , such as freedom of expression , freedom of the press and freedom of the Internet .
In order for us to be able to bring about change , we must also bring about change in the dialogue on human rights .
Firstly , we must say that the dialogue on human rights is not the only forum for raising such problems .
Every Member State is also obliged to act strictly and firmly on these matters in bilateral relations .
Secondly , the presence of civil organisations and transparency of negotiations must be ensured .
Transparency is very important for us to monitor what is happening there .
Since dialogue is not a goal in itself , it is only meaningful if it makes a good contribution to improving the human rights situation in China .
Finally , I would like to speak about the situation of the Uyghur minority .
Little is said about them and they are a forgotten minority .
They are not only afflicted by the general oppression in China , but they are also the victims of ethnic , religious and linguistic discrimination .
I urge you to act in their interests too . Thank you .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity to issue a couple of reminders to European governments .
The first has to do with the lifting of the arms embargo on China , to which reference has been made on several occasions .
I would like to point out that this House has frequently insisted that the lifting of that ban could only occur when there was genuine and meaningful progress in relation to those apprehended following the Tiananmen Square events of 1989 , not progress in general terms , but specifically in relation to that matter , because that is what we are waiting for from the Chinese authorities at this point in time : some meaningful progress which would enable such action to be taken .
Until that time I believe that it would not only be premature , but would convey entirely the wrong message and give Europe a very bad image to lift an embargo which , I repeat , was imposed at the time for very specific reasons which have certainly not been clarified .
The second message , endorsing the opinion of my colleague Mrs Trüpel , is that it is unacceptable for certain European countries to submit , and sometimes succumb , to pressure from the Chinese authorities aimed at preventing them from holding official meetings with important Chinese personalities , in some cases dissidents , or representatives such as the Dalai Lama , in return for assured trade relations with China .
Especially today , when we have signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights , this is something which is completely at odds with the basic ethos which we seek to impose on the European Union .
( PT ) At the Summit , Europe spoke clearly about how China is perverting WTO rules , failing to respect workers ' rights , exporting products that are harmful to health , pirating technology and impeding European access to the Chinese market .
The Chinese leaders were not used to hearing the EU speak so frankly and they retaliated by holding up the joint declaration for a few days , but the European leadership regrettably failed to keep up the pressure : not only did it make unacceptable concessions on the referendum in Taiwan , it did not contradict the ' One China Policy ' and it did not confront Peking on the subject of serious human rights problems .
Because there was not time , President José Sócrates told Portuguese journalists , sometimes these things are discussed over dinner .
The death penalty and the release of prisoners held since the Tiananmen Square massacre : these are among the reasons why this Parliament is in favour of maintaining the embargo on arms to China .
Arbitrary detention and trial , corruption and forced evictions , persecution and repression of journalists and Internet users , repression of Tibetans and minorities , responsibility for the tragedies in Darfur and Burma : none of these fundamental issues was on the Summit 's agenda .
Clearly the EU is not alone in having a duty to call Beijing to account before it holds the 2008 Olympic Games .
If the International Olympic Committee mediates about the quality of the air , why not judge Beijing on respect for the Olympic ideal in its relations with its own citizens and those of other countries ?
No one , least of all the EU Council and Commission , can continue to neglect the fight for freedoms and human rights in China .
This is a marathon that will only gain impetus in the context of the 2008 Olympics .
Not only does it affect millions and millions of Chinese , it will have consequences for the whole of humanity .
( DE ) Madam President , the human rights dialogue between the EU and China has been taking place twice a year behind closed doors for the last eleven years , and yet it has done nothing to improve the human rights situation in China .
Reports of executions , torture in prisons and labour camps and the oppression of the Tibetans plainly show that we Europeans are not shouldering our responsibility .
The Olympic Games are coming up , and they give China good reason to furnish proof of genuine reforming zeal .
At the same time , we must not practise double standards either .
It is very gratifying that Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel received the Dalai Lama in spite of heavy criticism .
It would only be logical if leaders in Belgium , France and other countries were to do likewise .
The EU is accepted worldwide as the voice of human rights , and it is high time we acted consistently in every context , including that of our dialogue with China .
Madam President , today we are having a debate on the EU-China summit , which took place 10 days ago , and on the 24th Round of the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue , which took place two months ago .
Especially today , let me start with the second one .
Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is a core principle of the EU and its policies and it is something that we all strongly care about and support .
But I am one of those who believe that the EU should follow a result-oriented approach in promotion of respect for human rights rather than a purely principled one and , most importantly , we have to accept that the improvements will only come step-by-step .
That does not mean that the EU should hesitate in voicing its criticism and using its power to insist upon democratic reforms .

I am also one of those who care about the high-level product safety that affects 550 million European citizens ; who care about trade imbalance , effective market access , intellectual property rights and international competition policies that affect thousands of European companies and millions of European employees ; and who care about cooperation on environment protection , international environment governance and climate change that affects the whole population of the Earth .
Because we care about all the above , we strongly support the Commission and Council and its Presidency for addressing , negotiating and stressing continuously each one of the issues in regular dialogue with the Chinese side .
A simple reading of the 18-page joint statement of the last EU-China summit is enough to understand that the complexity , sensitivity and importance in the EU-China cooperation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this debate again shows that societal change takes time , and I think we always have to remember where China has come from .
I think we also have to acknowledge a certain progress , as I said at the beginning .
But , at the same time , it is true that we are not yet where we would like to see China .
Therefore , I think the Human Rights Dialogue - also accompanied by the NGO seminar - remains the cornerstone for addressing our human rights concerns with China .
However , I think we need to be determined but also realistic .
Determined to convince China that it is in its own best interest to establish full respect for human rights across the board .
Realistic , because we need to recognise that only through engagement and long-term effort can we really hope to achieve genuine reforms in China .
In this context , I would also like to say that the continued holding of the NGO seminar is in the mutual interest of both China and the European Union .
This has also just been confirmed by the summit .
I think , therefore , there is a good chance that , back-to-back with the next human rights dialogue under the Slovenian Presidency , we will be able to resume this civil society seminar .
On a few other questions , let me just say that human rights were also mentioned in the joint statement that is there , and I will just read out the first few lines . ' The two sides emphasised their commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights and continued to place a high value on the EU-China human rights dialogue , including the accompanying legal seminar . '
You see : there it is .
They underline the importance of concrete steps in the fields of human rights and affirm their commitment to further strengthening dialogue and so on .
I would also like to say that there are a few concrete points that were highlighted in this discussion on which we want to see progress , such as the Falun Gong .
The situation of Falun Gong followers who have been subject to repression because of their beliefs remains a matter of concern for us .
We raised this issue several times , and more particularly on the occasion of the sessions of the Human Rights Dialogue .
We asked , and will continue to ask , the Chinese authorities to put an end to the harsh treatment imposed on Falun Gong followers .
Concerning the death penalty , I have said before that this issue is high on our agenda , and in this framework we have been urging China - and will continue along these lines - to reduce the scope of capital crimes , with a view to ultimately abolishing the death penalty .
A first step would be to impose a moratorium on implementation .
Then , as I said in my introductory remarks , would come a review of death penalty sentences by the Supreme Court as a first step which would be continuously monitored .
I think the debate has shown very clearly that there is a mixed picture : there is progress , but there is still a lot to be done , and I can only say we will further engage with China in order to encourage China to make progress .
I think the Olympic Games will be a good opportunity for China to show that more progress has been made by then .
I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Combating the rise of extremism in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on combating the rise of extremism in Europe .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all let me express my strong personal concerns about the rise in activities in Europe which have to be attributed to violent and extremist groups and organisations .
In my view , therefore , today 's debate is extremely important , because it is not just extremism which leads to terrorist acts - extremism about which we have talked on many occasions in this House - but also those activities and developments which are more properly to be seen as racism , anti-Semitism , xenophobia , nationalist extremism , Islamophobia , all those forms of intolerance which , as I said , are worryingly common in Europe , and which , in my view , are absolutely incompatible with and run entirely counter to the values of the European Charter of Fundamental Rights which we proclaimed this morning .
There can be no doubt that extremism , by its very nature , is divisive and leads to violence .
That is why the first goal , in my view , is a political goal .
That will obviously lead me to mention measures which have more to do with security and policing ; however , faced with the problem of extremism and its origins , we need once again to promote a European Union which is ever closer to citizens and therefore more able to pass on messages of tolerance , solidarity and respect for the Charter which , as of today , is one of the cornerstones binding on Member States and on citizens .
I believe that there can never be any justification for extremism ; while we have said that many times about terrorism , we also need to say it about racism , for instance , and about xenophobia .
However , we also have to explore the deep-seated origins of extremism and violence .
We have a duty to do so , because we have a duty to introduce European policy measures that can help not just to counter but also to prevent and eradicate extremist developments and activities .
I should like to cite a few examples which , in my opinion , show that a European policy may be genuinely useful and more useful , if I may say so , than a policy which is solely national .
From the point of view of citizens ' participation in the political life of Europe , it is very important for that programme - and it is not by chance that the European Commission is financing such a programme on fundamental rights and citizenship - to contain policies and measures encouraging citizens to play more of a role in political life , in the life of the institutions , and therefore , for instance , in events such as the European elections .
2009 offers us a golden opportunity to foster a debate that leads to a large turnout to vote reflecting positive participation in the life of the institutions .
It is nevertheless clear that the other policy measure that we are expecting from Europe and that Europe is keen to promote involves education , especially for the younger generations .
In my view , that - a policy to keep the memories of past tragedies alive in people 's minds and to do so among today 's younger generations , among students and among young people , even the very young - is also extremely important .
For instance , all the programmes which we support and which I believe should be further encouraged , programmes which keep alive the memory of the victims of all the dictatorships , of all the totalitarian regimes that have devastated Europe in the past , are , in my view , tools that can be put to good use in eradicating extremism and racism ; from the history of the concentration camps , for instance , we can draw a lesson for today 's young people so that tragedies of that kind never happen again , not just in Europe but in any part of the world .
Then there is another policy measure that I believe we can and must bear in mind : those measures that more generally promote tolerance and dialogue between different cultures and obviously between different religions .
We have two major opportunities , one this year , which is the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All - and we plan to review the initiatives that have taken place during the year - and one next year in 2008 , which is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , of dialogue between different cultures and between civilisations .
In my view , the 2007 review and the 2008 programme offer a golden opportunity to make people and , I would stress again , younger people , more aware of a spirit of dialogue which enriches , a dialogue through which everyone can grow together .
It is undoubtedly important to keep the public aware of the importance of promoting rights and eradicating extremism , violence and intolerance .
Here , the European Agency for Fundamental Rights has a role to play , which is what we wanted and what this House strongly supported ; just as the Vienna monitoring centre on racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism has in the past been an instrument for a very important sector , the fight against anti-Semitism , the Agency for Fundamental Rights will also be an instrument .
The Agency , as the main protagonist in this field , will have a very important role to play .
There , as you know , we are preparing the multi-annual framework which we are discussing in close cooperation with Mr Cashman , and we take the view that the Agency 's multi-annual planning framework will provide us with useful instruments for our common action to prevent extremism .
Over and above that , we obviously have to react : while those are all important prevention policies , we also need to react .
I fought personally , in the Council of Ministers as well , for a European law - and we reached agreement on this last April - for a European law under which acts motivated by racism and xenophobia can be punished and those committing such acts are punished in the same way in any country of the European Union .
It is not just the physical act , but also concrete incitement , the dissemination of hatred , those messages that frankly cannot be confused with freedom of expression which is a sacred right for all of us .
Here , we are speaking of concrete incitement to act , to commit violence .
That framework decision was agreed by the Member States last April .
Think of those awful manifestations of racism : at sports events , during football matches where people take the opportunity to shout neo-Nazi slogans , those are the kinds of act that the framework decision - which we genuinely wanted and which we agreed with the German Presidency - will punish .
I say will punish , using the future , as unfortunately , and this is an appeal to your sensibility , between April and now the reservations of the national parliaments of some Member States have not been withdrawn with the result that the procedure leading to the entry into force of this European law to punish racism and xenophobia has been blocked .
I say this with absolute respect for the national parliaments ; however , as the government holding the presidency of the Council of Ministers has given its agreement , I believe that it must take steps with its own parliament , so that its reservation is withdrawn as soon as possible , and we can finally ensure that the framework decision comes into force after three and a half years of lengthy discussion .
In conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , we already have legislation in other sectors which punishes discrimination based on race and ethnicity , and that legislation will undoubtedly be respected with the supervision , if I may put it that way , of the European Commission which is responsible for ensuring compliance with European law .
I would point out , for instance , the recent directive on ' borderless ' audiovisual services which very clearly establishes , from its entry into force , that audiovisual services must not contain any incitement to hatred on grounds of sexual orientation , race , religion or nationality .
It is precisely to achieve all that that policing measures are not enough , criminal law is not enough , prosecutions are not enough : what is needed is a deep-seated culture of individual rights , of value for the human person !
What we said this morning when we were celebrating the European Charter of Fundamental Rights !
I believe that this is one of the policies , at a time when we are preparing to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , through which Europe can offer the world a lesson on the ways in which these hateful crimes against the human person can be eradicated .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is scarcely believable .
Four or five weeks ago I was invited to attend a counter-demonstration to a demonstration organised by parties of the far Right in my region .
There were only 30 extremists demonstrating , whereas a large gathering of more than a thousand had assembled to demonstrate against them .
In those circumstances , when you stand in front of those right-wing extremists , you say to yourself , ' This is scarcely believable ' .
After that century in Europe , how can anyone revert to extremism , go back to strutting about full of hatred and arrogance and agitating against others ?
The debate we are holding today is welcome and important .
Extremism is a cancer in our society .
Time and again we politicians appeal to people 's moral courage , expecting them to rise up and protest against this extremism .
I believe it is also time to give thanks that such moral courage exists in abundance , that so many people do rise up in protest .
What is extremism ?
Let me stress that , when we speak of banning political parties , of banning the public expression of opinions and positions , it goes without saying that such measures must not be based on political judgements .
They must be based on an objective criterion .
We have defined that objective criterion today in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which sets out the essence of our basic values .
If parties or politicians attack those values , the courts must decide whether their actions are illegal and , if so , impose a ban .
What should be done if candidates of extremist parties are elected , if such parties win seats ?
Firstly , there must be no cooperation with these parties , and I am grateful to the Socialist Members , who have expelled their Slovakian member party from their ranks for cooperating with extremists .
Secondly , we must not overlook the fact that such electoral successes stem from public dissatisfaction , and we must not respond to them by maligning voters but rather by addressing underlying issues .
Thirdly , I wish to emphasise that extremism often begins with small steps in the party landscape too , and we must be aware of this .
My message is therefore ' Do not let it take root ! '
Political extremism exists on the Left and Right , and both are equally bad . That needs to be emphasised .
Europe has experienced extremism , and Europe has suffered from extremism .
Progress has been made in the fight against extremism .
It is a fight that is worth waging . And it is a fight that we shall ultimately win .
Mr. Chairman , Commissioner Fratini , Thank you for the understanding and the presentation on the intentions of the Commission .
I find it symbolic that precisely today , when the Charter of Fundamental Rights was signed , we are discussing a topic directly related to it .
For the growing extremism , the growing influence of extreme right-wing parties and organisations is a direct threat to the existence of the European Union .
It might sound too strong but our Union is based on clear principles and its existence is possible thanks to the fact that peace , solidarity , tolerance , mutual respect among ethnic and religious communities , and the peaceful co-existence of nations prevailed in Europe 50 years ago .
Today , the extreme right-wing attacks exactly these principles ; it attacks the very heart of the European Union , without which it could not possibly exist .
But our Union is not an abstract construct ; it is not just another administrative level of governance .
It is a union whose mission is to defend and protect the values underlying the whole world .
Willing or unwilling , prepared or unprepared , we have to understand that there are people deprived of fundamental rights , suffering from political reprisals , oppressed by non-democratic regimes or discriminated against on the basis of race , ethnic origin and religion in all parts of the world .
And , in all parts of the world , there is the hope that the European Union will support them and that the spirit of tolerance , guaranteed civil rights and social security can reach their country , too .
Can we be powerful and convincing in the outside world if we fail to cope with the problems in our own backyard ?
How can we explain to the people who pin their last hopes on us that immigrants die just because of their origin , that ethnic minorities are subjected to systematic discrimination , that partisan ideologies challenge the equality of women or define homosexualism as a disease ?
How can we explain that we are on the way of forgetting the gloomiest pages of our history and that young people praise Hitler and anti-Semitism is turning into the vogue of the day ?
I cannot accept this and neither can my collegues Socialists .
I believe that there is no political group in this Parliament to remain indifferent to the fact that right-wing extremism , racism , xenophobia are gaining new grounds .
Didn 't we become witness today how a historic landmark in the development of the European Union was disgraced in a vulgar manner by a noisy minority that could come back stronger , more aggressive and better organised in 2009 ?
Under the hypocritical demand for a referendum , it challenged not merely the Charter of Fundamental Rights but fundamental rights themselves .
It is this behaviour that we see also in many national parliaments encourages extremists who would resort to yet another punitive action tomorrow , inspired by this political circus .
We must name problems very clearly and seek solutions together .
Therefore we shall put this issue on the agenda of the Parliament over and over again . Because extremism is an all-European challenge which necessitates the cocerted efforts at the European , national , regional and local level .
If the European Commission is the custodian of the EU Treaties , then the European Parliament is the custodian of the values and I believe that together we shall be able to withstand a rising wave familiar from the recent past .
And that we shall stop it , without violating fundamental rights like the right of free expression , the right of assocation , the freedom of the media . For one can fight for democracy only according to the rules of democracy .
Breaking these rules will mean that extremism has prevailed . Thank you .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , a few weeks ago a young man by the name of Carlos Palomino lay dying of stab wounds in the Madrid metro following a clash with right-wing extremists .
Shortly before , in the Barcelona metro , a madman had been caught by TV surveillance cameras striking a young girl because she was an immigrant , just because of the colour of her skin - so she said - without knowing that he was being filmed and without knowing that his actions were going to be broadcast around the world .
These and other similar cases have been repeated in various parts of Europe .
Often , with a sometimes exaggerated feeling of responsibility , we and all politicians who are concerned by this phenomenon , try to minimise the significance of such attacks : we must not be alarmed , we say ; at the end of the day these are isolated incidents , there are not all that many madmen about , we must not exaggerate , it is not a serious problem .



We therefore label these attacks as minor because it frightens us to acknowledge that at best , in fact , this is not a minor matter . Among other things , because , as the resolution on which we are going to vote tomorrow correctly suggests , many of these neo-Nazi and right-wing extremist organisations are playing on feelings of fear which already exist in our society , and which we cannot hide .
Therefore , it is not enough to condemn .
We need to open our eyes and act responsibly and face up to something which is not just an isolated phenomenon ; without causing alarm , we must acknowledge its real scale and extent .
The day on which we signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a good day to remember that the European Union has a role to play and has its responsibility in this area .
There is no subsidiarity when it comes to defending the dignity of persons or denouncing racism , xenophobia and intolerance .
Action is needed at European level , firstly on the part of the Commission and the Agency for Fundamental Rights , in order to examine what kind of ramifications and networks there are behind all this - if any - what links there are between the various extreme right-wing movements , in order that we can apply legislation , contribute through education policies and support educators who teach about diversity , and , where necessary , forcibly denounce those politicians , social leaders , sportspeople etc. who , either passively or actively , lie behind these actions .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , growing extremism in Europe is a fact , and we need to talk about it .
The Commissioner said a great deal , but he spoke in general terms and about matters of secondary importance such as racism at football matches .
We need to talk about the facts , the political extremism we are witnessing at the present time in the European Union .
Yesterday , Mr President , the leader of the NPD , a neo-fascist party , appeared on Germany 's public television channel , ARD , and demanded that Poland immediately return Pomerania and Silesia to Germany .
He declared that Kaliningrad , Gdańsk and Wrocław are German cities and demanded German jurisdiction over them .
He also demanded that those cities and territories , which are part of Poland , should be returned to Germany immediately .
We are talking about events in Germany , a leading country in the European Union .
For some years now , the German fascists in the NPD have been calling for the revision of frontiers , repudiating the international treaties that ended the Second World War , and demanding that borders be pushed back .
Commissioner , we cannot permit this .
There has to be a strong reaction .
We cannot permit the public television service of any country , in this case Germany , to allow neo-fascists and Nazis to air their revisionist views and calls for another war .
This is not a marginal problem , ladies and gentlemen .
It is very real .
The party in question has representatives in seven regional parliaments .
This cannot be tolerated in Europe today , just as we cannot tolerate democratic principles , freedom to differ and freedom of speech to be undermined as they were today by Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Watson , who , referring to differences of opinion over the Charter of Fundamental Rights - or rather , not so much the Charter as the EU Reform Treaty - called the Members who were opposing him idiots .
That cannot be allowed .
That is not the approach to democracy and the present European Union that we should be teaching our young people .
Let us be united in diversity .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I think the part of the issue that we are looking at is : how do we combat what all of us see as extremism , this fear of the other , this desire to protect their own culture , as if it is the only culture , as if it has never changed , as if there has never been anything that has shifted in their lives ?
And yet we only have to look back over the last 50 to 60 years to see the enormous changes that have gone on , even within our own continent .
I think that desire to protect often comes from a feeling of fear that , somehow or other , you and your idea of yourself are going to disappear and , therefore , you want to project your strength against others and deny them their existence .
I think all of us here feel a pride in who we are , in the country that we come from or our region or our heritage .
But we do not , most of us , expect that to be passed on only through a bloodline , somehow , and a deep connection with territory , but through citizenship , through law and through our rights .
And as others have said , the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights here today was an extremely important symbol particularly attached to this debate .
But when we are looking at the election of extremist parties who only have one view of what is right - what is theirs - I think what we see is a legitimisation of violence , of hate speech , of actions against others that they see as different .
I remember the time when , a number of years back , we heard of the election of a single member of the British National Party to a local council in London .
The level of racist violence went up in that area .
( Cry of ' Bravo ! ' )
That is not a cause for ' Bravo ! '
That is shameful !
How can you say that and sit in a House where you claim to be democrats ?
Racist violence is to be condemned .
And , when we are looking at extremism , I think we ought to be aware that we have not yet seen the death of sexism and misogyny .
But the election of such parties raises the level of fear and , therefore , we need to think about how we react to that .
We react to it by also making sure that our actions uphold human rights and the values which we hold dear .
We have to beware that we ourselves do not pass laws that in seeking to deal with one example of extremism actually give succour to those people or strike fear into the hearts of other communities .
I commend the joint motion to the House today and thank all colleagues who have worked so hard on it .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Vice-President Frattini and all the fellow Members who have worked with me , and the proposers , to draw up this resolution .
Manifestations of racism and xenophobia have increased in recent years , as is borne out by the reports of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia .
This increase is closely linked to the growth and proliferation of political forces which , in Europe , have interpreted the problems raised by immigration in an aberrant way , often to put forward slogans defending race and identity , and to stir up feelings of self-preservation against those entering Europe , describing them as terrorist threats or criminals , or even branding them with unacceptable anthropological names and xenophobic and racist slogans .
Parties and movements which in recent years have had strong anti-European nationalist leanings , and are highly racist , are on the increase .
Their political propaganda draws on social insecurity and tries to add pieces to the mosaic of the war of civilisations .
That propaganda is now a mainstream part of the political and institutional debate and in some cases , seems to be the message emerging from governments or as the result of the activities of governments .
Tomorrow , we shall vote on a resolution on extremism , a title which is perhaps a little vague .
Lenin said that extremism is the infantile disease of communism ; we could paraphrase Lenin and say that extremism is perhaps an infantile disease of all political , religious , economic and ideological programmes .
Mr Weber is right : there is left-wing extremism and right-wing extremism , but there is not just left-wing and right-wing extremism , there is neo-liberal extremism , Catholic extremism , Muslim extremism , ecological extremism and anarchic-insurrectionist extremism .
The problem in Europe , however , is the growth of right-wing extremism and the problems which are causing right-wing extremism to proliferate .
Neo-nazi and neo-fascist political forces and movements have been set up in recent years in Europe and have made it their policy to work against European integration - we have seen them in Italy , in France , in Austria , in the Netherlands , in Belgium , in the United Kingdom , in Germany , in Denmark , and in Switzerland ; they reflect the crisis that has led an intellectual such as Alfio Mastropaolo to describe the offensive of the new right as the mad cow of democracy .
The democratic legitimisation of certain political forces has helped dangerous ideas to spread into the body of European society , feeding reactionary leanings .
A dangerous , and in some cases underestimated , disease which feeds on ethnocentric proclivities , often concealed and hidden , in some cases masked by seemingly democratic and legitimate acts .
We therefore need to question our choices and our political initiatives .
There is a growing emphasis on the need to establish and consolidate a shared European culture and identity .
I believe that a European identity and culture must be built on the basis of dialogue and contact with cultures other than those that have in recent years promoted and paved the way for the dissemination and the growth of a European idea , a European culture .
A major cultural battle is needed , and that is my conclusion .
Police or public security activities are not enough ; there needs to be a major cultural effort and only in that way will we manage to ensure that 2008 is actually the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , because Europe must be founded on intercultural principles .
( ES ) Mr President , I would be grateful if you would use your authority as President of this sitting to call to order a group of Members who seem to think they are at the circus and not Parliament and are spoiling the quality of this debate by their joking and cheering .
We are nearing the end of the year and it is normal to have meals at which you drink a little over the odds or at least more than usual .
The best idea in that situation is to have a siesta and not to disturb a debate where respect for the speaker should prevail at all times .
Thank you for your appeal but , as I said , anyone having a few drinks with his meal is best advised to have a siesta afterwards and not to interrupt our debates by his rudeness and lack of Parliamentary manners .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I detest extremism as much as anyone .
British people do - we have been fighting it for centuries .
If you want to combat rising extremism in Europe , look at its causes before you rush into yet more legislation which only restricts ; it breeds extremism .
Let us look at the high-water mark of European extremism , the Fascists of the 1930s .
In Britain , the marches of Sir Oswald Mosley were protected by law and arid hateful policies thus exposed to the light of day were rejected by the people .
Across Europe , Fascist leaders were vilified and obstructed .
Hitler himself was imprisoned - so he , like the others , gained power .
This morning , we saw the rise of extremism in this Chamber with the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , part of the Constitution for Europe to be signed tomorrow and on which a national referendum was promised in seven countries .
Two said yes , two said no - but were ignored - while the others are waiting .
In the UK , our Government gave a written promise , now denied .
So much for the talk in this Chamber about listening to the people !
For the EU are today 's extremists , seeking to impose their will by way of this distorted document .
It has been deliberately written so that no one beyond experienced lawyers can read it , with its numbered paragraphs taken from both the original and the existing Treaties , but which do not correspond between the documents .
The numbering will be changed for the signing and changed again afterwards to make quite sure that the people of Europe cannot understand it .
And this pseudo-democratic distortion is to be foisted on the people of Britain !
No thanks - we have got our rights already , embodied in the great and wonderful Magna Carta of 1215 , supplemented by the Bill of Rights of 1689 .
Just who do you think you are to overthrow these democratic measures laid down for us but open for all to follow ?
History ignored becomes history repeated .
Over the centuries you ignored our lead and paid the price !
Ignore our example now , and you are on your way to perdition .
( Applause from his group )
( FR ) Mr President , this must be the umpteenth report on the so-called rise of extremism in Europe .
The Council , the Commission and the political groups have all pitched in with their tuppence-worth and , as usual , the rhetoric is intellectually pitiful , politically disgraceful and morally perverse .
It is intellectually pitiful because every new idea that ever was - in religion , including the Christianity that some of you are bold enough to say you espouse ; in politics whether liberalism or socialism ; in science , including concepts now taken for granted , like the earth being round and rotating about the sun - has been considered extremist , heretical , subversive and unacceptable .
You cannot discredit an opinion simply by demonising it : you need to explain what makes it flawed .
The political disgrace is entirely of your making - you , the people in power who , instead of resolving problems , care only about fighting off the opposition .
All you are doing is highlighting your inability to solve the problem of immigration - of an invasion in which you , either deliberately or through cowardice , have colluded .
What you are admitting here is that you have failed - on the economic front , the social front , the cultural front and the moral and educational fronts - and that , instead of changing your disastrous policies , your only concern is to get rid of those who protest or who criticise you .
It is in moral terms , however , that your attitude is most repugnant .
You falsely equate violence and terrorism with the legitimate reaction of Europe 's people against the destruction of their identity .
What hypocrites you are !
You want to muzzle these people and deprive them of political representation : you are the Pharisees of democracy !
You are what the Bible calls ' whited sepulchres ' ; in other words , your sincerity is less than skin deep !
You talk about human rights and freedom of expression , about Europe 's values and about tolerance , but underneath the whitewash it is all rot .
You would deny to anyone who fails to think like you the very rights that you harp on about .
All of this would be odious , were it not so grotesque .
Tomorrow 's generations will pass judgment on you as the Barbarians passed judgement on Rome .
I hope , at least , that the Barbarians will give you what you deserve !
( RO ) Ladies and Gentlemen , the subject we are debating this afternoon is one of maximum importance for the future of the European Union and for the security of citizens and our values .
Over the last years , extremism has been an ever more frequent phenomenon in the public life of European countries , a phenomenon that has raised many alarm bells and many questions as regards fighting it .
Although various causes with different origins have contributed to the spreading of this phenomenon , I would like to insist on an essential aspect of the debate created on the subject of extremism , namely immigration .
Extremist groups identify immigration as the supreme evil in the European countries , because it is a subject that they can use in order to explain the unwanted changes in their societies .
Nevertheless , as we all know , immigration is a vital element for the economies of European countries and favourable for economic growth .
Its unwanted effects , arising from the inadaptation of immigrants to the societies that receive them , should be solved by methods that are specific to the European Union .
Otherwise , we are in danger of changing the very basic values of the European construction .
Therefore , we cannot accept the extremist parties changing the agenda of traditional parties .
If we use such a strategy in an attempt to reduce the risks and dangers entailed by such groups and to prevent them from obtaining votes from our citizens , we will only offer legitimacy to their ideas and methods .
We cannot allow messages of an extremist nature to be adapted and promoted as law in Member States .
Such an action means destroying the vision of a multicultural and multiethnic Europe .
The crisis generated by the issue of the Roma and the extremist manifestations in Italy must not create a dangerous precedent for the fundamental principles of the European Union regarding the freedom of goods , services , capital and persons .
We must explain to our citizens that such an attitude would be harmful both to their societies and to the European Union , as a whole .
The results of the European Parliament elections in Romania could be an example in this regard .
No extremist party has reached the threshold of necessary votes in order to send their representatives to the European Parliament .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to take a few seconds over my allotted time merely to direct at those in the back seats , on the right over there , a traditional Castilian saying : ' A palabras necias , oídos sordos - silly words will be met with a deaf ear ' .
I will now continue my speech in English .
Today , as we have very proudly signed the Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the European Union , it is more than half a century since Europe assisted in the most outrageous crime of xenophobia and racism - the Holocaust .
Millions of people were killed because of their religion , their ethnic background and their political beliefs .
Therefore , it is more necessary than ever to bear history in mind by living our present and preparing for the future .
We have to be alert and watchful ; beware of the eggs of the snake , as Ingmar Bergman taught us .
As Commissioner Frattini has confirmed today , there is a resurgence of violent acts with racist and xenophobic origin in our Member States .
But , to me , what is even more preoccupying is that more and more young people get involved .
Therefore , it is absolutely essential that we teach them citizenship and to be aware of what racism is about .
More and more extremist right-wing parties which base their ideology and political practices on intolerance and exclusion are voted into national parliaments .
There , they have an excellent platform for their political message of hate .
We should be aware of this and try to do things to counteract that as well .
Racism and xenophobia are the most direct violations of the principles of freedom and democracy and our fundamental rights .
So the European institutions and we , the Members of Parliament , are obliged to reaffirm our determination to uphold fundamental freedoms and to condemn and combat any manifestation of racism and xenophobia by means of law .
More than ever , zero tolerance is requested to combat racism and xenophobia .
More than ever we have to be belligerent in defending our values , using and strengthening the instruments available to the European Union and its Member States .
No single citizen should ever suffer from persecution because of his or her race , religion , gender , social situation , language , nationality or sexual orientation .
The eradication of racism and xenophobia , the right to live in peace , is a moral challenge to all democrats , and to defend civil rights is the duty of every democrat .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Yesterday we spoke for nearly two hours about the fight against the rise of extremism and the final text of the resolution that is based on liberal initiatives , but of course we have throughout taken into account the ideas and requests of all the groups .
I am optimistic , and I trust that there will be a common position on this painfully important topic .
Personally , I am very sorry that in 2007 , the year of equal opportunities , we are still obliged to fight the shadows of fallen dictatorships from the 20th century that creep out from time to time .
We know that there are no Member States that are exceptions to this .
Just to mention a couple by name : Pospolitos in Slovakia , the Young Nationalists in the Czech Republic , the New Right in Romania , the German National Democratic Party in Germany and the National Alliance in Italy , but we largely face the same extremism .
To speak of my own country , it is unacceptable for me that every day statements are issued by extremist parties and organisations like the Movement for a Better Hungary or the Hungarian Guard , in which they explain the conceptually absurd criminality of gipsies with genetic reasons , and instead of integrating the Roma into society they demand segregation and ghettos , whilst they march in black uniforms in Tatárszentgyörgy , and on Friday in Kerepes .
In connection with this , I would again like to draw the attention of my fellow Members to the fact that so many of the gypsy settlements in Europe are still targets for extremist forces , even today .
And now some news for the end of my statement .
The Hungarian Ombudsmen , the President of the Republic and the Hungarian Government have officially condemned the Hungarian Guard and the Movement for a Better Hungary .
We would like all responsible European governments to do the same in the face of their own extremism .
In any case , in order to do this it is necessary that as many of my fellow Members as possible vote yes tomorrow on the Parliament 's position on the fight against rising extremism . Thank you .
Mr President , today we witnessed a proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and we are now discussing the rise of extremism in Europe .
To my mind , there is very clear link between the two .
The EU Agency for Fundamental Rights was , until recently , known as the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia .
We cannot combat extremism without addressing the issues of racism and xenophobia , which are all too present in Europe today .
Extremism breeds extremism , and we in Europe are in danger of finding ourselves caught in a very vicious circle if we do not move swiftly to tackle and eliminate some of these root causes .
I listened to Mr Gollnisch earlier on , calling people in this House and others barbarians .
He did not put up one credible idea , not one positive idea , of how we can tackle this problem in Europe , except the usual diatribe that comes from him .
He and his leader , Mr Le Pen , want to come to Ireland in connection with the Treaty .
I can tell you something for certain : those sorts of extreme ideas would not and will not be tolerated in my country , thank you very much .
So please do come , and we can be sure that the Treaty will be passed when they hear the sort of continental Europe that you want to develop , and your kind of ideas .
It has been shown that attitudes that made workers receptive ...
( Interruption from Mr Gollnisch )
We know what you stand for , Mr Gollnisch , and we have heard you so many times , you and your leader .
It has been shown that attitudes that made workers receptive to right-wing populism include prejudice against immigrants , nationalism , authoritarianism , social dominance and political weakness , with prejudice against immigrants emerging as the most important factor among these .
In countries where appropriate reporting facilities are in place , the most reported reason for discrimination is often region .
If we address the elimination of such prejudice and discrimination , we will have taken a significant step forward in combating extremism .
Therefore , I call on all Members to encourage debate and the exchange of views on issues of social inequality , origin , race , religion and the impact of social and economic changes locally , nationally and at all European levels , and not to use emotive language , calling people barbarians .
To this end , I welcome the fact that , as part of the work for the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , the European Parliament has invited Pope Benedict , the President of the African Union , the Dalai Lama , the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the Chief Rabbi of the United Kingdom and the Grand Mufti of Damascus to address the European Parliament during the year 2008 .
I welcome those sorts of initiatives .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) With all due respect , Mr President , I should be glad to hear from you why it is that members of your own group and people who manifestly represent a line of thinking closer to your own are given much more extra speaking time and are not so readily cut off , whereas people you clearly do not agree with are cut short after only ten seconds .
You are applying a double standard here , and it is not acceptable .
First of all , it seems to me , Mr Dillen , that the President directs the debate according to his own criteria and not according to those of whoever is occupying seat 777 .
I have no explanation to give you .
All speakers , including those who have been speaking among themselves , have been given more than their share of time .
At any rate , I would like to ask all Members to address the Chair and the House and not to direct their comments at other fellow Members , in order to prevent disorderly interjections and interruptions .
( SV ) Mr President , we have all noticed that extremism is growing in the EU .
I think we should ask ourselves why .
Why are xenophobia and other extremist attitudes on the increase ?
I am convinced that exclusion and lack of participation in society are a breeding ground for extremism and xenophobia .
The equal value of all human beings is a fundamental principle in a civilised society , so we must all help to combat xenophobic forces which discriminate against persons with a different ethnic background , sexual disposition or gender or with functional disabilities .
These groups use violence and they use threats .
In my home country we have even witnessed the murder of people who have defended human rights .
We see the murder of young people with a different ethnic background , merely because of their background .
These things should never be allowed to happen again .
We who promote the equal value of all human beings must never allow ourselves to be silenced .
But we know that is not enough .
Xenophobic and extremist groups use young people in economic and social exclusion to create more fear , unrest and hatred against other groups .
The fight against extremism must therefore be combined with building a just society based on solidarity .
Mr President , the motion before us is another example of ignorance and hypocrisy .
In it we read that , amongst other things , some political parties and movements , including those in power in a number of countries or represented at local , national or European level , have deliberately placed intolerance and violence based on race , ethnic origin or nationality at the heart of their agenda .
We also read that this Parliament strongly condemns all racist and hate attacks and calls on all authorities to do everything in their power to punish those responsible .
In the Chamber in which we adopt such resolutions , one of our colleagues used abusive and offensive language of mendacious propaganda - the very kind that is often used by extremists , the very kind that is based on slurs and qualifies as a hate attack .
He implied that I could repeat Dachau .
Well , let me enlighten him : one , Dachau was a German death camp ; two , Dachau is in Germany , and I am not German .
He even claimed that , after a four-day visit to Poland , he knew my country better than I did , and that I am not a part of Poland - but that Dachau apparently is .
This kind of hate speech is too often cited , reoccurs too often and emanates from too many politicians .
The same politicians want to teach us all about democracy , while they themselves have little respect for it and little respect for equal treatment under the law .
It seems that in Europe today - just as George Orwell wrote years ago - some pigs are more equal than others .
Some can hide under the privilege of immunity , some can even avoid justice and even European arrest warrants .
Communist criminals are somehow better treated than ordinary citizens , and while we speak in here against extremist groups , some German politicians openly support historically revisionist political movements .
My dear colleagues , the Europe of our resolutions is very different from the Europe of our reality .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , we have been yet again essentially consoling ourselves with the fact that the rise of extremism reflects a deteriorating economic situation and unemployment .
I am afraid that such an assessment is no longer valid .
The economies of many EU Member States have been growing , unemployment has been falling , but extremism has not been waning .
On the contrary , the number of crimes based on race has been growing ; national guards with an nationalistic ethos are being set up ; SS veterans are marching across some EU Member States ; and politicians who refer to the Jewish and Roma people as the ' ulcers ' of society are being glorified .
Politics and the army are being infiltrated by neo-Nazis and racists .
The Prime Minister of the Czech Republic , my native country , has made neo-Nazi rhetoric part of his vocabulary .
Last but not least , the EU has become a destination of migration for poorer people and no one seems to know how to deal with it , which also plays a certain role .
Ladies and gentlemen , no resolution , no words can undo the swastika recently incised on the hip of a 17-year-old girl in Mittweida , Germany .
In the daylight , ignored by indifferent bystanders , neo-Nazis in German Saxony incised it on her body because she stood up for a little Russian girl .
I firmly believe that extremism can be prevented solely by citizens ' everyday acts , publicly declared opposition by the political elite , open and comprehensive interpretation in particular of 20th century history , and most of all the police and courts , which must not close their eyes to racists , xenophobes and neo-Nazis , but act without delay to punish such behaviour .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .

I speak now as one of the authors of written statement No 93 .

The statement , which I tabled jointly with my fellow Members Mr Tabajdi , Mr Szent-Iványi , Mr Vigenin and Mr Amezaga , condemns the operations of paramilitary extremist groups within the Union , which are one of the most obvious forms of extremism .
In my experience , although many people feel a moral and political obligation to stop such extremist ideas from gaining ground , many stop short of specifically condemning it in a written statement or in another way .
There are many reasons for this .
One of them , for example , is that when we try to publicise these ideas , the list is never complete and never accurate .
This deters many people from supporting it .
However , one thing we must know is that the list will never be complete , and the concepts and definitions will never be accurate .
For this very reason , we must instead grab extremism and extremist ideas by the roots .
Today in this House is a day of celebration , but the Charter of Fundamental Rights has not come to be signed in untroubled circumstances .
This Charter summarises in 50 paragraphs all the values and rights that we respect and want to protect in the Union .
This Charter is the charter of anti-discrimination , the charter of the freedoms of expression , religion and assembly , the charter of equality and the charter of protection for individuals , data , young people and the elderly .
We cannot pick and choose from it at will , put some people before others or use it for our short-term internal policy objectives .
Everyone must be respected and protected equally , because this guarantees human dignity , and we , as members of the Parliament , have sworn to do that .
Opponents to the sum total of the ideas and rights formulated here are what we call extremists , irrespective of the age , sex , religion , or nationality of the person concerned .
In this spirit , I would like to ask my fellow Members to support written statement number 93 .
Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , racist activity and racist crimes are on the increase in Europe .
Roma , migrants and all those who are ' different ' still face discrimination in many guises in employment , education and housing .
We cannot repeat often enough that what we want is a European Union rooted in the humanist values of tolerance and the protection of fundamental rights .
So the framework decision - adopted by a substantial majority in this House on 29 November - on combating certain forms of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law is very necessary indeed .
It will enable us to take the same measures against racist ideas and hate speech throughout the European Union .
Extremist parties exploit people 's fears of the other and of foreigners , so that they can propose an easy answer to globalisation .
But those who hail the imposition of national preferences as a panacea are irresponsible .
The real answer to the challenges of globalisation lies in grasping the full extent of today 's human challenges .
And we should not fear to state , loud and clear , that to respond by turning inward on ourselves is to court disaster .
Mr President , we are seeing in Europe a constant increase in extremist , nationalist and populist movements that endanger our democratic system .
In an ideal world , democracy is government of the people by the people and for the people .
In fact , democracy is still the ' least bad ' political system if it has proper checks and balances .
However , the paradox of democracy is that it contains the possibility of its own death , in allowing the expression of populist and extremist opinions which erode the democratic system itself .
In many European countries , there are parties that have succeeded in positioning themselves at the heart of political life with populist and demagogic discourses .
European history has shown how extremist parties , dressed in democratic clothes and using populist and nationalist propaganda , have often led democracy to dictatorships .
The best way to fight intolerance is to stand firm , to defend our democratic values and institutions , to defend individual rights , justice , equal opportunity and diversity , but also to sanction any discourse instigating hatred , segregation or discrimination .
As Robert Kennedy said , ' what is dangerous about extremists is not that they are extreme , but that they are intolerant .
The evil is not what they say about their cause , but what they say about their opponents . '
Healthy democracies need active citizens .
Democracy can only function if citizens are conscious and exert their civic rights and duties .
We need to reinvent citizenship .
We need new ways to learn democracy .
We need to ensure that our education systems promote the development of an active , critical and engaged citizenship .
In a global world , we imperatively need a citizenship that celebrates diversity and promotes understanding and tolerance .
( PL ) Mr President , I do no know whether political extremism is on the increase or not .
I know that it must be opposed and condemned , both for its ideology and for its methods .
However , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which we welcomed today with such great ceremony , is not the answer to the problem but can itself create new problems .
Article 21 of the Charter prohibits discrimination on the ground of political or any other opinion - I repeat , any other opinion - which thus includes extreme opinions such as those expressed recently on German public television by the leader of the NPD calling for changes to the border with Poland .
Platitudes tend to rebound painfully on those who mouth them .
I would therefore ask the supporters of the Charter of Fundamental Rights how they intend to fight political extremism when they are defending it at the same time .
( EL ) Mr President , it would be an omission on my part if I did not begin by expressing my concern at the general use made of the term ' extremism ' without any definition , and without specific condemnation of extremist acts , in other words any extreme form of unlawful use of violence .
It would also be a mistake not to mention the attempts to ' awaken ' citizens to the dangers of radicalisation , and the simultaneous creation of flexible categories for possible criminals .
I would like to remind you that in modern history , during periods when freedoms and rights were curbed in the name of security , policing and strict control , and when persecution based on stereotypes was allowed to gain ground , ideological bigotry , racism and xenophobia intensified and unspeakable crimes were committed .
Similar lapses today could lead to the banning of political parties and trade unions , which will be a real blow to democracy , the rule of law and civil liberties .
We must therefore ensure that democracy does not become merely a smokescreen for the adoption of punitive measures ; at the same time , we must concentrate our efforts on mitigating the real causes of violent extremist acts , which utterly debase human dignity , since by definition they overstep the limits of freedom of expression .
It is our duty to take up the battle against poverty , unemployment , deprivation , the exploitation of workers and social marginalisation , and to ensure that future generations , thanks to proper teaching and education , stay away from aggressively nationalist and fascist organisations which promote extremist acts as a means of expression .
( SK ) Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
In my view , it is essential to adopt a joint resolution on combating extremism , which has become more and more evident recently .
There is a certain symbolism in the fact that this debate is taking place on the day when the Presidents of the European Parliament , the Commission and the European Council confirmed with their signatures the EU 's legal commitment to the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We cannot allow individuals or extremist organisations to attack citizens , whose rights must be guaranteed in a civilised society .
The history of Europe has shown the forms that extremism , militant nationalism and ideological radicalism can take .
It is our duty to consistently monitor European territory for any activities by these groups or individuals and take vigorous action against it .
I must add with regret that extremism seems to be on the rise primarily among young people in Europe .
This reflects a certain failure on the part of the politicians .
It is important to remember that many politicians , due to a lack of positive and professional assets , seek to promote their own political background and capital by provoking the least experienced and poorly informed sections of the public .
That is why adopting stricter legislation and more vigorous measures while there is still time is an issue and a responsibility we must all assume .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , at this stage of the debate most of what can be said on this subject has already been said .
However , I would like to refer to the Commissioner 's exhortation about the need to think about the underlying roots of extremism .
It seems to me that the problem of extremism is not that there is a series of groups who carry out violent attacks .
It is a problem , but it has to be tackled through the law and individuals must be prosecuted , etc .
The problem arises when the violence and the intentions behind it are repeated and have a chance to affect a broad sector of the population or certain sectors of the population .
From a social and political point of view , it is when violence causes concern that the problem arises .
As for how to prevent it , I think there are three essential factors .
First , the Commissioner mentioned a knowledge of history - I myself believe that it is very important to know about tragedies , about successes and ultimately about ourselves as humans .
However , I think we have to be careful not to use history as a weapon against others with a view to short-term political gain - something which is happening now in some countries , including my own country , Spain , I have to say .
Secondly , I think there are two other fundamental aspects which at the moment are much underrated .
Firstly , education .
We have lost , and are still losing , or at least eroding , values such as work , discipline , self-reliance , that is to say all those values which go towards creating a good citizen when these people reach adulthood .
Finally , in the context of the European Union , the important thing is not to break up that environment in which we Europeans can challenge together the networks created by globalisation .
What we have now , and what we have had at other times in the course of 20th century European history , is a great deal of uncertainty , a certain desperation , a certain aimlessness , and what we need to do is provide hope , a forward-looking spirit and strong leadership so that everyone feels a part of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , the continent of Europe , the countries of the European Union , are now a territory in which we encounter cases of xenophobia , extreme nationalism , anti-Semitism , racism and islamophobia .
What is missing in Europe today is the liberal-democratic consensus of the period following the Second World War .
Europe 's politicians lack the real political will to tackle these problems .
Dealing with the outbreaks of racism , Islamophobia , anti-Semitism and xenophobia is a common duty that falls upon European education , media , churches , sports activists and , above all , politicians .
We often find ourselves defenceless against such extreme forms of political activity .
Worse still , many politicians and political parties take advantage of extremist or populist movements for their own purposes .
I do not want to use this debate to score political points in the European Parliament , but I could mention many such examples .
What matters now is to achieve a common policy at the level of the European Union - in the field of education , above all , as well as in sport , culture and politics - to combat extremism .
Mr President , eight years ago Jörg Haider 's immigrant-hating party entered into a coalition government in Austria .
EU governments did not have a clue what to do .
As a result of that disarray , Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union was inserted .
It has never been used and it is clear that Member States have a cultural problem in criticising each other .
But we have to have a more proactive policy of peer review when Member States call each other to account , because it is an EU concern if extremists and intolerant parties enter into government in one EU country .
The criminal law has a solid role in punishing incitement to hatred , alongside provisions outlawing discrimination .
The law can help change attitudes , as well as behaviour .
Society signals the limits of acceptability in part by what it criminalises or bans .
That is why I was so disappointed that the Commission apparently found the Italian Government deportation action against Romanians , largely Roma , and the accompanying rhetoric , compliant with EU free movement and anti-racism laws .
Personally , I did not .
But the law can and should only go so far .
For instance , the question of whether to criminalise Holocaust denial is a controversial one in Europe .
The recently agreed new EU law banning incitement to racial and religious hatred was right , in my view , to leave that option to individual countries .
My own country 's tradition and preference is to leave people like David Irving to condemn themselves by the absurdity of their unhistorical views and to be contradicted by vigorous debate .
Those of us in the mainstream parties do not have to be intimidated by the thugs and bully boys of the extremist right , left or fundamentalists of any kind .
Liberal democrats - and I use that term with a small ' l ' - of all democratic parties are just as confident and passionate about our commitment to a generous , inclusive , European vision as they are to their mean intolerance .
Let us constantly express that .
( PL ) Mr President , extremism is a phenomenon supported by politicians who exploit racism , nationalism and xenophobia for their own ends .
Extremism often uses terrorism in pursuit of its aims .
Extremism does not unite people and social groups : it divides them . It is the enemy of a democratic society .
It is opposed to the basic values of the European Union , a community of people who reject hatred and the war caused by fascists and nationalists that cost tens of millions of lives in Europe in the 20th century .
The largest terrorist organisation , al-Qaeda , founded on extremism and the use of terrorism for political ends , is now capable of destroying weak democracies and achieving political power .
I support the resolution , which seeks to mobilise the European institutions for further action against terrorism and extremism .
( EL ) Mr President , the rise of far-right racist groups and organisations in Europe is no accident .
It is the result of the European Union 's anti-popular , reactionary , imperialist policy .
This policy , whose only guiding principle is the maximisation of profitability for the European monopolies , through the accumulation of vast wealth on the basis of savage exploitation of the working class , is spreading poverty , inequality and marginalisation , and is drastically eroding the position of the working-class family and aggravating working-class problems .
Under these conditions - in marginalised sections of society or in social strata with a low level of political awareness and experience - far-right and fascist ideas , which are promoted under a populist , demagogic guise , are able to take root .
Today there is more fertile ground for the creation and growth of such groups because of anti-communist hysteria , the attempt to rewrite history , the shameless attempt to wipe out the huge contribution of the USSR to the victory over fascism , and to equate communism with Nazism and fascism .
We see this , for example , in the recognition and legitimacy granted by the governments of the Baltic countries to the local fascist groups , who were collaborators with the SS and the Nazis who were based in those countries during the Second World War .
Fascism , racism and xenophobia are faces of the same coin .
Born and bred of the capitalist system , which creates , maintains and nurtures these fascist groups .
For precisely this reason we regard as hypocritical the alleged concerns over the rise of far-right and paramilitary organisations in Europe , and we reject every attempt to equate the class struggle , the struggles of the workers ' and popular movement and communist ideology with extremist ideologies , as an unacceptable attempt to instil fear in people .
( BG ) Mr Chairman , Colleagues , This day is a testimony that the European Parliament guarantees the rights not only of the majority but also of those who have different opinion .
Because if the nationalists in this hall achieved their goals , none of us would have the right to a different opinion as they had the oppoprtunity to express it today .
We shall prevail over intolerance and extremism with arguments rather than emotions , with facts rather than noise .
Unfortunately , however when we talk about facts , there is nobody to hear them .
This is a regrettable fact .
Still , I hope that our supporters , our voters in the Member States will hear very carefully what was pointed out also by Commissioner Fratini .
In the first place , intolerance and extremism come from the oblivion of the past .
We must remember the past and the two severe dictatorships that Europe suffered .
Therefore I appeal to the Commission and to all of us : let us remember the history of Europe and let give more opportunities for the progammes of the European Commision to finance projects that preserve our memory .
Secondly , we must remember the involvement of citizens in the political process .
Colleagues , we are partly to blame for nationalism and xenophobia in Europe .
Many of us started speaking as bureaucrats rather than politicians .
They have forgotten the language that the voters can hear and speak the language of institutions instead .
Let this make us strong enough in this debate to overcome the problem which exists especially in the new Member States .
Let us name problems and tackle them directly , when they exist .
For more often than not political parties win in elections by promising one thing and doing other things afterwards and then they are surprised by the existence of extremism and discontented people .
It is our common responsibility of all of us in the European Parliament to also oppose the rising extremism and intolerance to the east of the European Union , which is dangerous to all of us . Thank you .
( HU ) Mr President , it is not generally enough to fight extremism .
Everyone must act against the nationalist and extremist tendencies emerging in their own country .
First of all , everyone should condemn extremist nationalists and distance themselves from them in their own country .
This is an extremely important requirement , and this current debate also demonstrates that extremism must be fought using direct and indirect instruments at the same time .
Direct instruments must be used to punish speech that incites to hatred .
There are some who refer to freedom of expression and say that this cannot be condemned using the instruments of criminal law , but I feel that we have not yet struck the right balance .
Democratic forces must give an example , especially to the right wing , and the democratic right wing has great responsibility for distancing itself from the extreme right-wing phenomena that are running riot in Europe .
At the same time , some of my fellow Members have spoken about the fact that we must also react using indirect instruments , as the reason for very many extremist incidents is social uncertainty or uncertainty of national identity .
This current debate is very important , and I feel that Commissioner Frattini , the Agency for Fundamental Rights and the European Parliament must monitor all extremist incidents closely . Thank you for your attention .
( NL ) Mr President , there are extremists on all sides , but in recent years they have been dictating the tone and content of the political agenda .
Democratic mainstream parties are far too slow to distance themselves from extremists because they fear losing votes , and the result is a creeping political acceptance of extremism and intolerance .
And there is something else .
On top of racism and nationalism there is also extremism against women and homosexuals , for example - we have not dealt with this yet today - and this is often based on religious beliefs .
I am horrified when I see parties in government , with power to rule , or parties represented in parliament - in my own country too - encouraging discrimination against women , gays and people of other faiths .
Lastly , a word or two that may be controversial , Mr President .
With all due respect to what Mr Ryan has said , I myself am not greatly in favour of inviting leaders of the major world faiths here to address our plenary unless they are prepared to abjure their discriminatory views on women and gays .
( PL ) Mr President , one way to combat extremism and reduce the electorate of extremist parties is to listen more attentively to citizens on matters of importance to them and to analyse the underlying causes of extremism .
If the citizens of Europe vote for extremist parties , it means , among other things , that a large section of society does not feel that the people in power are listening .
I am not defending extremism , but it does not come from nowhere .
In France Nicholas Sarkozy has understood this .
By approaching issues such as immigration and the accession of Turkey honestly and courageously , he has succeeded in weakening the extremist parties .
I would encourage the European Commission to follow the French example .


Mr President , a mayor rails against immigrants claiming that immigration is a source of insecurity ; another mayor declares his city free of foreigners ; a head of state speaks about the Parliament as a gang of outlaws , instigates the people to mutiny against the legislators and glorifies a democracy without opposition and without parties .
A group of parliamentarians today , in a hooligan manner , called for direct so-called ' popular democracy ' which would replace elections with referendums .
An outstanding public leader expresses support for the violent groups which stormed the parliament building of a democratic state and asked for the revision of the peace treaties .
A number of journalists express daily - even if sometimes in politically correct vocabulary - xenophobic , anti-parliamentarian , anti-pluralistic , anti-Roma , anti-Islamic , exclusivist , intolerant , discriminatory and chauvinistic views .
A minister asked the European Commission to make money available in order to concentrate a certain undesirable ethnic community in the poorest countries of the Union .
All these are facts , taking place in the European Union and committed by persons reputed to be democratic members of the mainstream democratic parties .
Here , today , we condemn the extremist parties and their organisation .
This is just because they are perpetrators of intolerance and intolerance should not be tolerated .
But what about the facilitators ?
The populists disguised as democrats who , by weakening the democratic institutions and relativising the democratic principle , create the most favourable environment for extremists ?
If we keep speaking only about symptoms and perpetrators , remaining silent or passive when it is about the causes and facilitators , we are going to jeopardise our values .
This must not happen .
( SV ) Mr President , let me begin by thanking all parties for the resolution .
Today no EU country is free of right-wing extremism , not even my own country , Sweden .
In the last local elections in 2006 Sverigedemokraterna ( the Sweden Democrats ) won seats in two thirds of municipalities .
It might be suspected that their next targets are the elections to the European Parliament in 2009 and the Swedish parliamentary elections in 2010 .
We Swedish parliamentarians need help in making that more difficult , precisely as others need help in their countries in stopping the spread of right-wing extremism , which is on the increase throughout Europe .
Europe needs democratic parties whose programmes reach out to all , not just a few .
In the 2006 elections the slogan of the Swedish Social Democrats was ' Everyone is included ' , and it becomes even more relevant in this debate , since the parties and groups we are discussing have programmes which do not respect the EU 's fundamental values and the equal value of all human beings .
For me , as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the approach to questions of asylum and refugee policy is absolutely crucial .
The right-wing extremist parties oppose both a more open Europe and the development of the EU .
Instead they advocate nations with closed borders .
It is a threat which I observe in Sweden and , along with all of you , throughout the EU .
I would like to make one more comment on the resolution .
The propaganda which extremist groups spread among children and young people takes the form of white power music .
The media and communications are the tool used , and it circumvents school , the family , further education and our political values .
It is important that we , as elected representatives , now take charge of the debate .
We must do that as of now and continue up to the European Parliament elections in 2009 .
Let us applaud the resolution .
( Applause )
( EL ) Mr President , a threat hangs over democracy in Europe , and I doubt whether we have all understood its significance .
This threat is not the spread of far-right ideas , but the transition from the ideas to the methods of the far right . To the acceptance , in other words , of brute force , as seen in the activity of the paramilitary far-right organisations .
A major distinction therefore needs to be made : on the one hand , we are combating ideas with which we do not agree .
The ideas that promote nationalism in Europe , and racism , xenophobia , oppression of women , oppression of minorities .
We are combating these ideas with our own ideas and with our effort to fight the causes , the political causes , which are to be found mainly in the problem of diversity - in the fact , that is , that European citizens do not accept diversity , do not accept the policy that supports it , and do not accept Europe itself .
On the other hand , however , we are fighting a different battle , even by criminal means , against the spread of those ideas , through action which leads to violence .
From this point of view , I think this very well-balanced joint resolution from all the democratic parties in Parliament is another great political moment for our Parliament - especially after what happened today - and I am very proud that this resolution originated from our own group , the Socialist Group .
( PT ) On 6 September some twenty graves in the Jewish cemetery in Lisbon were desecrated and swastikas painted on the headstones .
The two perpetrators were arrested .
They are members of the Frente Nacional or National Front , an extreme right-wing Portuguese skinhead organisation which openly advocates racial war and violent action to secure white supremacy .
This case and others , notably the wave of anti-Muslim hysteria in various European countries and the racist violence recently unleashed against the Roma community in Italy , show that xenophobia and violent racism are with us and we cannot afford the luxury of minimising them .
In the Portuguese case , the authorities were initially tempted to play the case down and declare that anti-Semitism was contrary to the supposedly tolerant nature of Portuguese society .
But the presence of the Ministers for Justice and Internal Administration at the Jewish cemetery for the ceremonial purification of the graves and the publicity this demonstration of solidarity received in the Portuguese media are a lesson for other cases in Portugal and elsewhere .
Extremism in Europe can only be fought effectively if the political representatives and the media assume their responsibilities by giving visibility to crimes of this type and identifying them as direct and base attacks on the very essence of democracy , of Europe and of Humanity .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rise of extremism in Europe is certainly very worrying and all the European institutions need to mobilise to stem the growth of these extreme right-wing movements that are becoming ever more threatening as they not only promote suspect values but increasingly attack human rights on the basis of their racist ideology .
This dangerous trend in the European Union is unacceptable !
As I see it , the Commission needs to respond on two fronts , reflecting the ideas expressed in the written statement and in the PSE resolution on the subject : it needs to act positively along with the Member States to identify appropriate political and legal means , on the one hand , of condemning human rights violations and , on the other , of preventing extremism , particularly among young people , by raising awareness of the Union 's fundamental values .
It is also essential to ensure that no European fund can be used by an institution or organisation that promotes values , or makes statements , inciting people to xenophobic , racist violence .
I would remind you here of the case of Radio Maria in Poland , which , although notorious for promoting anti-human-rights views , applied for European grant aid .
I would therefore take this opportunity , in the presence of the Commission representative , to urge once again that no European funding should go to media which serve as a platform for racist ideas , with a widespread and potentially very dangerous impact on the public .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider that today 's debate has been of extraordinary interest - of extraordinary interest and also of a high political level - and I should therefore like to thank all those who have spoken , including those who have said things with which I do not and cannot agree .
Some speakers have questioned whether it is necessary or important to raise such an issue in this House ; I believe , however , that it has been very important .
An issue which is certainly a highly political issue has been raised : striking a balance between the right freely to express our thought , which is one of the rights that the Charter of Fundamental Rights recognises , and other fundamental rights such as the dignity of the human person , equality and non-discrimination .
May I say that those who have raised this issue , taking the view that freedom of thought makes it possible to cause offence and to stir up values running counter to the fundamental rights of the person , have distorted what freedom of thought actually means .
I always speak as I find , even when my opinions run counter to those who spoke before me .
Someone said : ' if , in a referendum , citizens come out against the Charter of Fundamental Rights , that will be an expression of freedom ' .
I do not agree , because calling for a referendum against the Charter of Fundamental Rights would be to call for a referendum against citizens , since those citizens are clearly the holders and protagonists of the fundamental rights that we must now safeguard .
It is not because that principle has to be refuted , but because those who defend fundamental rights are not extremists , while those who violate and refute them , those who wish to affirm the right to incite a mob or a group of violent people to destroy Jewish graves are extremists .
That is not freedom of expression , that is violence that has to be eradicated through policies and has to be punished by the instruments of the law .
These are , in my view , the two measures for which Europe must steadfastly press .
We must not play it down .
We must not think that a single event can be underestimated because it is a single event , if that single event is a symptom of racism and intolerance , of a profound scorn for human values , we must also be worried by a single event , by a single act of violence !
Many of you have raised another , very important , issue : can the propagation of a racist message by political forces be tolerated in the name of the free expression of political thought ?
Because they are elected by citizens , I believe that those in politics have a special responsibility and must not incite the mob against other citizens or other people : a sense of personal accountability .
In my view , it is difficult , and I say this frankly , to use the instruments of the law , the police or the secret services to undertake a far-reaching investigation of this or that party .
However , when this or that party publicly says that its intention is to restore racial supremacy , that is not free expression of thought , but an attack on a deep-seated foundation of Europe .
It is for those reasons that repressive action is justified , and there can be no talk of censure or of violation of the freedom of expression .
I will defend the right of those who do not agree with me to say what they wish to say , but I cannot defend the right of those who do not agree with me to incite the mob or other people to attack and to wound and kill .
In no way is that free expression of thought !
That is why today 's issue is a key issue and I shall put forward similar arguments when we debate the appalling form of extremism represented by terrorism , because we can surely not draw a line between the message of racial hatred and the message of those who consider that killing people in terrorist attacks is a possible answer to society 's problems .
Both are issues which - in my view , through education and prevention , by fostering tolerance , and by using the instruments of law and the instruments of enforcement - must be tackled at European level .
We can only be satisfied when we are sure that there is no room for racists , bigots and terrorists in Europe .
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I will vote for this resolution with a degree of reluctance .
It covers an important subject which I have worked on in this House since I was first elected in 1984 , when I had the honour to chair Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry into the Growth of Racism and Fascism in Europe .
My concern is that this resolution is so weak that individuals who back in the 1980s were members of neo-Fascist parties like the Movimento Sociale Italiano are able to sign and vote for the resolution today .
On that basis , it must inevitably be flawed .
in writing . - ( HU ) The extremist movements that are growing stronger throughout Europe give us cause for grave concern , since their political activities are based on inciting hatred against the most vulnerable groups in society , and they preach intolerance and social exclusion .
Such ideas are incompatible with European values , human dignity , equality of rights and the fundamental freedoms in the founding treaties of the Union , or the basic principles formulated in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , proclaimed this very day .
Such movements and the views they express are capable of generating fear among minorities and among the law-abiding , democratic majority of citizens .
Because of the increased media interest by extremist groups , the false generalisations and distorted half-truths that are expressed more widely than before are not only unacceptable but extremely dangerous , since they strengthen incidents of prejudice and negative discrimination and further impede the resolution of social problems .
I would like to remind you separately of anti-gypsy incidents , which are also becoming increasingly frequent .
There are more than ten million gypsies in Europe , and they are the largest and at the same time most vulnerable and most defenceless ethnic minority in Europe , and it is not that their situation has not improved in recent years , but in many areas it has definitely deteriorated .
It is the joint responsibility of the European Union and civil organisations to find a solution to the problems of unemployment and abject poverty , and to put an end to the residential and educational segregation of gypsies .
Resolving these problems is now the most urgent minority question for the European Union .
in writing . - ( HU ) The extremist parties gaining seats in many Member States of the Union and temporarily even in the EP cannot become acceptable in European politics .
Their suppression is a matter for all of society in the European Community , even if we know that everyday racism and xenophobia are concealed by citizens who otherwise demand democracy and human rights .
Young people , for whom not only the Holocaust but also the fall of the Berlin Wall are history , are particularly at risk .
Europe without borders overestimates the consciousness of belonging to a nation , and it is easy to instil even wild ideas .
So far , European legislation has followed national measures : it does not go beyond it and it does not point the way .
However , the problem requires not only political or legal responses , so action should not just appear in our objectives , but also in responses from civil organisations and churches that profess European values and play a role in public life .
For example , Pope John Paul II spoke out against racism and xenophobia many times , and he saw the task of religion as serving truth , peace among men , forgiveness , life and love : in other words , all the values that these radical groups do not represent , or only in an extreme sense .
I would like to ask the EP President and the Members of the Commission , during the dialogue to be held with the churches , to ask the churches to act against extremists and to withdraw any gestures of support .
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , extremist ideas and organisations have become alarming phenomena in our everyday lives , and we can see this everywhere , almost without exception .
The basic concept for the fathers of European integration was freedom of thought and opinion .
Today , these are our fundamental values .
True democracy also guarantees freedom of expression , which cannot , however , lead to any disturbance or cast doubt on peace , life and existence ; indeed , we have got there today .
Nor can we allow the ideas that previously incited the Holocaust and hatred among nations and peoples to have a forum and organisations .
In many places the extreme right wing looks for and finds one of the sources for its solutions to the social problems before us in segregation and in inciting hatred , rather than in social reconciliation and integration .
The European Union , as the true repository of human rights and humanitarian protection , must do everything to make these ideas and organisations withdraw , and even to make them disappear from our everyday lives if their aggression , which disturbs the healthy life of society , so demands .
I also recommend that the Union have more room for information in its communication activities .
Unfortunately , significant layers of the population , primarily though ignorance , are susceptible to extremist , populist manifestations .
It is primarily the young generation that is at risk , since they have not had the means to obtain the relevant historical experience of finding the right direction .
Our task is to help them with that .
If we give up , we will shake the foundations of our future .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union must fight against any type of extremism , since this activity is contrary to the principles of freedom , democracy and respect of human rights lying at the basis of the Union .
For this reason , at European level , anti-extremist and anti-terrorist actions should not affect the fundamental rights of citizens .
Extremist movements of paramilitary groups , ultra-nationalism , xenophobia , calls to violence and local ethnic and religious conflicts threaten the stability of the European Union , characterized by a rich cultural and traditional diversity of its Member States .
The latter must join efforts to fight extremist actions and identify the instigators and organizers of such actions .
The European Agency for Fundamental Rights will also play an important role in preventing racism and xenophobia , ensuring a climate of security on the territory of the Union .
Dialogue , education and public information on themes related to promoting tolerance and combating racism are important elements that contribute to the dissemination of the principles of freedom and democracy .
Member States should also cooperate and make efforts to integrate marginalized social and ethno-cultural categories , so that fight against discrimination and incitation to violence would ensure an ethnic and political harmony inside the European Union .
Montenegro - EC / Montenegro : Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the statement by the Commission on Montenegro ,
the recommendation , by Marcello Vernola , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the proposal for a Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Montenegro , of the other part - C6 0463 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Vernola for this very solid report , which is due to be adopted at a very crucial stage of our relations with Montenegro .
Let me first make a point on the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
The Council meeting of EU Foreign Ministers on Monday reaffirmed that the future of the Western Balkans lies in the European Union .
As proof of that we have in the last two months signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Montenegro and initialled SAAs both with Serbia and with Bosnia-Herzegovina .
I want to thank the Portuguese Presidency for its major contribution to these encouraging steps .
I hope we can soon sign the two latter agreements , once the conditions have been met by these two countries .
Montenegro has made good progress since independence , including in the development of smoother , well functioning relations with Serbia .
Of course a decisive step on Montenegro 's European journey was taken on 15 October this year when we signed the SAA with the country .
I welcome the unanimous ratification of the SAA by the Montenegrin Parliament soon thereafter .
The SAA provides a stable framework for economic , political and institutional development in Montenegro and it is a significant step forward in the country 's European integration path , provided that the Agreement is properly implemented .
In another positive development , I also welcome the adoption of the Constitution of Montenegro only a few days after the SAA was signed .
The new Constitution , which is broadly in line with European standards , helps strengthen democratic institutions in the country .
Its full implementation will require further efforts and determination .
The Commission 's regular progress report , adopted on 6 November , highlights these positive developments .
It commends Montenegro for establishing the necessary legal and institutional framework following independence .
It also underlines progress made by Montenegro in preparing for the implementation of the SAA and strengthening its administrative capacity .
Our progress report also points out certain key challenges that Montenegro will face in the coming years .
For instance , Montenegro 's administrative capacity remains rather weak and therefore administrative reforms need to be continued at all levels .
In the fight against corruption , urgent action is needed to achieve concrete , tangible results .
Money laundering and organised crime remain areas of concern .
These are also highlighted , rightly so , in your report .
The new Constitution enhances the independence of the judiciary by setting up a new constitutional body , the Judicial Council , in charge of the appointment and dismissal of judges .
The Government also adopted a judicial reform strategy for the period 2007-2012 .
Its implementation will certainly be a major challenge but it is clear that Montenegro needs to ensure the independence , accountability and professionalism of its judges and prosecutors .
Montenegro participates actively in regional cooperation .
It has good relations with its neighbours .
Most issues with Serbia following independence have been settled .
Montenegro has also taken a constructive approach to the Kosovo status issue , aligning itself with the EU 's position .
Focus should now be on full implementation of the interim agreement on preparations for the whole SAA as well as on the recommendations of the European partnership .
Montenegro needs to build a solid track record of implementation and of reforms .
She has got off to a very good start in the stabilisation and association process and I hope that the country will build on this positive momentum .
We are very much looking forward to working even more closely with the Government of Montenegro , the Parliament , other institutions and the civil society of the country on its European reform agenda .
I am pleased to inform you that the new Commission delegation has been operational since 1 November and is preparing to take over the work carried on by the European Agency for Reconstruction , in due course as planned .
Montenegro is expected to receive close to EUR 100 million under the instrument for pre-accession in the coming three-year period until 2009 .
These funds will assist Montenegro in such areas as the rule of law , the strengthening of administrative capacity and implementation of the SAA .
Economic and social development and civil society development certainly will be another priority .
So I trust we can count on the strong support of the European Parliament , which is crucial as always .
( DE ) Mr President , this was announced as a debate or as statements from the Council and the Commission .
I only wanted to ask where the Council is and whether it will at least be represented again at Council Question Time or perhaps even in the course of this debate .
The services inform me that the debate is taking place in this way by decision of the Conference of Presidents , as the Council is engaged in preparations for the meeting of the Council in Lisbon tomorrow .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is now accepted that the future of the Balkan countries lies in Europe ; that was confirmed by the Thessaloniki European Council in 2003 and has been endorsed by ourselves in this House on a number of occasions , marking an end to any further discussion of the issue .
Montenegro is undoubtedly in pole position on the road towards accession to the European Union , as the facts show : following independence from the Union with Serbia in 2006 , declared democratically after a proper referendum and duly agreed with the Serbian Government , the negotiations for the country 's own Stabilisation and Association Agreement were re-opened and concluded in the space of slightly more than two months .
The agreements were initialled on 15 March 2007 but , unfortunately , some technical problems then arose which slowed down further progress , although the end is now in sight .
The Commissioner has just announced that an office has already been opened in Podgorica - which we commend - and that everything is now in place for ratification of the agreement .
Montenegro 's progress in the last year , the commitments into which it has entered vis-à-vis the European Community and ongoing reform work , even in the last few days , all lead us unhesitatingly to endorse the favourable opinion on the conclusion of the agreement .
Clearly , however , that is not the final goal , but is no more than a starting point .
Montenegro must now focus on implementing all the measures needed to complete the reform process which is already under way in order to fulfil the commitments into which it has entered in the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
From that point of view , we should note the good climate of cooperation between the European Parliament and the Parliament of Montenegro , which we have met on a number of occasions and by which we shall be welcomed next week in Podgorica .
Montenegro has everything that it needs to bring this process swiftly to a conclusion , starting from its status as a candidate for accession .
Montenegro 's economy has continued to grow in recent years and that has helped to attract huge foreign investment , partly as a result of fiscal policies favourable to enterprises .
As a result , unemployment has dropped sharply from 33 % to 12 % .
Some months ago , the new Constitutional Charter was adopted , a clear sign of the extent to which the country is strengthening the democratic prerogatives which mark it out in the Balkan area .
The Montenegrin authorities are working speedily to bring themselves into line with European standards .
The most recent news has led us to table five amendments to take account of recent developments .
In the last few days , a cooperation agreement with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has been signed in order to regulate technical assistance in respect of that Tribunal .
We should bear in mind that unconditional cooperation with the ad hoc tribunal in The Hague is of crucial importance for all the states emerging from the break-up of Yugoslavia .
We should also bear in mind that Montenegro has never shirked its international obligations , and indeed has always been praised for its efficient cooperation with the legal and foreign authorities .
Montenegro needs to make further efforts to combat and put an end to organised crime in the area of illegal cross-border trafficking .
The European Parliament also considers that corruption in the public administration and the judiciary needs to be combated : the country is responding positively to the European authorities and signs of this can be seen in the new Constitution which introduces mechanisms to protect the autonomy and independence of the judiciary .
The capacity of the ruling class will also be developed by participation in Community twinning programmes and exchanges with the Member States .
Some of these programmes will foster the development of younger people and researchers .
Promoting the free movement of people , in particular students and researchers , is a goal which is being pursued among other things by simplifying the procedure for the issue of short-stay visas in respect of which specific agreements were signed last September with the European Union ; the final goal is fully to liberalise visas in order to make freedom of movement effective , another major point of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , and to open up channels fostering growth and education .
We consider that cultural bodies should be allowed to flourish , for instance by promoting the voluntary sector and protecting the representatives of civil society .
Freedom of thought must be ensured as must the right to information .
The environment deserves a special mention : the previous Constitution defined Montenegro as an ecological republic , the first in the world to give itself such a label .
Nature has been kind to the country , from the beautiful coastline to the natural Bay of Kotor and the Durmitor mountain massif which is on UNESCO 's World Heritage List .
That heritage must be safeguarded by specific legislation which is in many cases already in the statute book but not strictly applied , often for lack of financial resources .
The country derives considerable income from tourism , but unfortunately tourism itself may have an adverse impact on the environment , as the facilities available do not have appropriate systems for managing the major influx of tourists from an ecological point of view .
For that reason , we asked Commissioner Rehn in another forum to focus the Commission 's attention on promoting environmental policies , especially as regards renewable energy sources , waste and water management and coastal protection .
Montenegro is aware of the problem and is continuing to work towards proper management of natural resources .
The spatial plan regulating construction work so as not to spoil the coastal landscape has recently been approved .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I naturally welcome the progress which Montenegro has made since declaring its independence and which has very quickly led to the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The Montenegrins , of course , should not sit back and relax now but should fully implement the agreement they have signed .
They should follow the guidelines they have set themselves and enable their administration to apply enacted legislation .
They should ensure that the judicial system is brought up to scratch and that action is taken to combat corruption , especially in the administration and the judiciary .
I am well aware that the particular situation which prevailed in the region in the 1990s allowed corruption to take hold and that it is very difficult to eradicate it today , but it does nothing for Montenegro 's reputation among the countries of the European Union when its name keeps cropping up in connection with smuggling , corruption and money laundering .
Montenegrin politicians must do everything in their power to alter that image .
After all , at some stage the people of the European Union are supposed to welcome Montenegro into the fold .
For this reason it is imperative that the development of democracy and a market economy in Montenegro should take place in a truly transparent framework .
I do not intend to discuss every point that has been raised today or is still to be raised , nor will I refer to everything that is contained in our resolution .
I would like to stress , however , that the Montenegrin landscape is a jewel , and special measures are needed to conserve its unique characteristics .
This means , as Marcello Vernola said , that the clause in the new Constitution declaring Montenegro to be an environmental state must not amount to an empty promise .
The coastline and hinterland must be protected , and megalithic investment projects must be prevented .
Natural features and sites of cultural and historic interest must be conserved in order to ensure that Montenegro does not squander its unique tourist appeal .
There are enough cautionary examples of such desecration in western Europe .
A sell-out of the coastline and hinterland must be prevented , and judicious development of tourism and cautious land-use are the order of the day .
There is an urgent need to prevent overdevelopment of the coastline , and land and property speculation must be curbed .
I am pleased to note that there now seems to be a land-use plan for that area .
I welcome the cooperation with ICTY , the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , and hope that it might result in the arrest of Mr Karadžić at some point .
It is also my earnest wish to see Montenegro finally create the national agency that will let the country enable its students and trainees to take part in the Erasmus and Leonardo education programmes .
We will be meeting a delegation of our counterparts from the Montenegrin Parliament next week , and we will encourage them to support their government in its efforts to pursue the path of convergence with the European Union and to combat all the abuses to which we have been referring .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , at the EU summit in Thessaloniki in June 2003 , the Heads of State or Government reaffirmed their support for the development of a European perspective in the Western Balkans , where Montenegro is the newest successor state of the former Yugoslavia , having declared its independence from Serbia in 2006 .
Since then , its relations with the European Union have become ever closer , and Montenegro has clearly chosen to steer a European course .
I particularly welcome the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement on 18 October , which marks a milestone in relations between Montenegro and the EU .
It brings numerous benefits to that small Balkan country , particularly in business and trade , for it provides for a free-trade area as well as facilitating investment and business cooperation .
On 19 October 2007 little more than a year after the declaration of independence , another important aim was achieved when the Montenegrin Parliament adopted the country 's first Constitution , which will play a particularly important role in forging the identity of this young nation .
It establishes Montenegro as a democratic , liberal and environmental state based on the rule of law .
That is a great success .
Montenegro still has a long way to go to attain membership of the EU , but remaining obstacles are being dismantled bit by bit .
There is still a particular need for progress in the struggle against the informal economy and corruption .
The functioning of a free and independent judicial system , cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and , above all , reform processes in the spheres of democratisation , human rights and the protection of minorities are indispensable for Montenegro and its future in the EU .
The initial priority must be the successful implementation of the reforms prescribed by the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
On 1 January 2008 Slovenia , another of Yugoslavia 's successor states , will take over the Presidency of the EU Council .
It is gratifying that one of the priorities of the Slovenian presidency will be the Western Balkans .
The security and stability of the Western Balkans are a paramount interest of the region itself and of the whole of Europe .
A democratic and stable Montenegro can and should play a major role in the pursuit of these goals .
Let me close by emphasising that the prospect of Montenegro acceding to the EU one day , albeit in the more distant future , is the main generator of further reform processes .
We in the European Parliament should support Montenegro on its way towards the EU .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( SL ) Over a hundred years ago Montenegro was a kingdom on the political map of Europe .
It was recognised and valued both culturally and politically .
Part of the coast , the Bay of Kotor , was an integral part of Austro-Hungary and at that time also provided access to the sea along with present-day Herzegovina .
Montenegro was at one time part of modern Europe and is now preparing itself for full cooperation in and membership of the European Union .
Since May 2006 , when it became a new European country , Montenegro has made encouraging progress as regards implementation of the European agenda .
It deserves heartfelt congratulations for its signing of the Stability and Association Agreement and the new laws adopted in October .
Podgorica also deserves recognition for its cooperation with the Hague Tribunal and its positive role and contribution to the long-term stability of the region .
However , from this day forward our European Union will be different , since a few hours ago in this hall we witnessed an extremely historic event when the Charter of Fundamental Rights was signed .
The nationals of Montenegro also deserve greater democracy , greater respect , greater diversity and greater legal certainty .
The main challenges to this young country are associated with the fight against organised crime and corruption , where more must and can be done .
I would ask the competent authorities to be more proactive in the fight against corruption , organised crime and the trafficking of people , arms and drugs .
In that context I welcome the firm legislative framework .
However , I would stress that the implementation of legislation in practice is a process which also requires adequate administrative and political resources .
I am still very concerned about the lack of transparency and political culture both in political and economic structures .
This is preventing Montenegro from developing a democratic society and a free market .
Montenegro must do more in terms of freedom , plurality and professionalism of the media .
It must carry out the adopted reforms in full and ensure the independence of Montenegro 's radio and television .
I regret the fact that there have still been no results in the investigation into the case of murdered journalist Duško Jovanović who at the time was publishing a series of articles on organised crime in Montenegro .
Journalists and civil society play an important role in the development of democracy , in particular where they draw attention to sensitive social problems .
I would therefore ask the government to be more active in resolving these problems and to involve and consult civil society and provide them with better conditions in which to operate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , may I express my warm thanks to Mr Vernola for his report and for the cooperative way in which it was dealt with in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
It is with even more gratitude , however , that I congratulate our Montenegrin counterparts and the Commission , who have once again demonstrated that a European perspective fuels the development of democracy , the rule of law and stability .
In actual fact , however , I feel that the process is advancing too slowly .
For this reason I appeal to both parties , starting with ourselves , the European institutions , to remember that Montenegro , and indeed the entire Western Balkans , is part of Europe .
It is in our own interests that lasting peace and democracy should prevail there .
We should deepen our commitment to the whole region .
Our proposal for a specific agenda for a close economic and environmental partnership with the Western Balkans should be adopted .
Let us do away with visa requirements as soon as possible .
I ask Montenegro to ensure that progress reports no longer tell , as they have told for years , of inadequate efforts to fight corruption , of organised crime and of public institutions with insufficient capacities .
It must step up its efforts to put European values into practice .
These include an atmosphere of openness in which the activity of civil society can truly flourish and in which unrestricted freedom of the media is a matter or course .
Lastly , it must take on a more prominent role as a constructive player throughout the region as well as in efforts to resolve the issue of Kosovo 's status .
Perhaps it can also rethink some of the steps that have led to dependence on countries outside Europe in certain areas .
Such steps include both the signing of the bilateral immunity agreement with the United States and legislation permitting unhealthy speculation in land and property , which undermines efforts to protect the environment and prevents truly sustainable development of Montenegro 's stunningly beautiful coastal region .
The recent adoption of land-use planning objectives is an important step .
Once again , then , I offer my congratulations and my encouragement for further progress on the way to membership of the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in 1918 independent Montenegro took a voluntary decision to unite with the neighbouring states of Serbia , Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , and Slovenia .
After the break-up of Yugoslavia , the Montenegrin electorate decided democratically in 2006 that they did not wish Montenegro to remain united with Serbia .
Montenegro thus became Europe 's 49th independent state , a state in which most of the population are Slavs except in the regions bordering Albania and Kosovo , where ethnic Albanians predominate .
In terms of everyday politics , it is important that Montenegro should not become a haven for foreigners who want to pay less tax and launder ill-gotten gains .
Montenegro must find solutions to the problem of environmental pollution and to the plight of long-term refugees from Serbia and Kosovo .
The railways must be made serviceable again , and smuggling must be combated .
My group is pleased that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has adopted our amendments on refugees ' living and working conditions .
People who are not currently nationals of any country must not remain stateless for ever , and Montenegro must follow the relevant guideline laid down by the Council of Europe .
Our proposal on the resumption of rail services to Nikšić on the Bosnian border and to Shkodër in Albania has also been adopted .
Urgent measures must be taken to put an end to the neglect of the North-South rail link and to redress the imbalance caused by the decision to rely entirely on cars , buses and lorries .
We also welcome the fact that the rapporteur has not repeated the call he made in his previous report on Montenegro for the country 's rapid accession to NATO .
Accession to NATO must not be imposed as a condition of future access to membership of the EU .
It is also a good thing that this report does not repeat the demand that Montenegro pursue the sort of neo-liberal economic policy which would go even further than we already have within the European Union .
Montenegro has the opportunity to become a Member State of the EU .
That is important , not only for Montenegro but also for the other states of the former Yugoslavia which likewise aspire to accession .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the rapporteur Mr Vernola rightly makes the point that Montenegro 's future lies in the European Union .
But the road to European integration is not a rose-strewn path .
There is cause for alarm at the way in which the fledgling Balkan state is developing .
Montenegro may in theory be splendidly ' green ' and developing ideally , but Podgorica has to sustain this over the longer term .
And current practices seem to be stubbornly entrenched .
One danger , for example , is the unstable boom in property prices on the Gold Coast around Kotor .
In addition , fast-expanding and sometimes illegal construction is placing undue strain on the country 's water and sewerage systems .
Mr Vernola mentions this , but not forcefully enough for so serious a problem .
The huge potential for growth of Montenegrin tourism has its dark side too .
Whilst the tiny state 's Adriatic coast is experiencing a development boom , unemployment in the north is more than 20 % and poverty is above the national average .
And the legacy of the war is still apparent .
Infrastructure is minimal and in some localities the population has to contend with water and electricity shortages .
Montenegrins are still not investing productively enough in a sound economic future .
With a view to development , with a view to joining Europe , Montenegro needs a properly thought-out strategy of growth for the whole of the country .
There must be no careless action regarding a new ' European Gold Coast ' .
( SL ) I am pleased to support the consent given to the conclusion of a Stability and Association Agreement between the European Union and Montenegro which is one of the important , positive acts to have taken place in south-eastern Europe in recent months .
This Agreement is recognition of the work that Montenegro has done and at the same time a contractual obligation to continue work on the road to full membership in the spirit of Thessaloniki perspective .
The Agreement lays down clearly the key priorities in the political and economic fields and in other fields .
In that sense I welcome the agreement 's clear relationship to development priorities in the field of tourism , environmental protection , transport and energy production .
All these priorities are closely interlinked and it is therefore also important that Montenegro carry out or bring about administrative reform through which it will be able to ensure rapid development and satisfaction of the conditions for acquiring candidate status .
I genuinely wish Montenegro success in this regard since implementation , which the speakers before me emphasised , depends on this .
I am convinced that under the Slovenian Presidency the European Union will note any progress by Montenegro in complying with its contractual obligations .
Progress by Montenegro is of course in the particular interest of south-eastern Europe and thus also of the European Union as a whole .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is much to admire about Montenegro .
The landscape is admirable , as is the way in which the separation from Serbia was conducted , both Montenegro and Serbia having acted very responsibly .
I must also express admiration for the country 's policy on minorities , as a result of which minorities , by and large , tend to feel at home in Montenegro .
These and many other things certainly merit our admiration .
There are also dark sides , however , which cause me great concern and which other speakers have already mentioned .
One of these is the activity of foreign investors , particularly those from Russia .
I have nothing against Russian investment in Montenegro or any other country .
The Montenegrins must beware , however , of an imbalance that would make them dependent on a single country - and I would say the same thing about dependence on any country , not just Russia .
Some of these investments are already endangering Montenegro 's natural beauty spots and its picturesque landscapes .
What continues to make me particularly sad is the prevalence of corruption , to which some Members have already referred .
We have many reports from media sources that can at least be trusted to try to report in a fairly balanced way .
The cases of massive corruption in connection with cigarette smuggling and other cases we have been reading about are things we thought had been consigned to history .
I ask the Commission to make these occurrences a priority .
If corruption were the sole criterion , we ought not to consent to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement today or in the days to come .
We shall consent to it , however - and I include the Socialist Group here - because we want to help the country with its reform process .
Needless to say , however , we expect the Commission and the country itself to make every effort to eliminate corruption , which - and this is the sad thing - extends into political circles .
At least there have been widespread serious allegations of corruption on the part of politicians .
Like Mr Kacin , I wish to highlight the fact that the case of the murder of Duško Jovanović has not yet been solved .
I wonder whether it is a mere coincidence that he and his colleagues had written a great deal about organised crime .
I hope that it is a coincidence and that there is no connection .
I certainly wish that the Montenegrin authorities would solve this case soon and would do far more to fight corruption in their own country .
( PL ) Mr President , the recommendation on the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and the Republic of Montenegro concerns a special situation .
For the first time we have to deal with a country that achieved independence through a referendum .
I was an observer at the first parliamentary election held in Montenegro after the referendum , as a representative of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
Both the Council of Europe delegation and the OECD confirmed the democratic nature of the election .
I was fascinated by the degree of civic involvement in the observation of the election process .
Representatives of non-governmental organisations , returning officers , were present in all the electoral committees we visited .
The great commitment of the members of the electoral committees in ensuring that all procedures were complied with was clear to see .
It should also be noted that Montenegro has adopted the euro as legal tender .
Having regard to the progress made towards integration in the European Union , I support the recommendation on the conclusion of the Agreement .
It is my hope that the adaptation process will help Montenegro improve the living conditions of its inhabitants .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the relationship between the EU and the Balkans is a delicate issue partly because the biggest EU Member Sates , through their policy which amounted to a ' divide and conquer ' approach , contributed significantly to the break-up of the former Yugoslavia , which since the First World War had been a key stabilising factor in the area as a whole .
With the exception of Slovenia , all of these states are characterised by instability , ethnic tensions , migration issues , high levels of corruption and unemployment , a weak state and limited influence of elected parliaments .
Such an environment is a breeding ground for illegal trade and trafficking of weapons , people , drugs , alcohol and tobacco products .
In such an environment it is difficult to plan for transport , energy and economic development .
It is also difficult to protect the environment .
It should not come as a surprise to any of you that we view these phenomena , which are also prevalent in Montenegro , as pressing global issues facing the earth .
A resolution is only a weak substitute for what we should do to redeem ourselves from the guilt borne by several members for the current state of affairs in this area .
Is Parliament aware of this ?
( EL ) Mr President , our fellow Member Mr Vernola has given an excellent - vivid , I would say - picture of Montenegro , which is the most enchanting corner of the Balkans .
In Balkan legend , there have always been tales of this ancient kingdom , which has managed to live with five neighbouring countries .
So many neighbours !
It shares borders with Bosnia and Croatia and Serbia and Albania , and also with Kosovo , which will now perhaps be Montenegro 's problem , because , from what we see in the newspapers and hear from fellow Members , Kosovo is about to declare its independence , unilaterally !
This could be a problem for Montenegro , which is now home to large numbers of Albanians .
In my view , the signature of the accession agreement , for the start of negotiations , is very positive , and will help towards the reform of public administration and judicial authority , but above all it will help to combat corruption , and I hope this same agreement will restrain whatever tendencies may emerge among the Albanian population .
( PL ) Mr President , the political situation in the Balkans has been a subject of special interest to this Parliament for many years .
We are happy that , after a period of bloody conflicts , peace and cooperation between nations are now the norm in the daily life of the region .
Even the most sensitive issues , such as declarations of independence by new states , now take place , or can take place , in a manner and form complying with the highest international standards .
That is the real trend in the political development of the Balkans , a trend that creates the possibility to achieve the strategic goal of the majority of nations living in the region , namely closer cooperation with the European Union , up to and including full membership .
Montenegro is an excellent example of this trend .
After declaring independence , it maintained good relations with its nearest neighbours , including the Republic of Serbia , with which it had previously been joined in a federation .
It immediately began intensive negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement , which culminated in the signing of the Agreement on 15 October of this year .
In parallel , it concluded a free-trade agreement with the EU that will enter into force in January .
In the course of this short period of time , barely one and a half years , Montenegro has made appreciable progress .
The changes made in fiscal and taxation policy , and in establishing a market economy based on competition and the free movement of capital , must be seen as positive achievements .
There is still much to be done , especially in the fields of social policy and employment , energy and protection of the environment , and security and civil rights .
An effective fight against corruption and organised crime and full cooperation with the International Tribunal in the Hague are particularly important tasks facing the government of Montenegro .
Montenegro , however , is not alone in facing these problems .
Similar challenges face all Balkan countries applying for membership of the European Union .
Montenegro is one of the leaders in this process , and I would like here to express the hope that it will remain so .
The Union is prepared to welcome the Balkan countries into the community .
Whether and when that happens depends , above all , on the Balkan elite and the wisdom of Balkan politicians .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Montenegro has made visible progress during its short existence .
The foundations have been laid for a new state and a new constitution has been adopted .
The country 's economy is showing strong growth of 8 % and inward investment has this year been in the order of EUR 700 million .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been signed and Montenegro has taken its first steps on its way to full membership of the EU .
If , however , its path to membership of the EU is to be as short and fast as possible , Podgorica should make some fundamental decisions .
It is necessary to reinforce the functioning of the rule of law and guarantee among other things an independent judiciary .
It is also necessary - with more conviction than in the past - to combat corruption and increase transparency in decision-making in political and economic structures with a view to guaranteeing the democratic and equitable functioning of the market economy .
Tourism has a fundamental significance for the economy of Montenegro .
Its sustainability must be guaranteed by adopting a unified legislative framework for the protection of the natural environment and the coastline .
Ladies and gentlemen , the accession process of Montenegro and its neighbours facilitates much greater development of regional cooperation .
I am convinced that regional cooperation in the context of CEFTA will also help to solve many political , economic and social issues in the area as a whole .
I would like to conclude my speech by inviting the Commission to help Montenegro and other Western Balkan states to develop regional cooperation , primarily in the areas of energy , transport and the environment .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Swoboda rightly referred a moment ago to the widespread corruption in Montenegro .
In support , I would like to quote figures given by Transparency International , which show that , on a scale of 0 to 10 ( where 10 denotes the absence of corruption ) , Montenegro scores 3.3 .
It is thus right at the forefront of countries where corruption is a major problem .
I would add that smuggling is also a dramatic problem for Montenegro .
In this respect the country really does have no borders .
Recently there was a proposal to prohibit smoking in public places , when at the same time , in the centre of the capital city , you can buy thousands of packets of contraband cigarettes .
In that regard Montenegro clearly has a long way to go on the road to the European Union .
On the other hand , the country must be encouraged to meet the Union 's criteria as soon as possible .
I welcome the fact that , in regard to the judiciary , for example , or the functioning of the administration , there has been perceptible progress .
We have to appreciate what Montenegro has done in this field since the moment it rather unexpectedly declared its independence following a referendum .
I believe the European Union should give a clear signal that , once the relevant criteria have been met , the road to the Union will be shortened .
We have to hold out a real prospect of membership - obviously not in two , three or four years ' time - but a real incentive to Montenegrin society for the increasing achievement of European standards .
( DE ) Mr President , Montenegro is not just one of the world 's most beautiful countries ; it is also the Balkan country with the oldest tradition of independence in the modern era .
When Belgium was founded , Montenegro had already been independent for centuries and possessed the characteristics of a state .
I stress this because Montenegro is always wrongly dismissed as an example of a superfluous tiny land that suddenly found itself independent by a quirk of fate .
Let me say to Mr Markov that Montenegro was annexed by its Serbian ally after the First World War .
There was no question of voluntary union at that time .
A pro forma parliamentary vote was taken , but that was all .
There was a massive Montenegrin liberation movement , whose activities continued through the twenties and into the thirties .
Tito then restored Montenegro 's independence within Yugoslavia , and under Tito 's Yugoslav Constitution it had a right of secession .
When it tried to exercise that right , however , obstacles were placed in its way .
Today it is an independent country on the way to membership of the European Union .
We must support the democratic forces there .
As has already been said , its treatment of minorities is an example to many others in the region , which is why the minorities supported independence .
What it still needs , however , is a stronger system of independent education , such as that provided by the Franciscan school centre in Tuzi , near Podgorica .
Private education initiatives are needed to release the country from its rigidity .
I call on the government to keep moving vigorously along this path towards pluralism , not only in the economy but also in education and in the country 's constitutional and democratic structures .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , there is no doubt that Montenegro is an example of positive development in the Balkans with regard to the structure of the state , the constitution , the rule of law , entry into the global market and the creation of a market economy .
Without a doubt , therefore , the European Parliament should support the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Montenegro .
At the same time , however , we must remember that Montenegro has a great deal to change and to do , especially with respect to the rule of law and the fight against corruption .
I would point out that in April 2007 Montenegro signed a bilateral agreement with the United States on exclusion from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court .
Unfortunately , that agreement is in contradiction with the common position and basic principles of the European Union .
The International Criminal Court is a very important institution from the viewpoint of EU policy .
The bilateral agreement therefore grated unpleasantly with the prospect of an agreement with the Union .
I do not say this in order to make the European Parliament ill disposed towards Montenegro .
On the contrary , I believe the European Commission and all the EU institutions should do a great deal at the present time to help that country prepare properly for closer relations with the European Union , especially in combating corruption , strengthening the rule of law , building a market economy and countering the black market .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the example of Montenegro shows how important a referendum can be .
I therefore understand why numerous posters calling for a referendum were held aloft in the House today , as the Treaty of Lisbon itself , of course , gives us the option of offering the European people such a referendum .
I believe it is important that the general public are involved in the consultation process and that they have the opportunity to express their wishes .
In Montenegro I believe there is also a need to improve the country 's economic structures ; as Mr Posselt has already indicated , the educational establishments and programmes of the European Union are particularly important in that respect .
In energy too , energy efficiency and renewables pose a huge challenge in Montenegro as well as offering unprecedented opportunities .
In the telecommunications sector too , it would be desirable for Montenegro to transpose the Roaming Directive into national law because that could , of course , contribute to better communication with our European countries at more reasonable prices .
It goes without saying that the environment is one of the key challenges , and the domain of waste management , sewage works and waste water poses a particular problem .
If we speak of magnificent unspoiled natural beauty , we have grounds for applying the latest standards there .
The European Union is offering environmental support frameworks , which should be put in place as soon as possible .
( LT ) Many thanks to the rapporteur , who had the honour , in this report , of introducing a new and at the same time old European country .
After the ' velvet divorce ' from Serbia , Montenegro has been given the opportunity to demonstrate the unlimited potential of a small , proud country .
On the other hand , Montenegro should lead in the development of regional cooperation , continuing to increase the rights of minorities and contributing to the conversion of the Balkan region from a barrel of gunpowder to a garden of nations .
Like the other countries whose names have only recently appeared on the map , Montenegro is facing a number of hazardous challenges : deep-rooted corruption , illegal business , the black economy , etc .
It is unfortunate that some foreign investors , especially those from Russia , are attracted to this young country mainly because it offers easy ways of striking illegal financial deals .
The decision not to hand over the US workers to the International Criminal Court in exchange for military assistance undermines Montenegro 's credibility as regards its willingness to cooperate peacefully with its neighbours , and even its dedication to European objectives .
Today , from the shadows of the past , Montenegro , like some of its neighbouring countries , is attracted to the prospect of becoming a member of the European Union .
The very perspective of becoming a Member State encourages the development of democracy , human rights and a better life for citizens .
The implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement should put the wind of Europe in the sails of Montenegro 's reforms .
The country can draw from the experience accumulated en route to achieving EU membership by their neighbour Slovenia and other countries that joined the EU in the new Millennium .
Montenegro 's initiative of declaring itself an ecological republic is laudable ; however , the path to achieving credible implementation could be a long one .
It is good , that the curtain of isolation surrounding visas for Montenegro and other Balkan countries has been ripped up .
The European Commission and the Council should not linger at the halfway stage , but continue to demolish this obstruction , together with financial and bureaucratic barriers , while maintaining a strong level of protection against criminals and lawbreakers .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the Members for a very substantial and substantive debate and Mr Vernola for stimulating this debate .
Most Members rightly emphasised the absolute necessity of combating corruption and crime and ensuring that the rule of law is reinforced in Montenegro .
I could not agree more : the rule of law is fundamentally important for all sectors of society , underpinning the functioning of the whole society and the economy .
That is precisely why the Commission insists very much on judiciary reform early on in the pre-accession process in Montenegro , as well as in the other countries of the Western Balkans .
This is one of the most important political criteria of accession , which should be considered first and foremost .
Mr Vernola and many other Members also highlighted the importance of ecology and the environment .
The Commission is assisting this ancient kingdom to become the ecological republic in the garden of nations , as Mr Paleckis said , by strengthening the administrative capacity of Montenegro , which in turn makes the country better able to approximate its laws to ours , for instance in the field of waste management and water treatment .
However , this is also related to corruption and I want to quote from the progress report of the Commission . ' There have been no improvements in activities to curb political corruption . ...
Management of public assets raises serious concerns .
There is considerable room for corruption , especially in the cases of construction and land-use planning , privatisation , concessions and public procurement . ' This is a very serious issue and that is why Montenegro needs to address corruption as one of its first priorities .
Let me also inform the honourable Members that the Commission intends to adopt a communication early next year - probably in March - in which we will take stock of developments since Thessaloniki , and Salzburg last year , and give pointers towards the future .
One such issue will be visa liberalisation , mentioned by many of you , and rightly so .
The Commission will initiate dialogue on roadmaps towards visa-free travel , which should help the countries of the Western Balkans to make progress to meet the requirements so their citizens will no longer need visas to travel to the European Union .
But , I want to underline that this is not , as such , within the competences of the Commission but in the hands of the national governments of the European Union , and the ministries and ministers of the interior are the key players here .
Therefore let us join our forces and carry out effective lobbying of the ministers of the interior as well as of the countries concerned in the Western Balkans , because we have to be sure that all the security requirements , such as the issuing of documents and border controls , are in full order before we can move towards visa liberalisation .
Finally , I am very pleased to hear about the successful parliamentary cooperation which is taking place between the Parliament of Montenegro and the European Parliament .
I know this is very important - it is part of true political integration - and this is helping to develop institutions in Montenegro in a most welcome way .
I trust that we can work together towards reinforcing the democratic institutions and administrative capacity of Montenegro .
I am very glad that we see eye to eye on the future development of Montenegro on its road towards the European Union .
( Applause )
I have received one motion for a resolution to wind up the debate on the Commission statement .
That joint debate is closed .
The votes on the motion for a resolution and the Vernola report will be on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , as a Member of the European Parliament I have great pleasure in expressing support for the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States and the Republic of Montenegro .
I believe that cooperation between the European Union and the Republic of Montenegro will be mutually beneficial in the future , especially through the gradual creation of a bilateral free-trade area .
I am also very pleased at the progress made by the Republic of Montenegro towards meeting the obligations imposed by the European Union .
I would , however , refer briefly to areas in which , as set out in the Commission 's recommendations , Montenegro must continue its efforts if it wishes to draw closer to the European Union .
The most important task is to improve the rule of law by reforming public administration so as to strengthen institutions at all levels and effectively combat their politicisation .
I am aware of and appreciate the legislative efforts made by Montenegro in this area , but it is most important that they should gradually be given greater practical force .
The Montenegrin authorities must also achieve greater transparency in matters of budgetary control , management of public funds and tender procedures .
I believe that implementation by the Republic of Montenegro of all the European Commission 's recommendations will make it possible to set the country swiftly on a direct path to accession .
1 December 2007 : World AIDS Day ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on World AIDS Day , which was on 1 December 2007 .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , once again we have the opportunity to discuss this serious health threat in the European Parliament .
It was only a few months ago that we had the opportunity to discuss the Community Action Plan regarding this health threat .
Our concern does not , of course , relate only to the European Community , but also to the whole world .
We are concerned with the rise of infections , with the number of people who are affected and living with HIV worldwide , and the number of 33 million people , for us , is too high .
Therefore , we want to take action within the European Union but also coordinate with all the other international players outside the EU to tackle this issue globally .
This also matches the new European Community health strategy , which includes a global role for the European Union in the area of health .
Areas we can concentrate on : first of all , to prevent infection - this is very important .
At the same time , to make sure that testing is available , and treatment and care where needed .
To achieve all this , we need to raise awareness , and this is a very important factor ; this is something where we are lagging behind - I will come back to that in a minute .
But also the social stigma .
This is one of our major concerns , and in a way this works as a vicious circle , because the social stigma prevents people from wanting to test themselves and learning whether they have been infected , and therefore , they could infect others .
They do not seek treatment and do not get tested , with all the negative effects .
This is more worrying among young people , and this is our main concern and target .
Our studies and polls show that , among young people , there really is a lack of knowledge - one could say there is ignorance when it comes to these health threats .
So it is important to show to them in a balanced way , in a way that presents information and on the one hand does not create panic but on the other hand does not lead to complacency , that it is a serious disease ; there is no cure for it , but they can protect themselves - and they can be shown how to do that - and at the same time that they should not be afraid of fellow citizens who have the infection , who have the disease .
We have seen two extremes from the Eurobarometer .
Some young people think that there is nothing to worry about : you take some antibiotics and it goes away .
On the other hand , just by touching infected people or even sharing a glass with them or through a kiss one can catch the disease .
So we see two extreme views regarding this health threat , and neither deals effectively with our aim , which is to control the spread and further infections .
World AIDS Day is an important day and gives us an opportunity to discuss and raise awareness ; but we should not limit ourselves to this one day , and that is why I am happy that , within the European Union at least , we will be discussing these issues continuously .
But when it comes to young people , we have to remind ourselves that we had very active , very effective , very aggressive campaigns in the 1980s which managed to reach the goal of raising awareness , but then we stopped and we forgot that a young generation , a new generation of young people became sexually active after the end of those campaigns .
In fact , some of them were born just before the end of those campaigns , and they did not benefit from those awareness-raising initiatives that were taking place then , and that is why we have the results I have just mentioned .
We know that , through simple messages , simple methods , role models , celebrities , opinion leaders , giving a good example and explaining the situation , we can achieve the awareness that we would like to achieve .
This year , our initiative was to propose to the health ministers of the European Union that we would all go simultaneously into schools and discuss these problems with young people on World AIDS day , to see what they know , tell them what we know , and have an exchange of views .
We had a positive response : more than half the Member State Ministers followed that approach .
We went into schools - I also went - and it was an eye-opener : the debates and discussions with young people , understanding , first of all , what they know or do not know about this disease , and also some practical problems .
They know , for example , that the use of condoms is the best protection , but at the same time , how can they get them ?
They are too embarrassed or they are worried or they are shy .
So we see some practical effects that we never thought were problems , never thought we would have to face in Europe .
But they are still there .
Also , because we want to talk to young people in language that they understand , the Commission this year took the initiative of producing a new TV spot addressing the prevention of HIV transmission .
This was done through a competition among young people , and the best one chosen , the winning entry , was by a Polish student .
We produced that , and it was broadcast by several TV channels and was also used in the school visits .
This is an important strategy which we must follow : we have to talk to young people in the language they understand .
But , as I said earlier , the challenges arising from HIV and AIDS are present well beyond the European Union boundaries .
It is true that , worldwide , there has been some good progress in terms of access to HIV-related services , especially low-middle-income countries .
Now , about 95 % of people infected with HIV live in those countries .
Thanks to an unprecedented increase in international funding in these countries , the number of people receiving treatment has considerably increased , from 100 000 in 2001 to 2.5 million people in 2007 .
These are impressive figures ; nevertheless , more than 70 % of people in need of ARV treatment in these countries do not receive it or do not have access to it .
This shows that we still have a long way to go .
The European action is financed through a wide array of financial instruments both at national and global level , such as the global fund , for example .
There are also other financing mechanisms through public private partnerships .
Progress has been achieved through these joint efforts with the international community , but we still have a long way to go , and this requires strong cooperation among the European institutions .
As I said at the beginning , our principal goal is to bring the number of new HIV infections down and work towards the best possible solutions in terms of support , treatment and care for those who are already living with HIV / AIDS .
I therefore want to emphasis this once again : fighting the stigma - the social exclusion , the discrimination of the disease and people suffering from it or being affected by it - is very important and unless we do that we will never be able to control the situation .
To do that , we need to raise awareness campaigns and increase them .
This is why the motto of the European Commission in this action against AIDS is ' Remember me ' , because it is a forgotten disease at all levels , or at least it has become one .
We will now bring it back to the forefront ; but it is not just for the citizens , to remind them of the existence of this disease , but also for the decision-makers , to make sure that they put it back at the top of the political agenda and take all the necessary actions .
In this respect I am counting - and I know I have it - on the support of the European Parliament .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , there is so much to be done .
Let me start with what the Commissioner really highlighted in his speech , which is the effect on children , because one of the campaigns that is running this year , of course , is Stop Aids in Children .
We know that every minute of every day a child is born with HIV ; we know that 2.3 million children are living in our world with HIV ; that only one in 10 who needs anti-retroviral treatment receives it ; in the absence of treatment we know that an estimated one third of infants die in their first year and half die by their second birthday ; we know that 15.2 million children under the age of 18 have lost one or both parents to AIDS ; and we know that by 2010 , that magical year , more than 20 million children will have been orphaned by AIDS .
That is the children 's story , that is the challenge regarding children , but of course it is an adult story as well .
We know the numbers that we have in our various countries for people being diagnosed , for people living with HIV : all on the up , and the frightening statistic that one in three people do not know they are infected .
That is the challenge , but there are specific challenges I think we should highlight this year , and the Commissioner has hinted at some of them .
The level of basic knowledge has actually been going down in the last five years : the public is less aware than it was .
Myths and misunderstandings have been growing .
One in five people do not know that HIV can be transmitted through sex without a condom .
Fewer than half of all sexually active people always use a condom with a new sexual partner .
We know that the number of people diagnosed has trebled since 1997 ; we know that risk-taking sexual behaviour is on the increase ; we know that a quarter of all HIV-related deaths are due to late diagnosis , and a third are preventable .
And , specifically , we know that failed asylum seekers living with HIV are too often not eligible for free HIV treatment and so cannot afford lifesaving care , and can go on and infect others .
We also know that the rate of HIV among male prisoners is 15 times higher than among the general population .
All those things we know , along with the knowledge we have of the hopeful signs , of research .
Recently in Rwanda I saw for myself the research , the ongoing clinical trials and the need for trials in Africa for vaccines for Africans .
But all these things need that urgency , and 2010 is the target year ; 2010 is nearly with us .
2010 , Commissioner : you and I come to the end of our term of office .
I want us not to hide behind that fact and leave it to our successors .
I want us to say , in 2009 , when you and I may be leaving office , at least we have fulfilled this promise .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my compliments to the Commission for its efforts , which the Commissioner has just described .
I would stress today the importance of World AIDS Day and of our joint responsibility in combating this disease .
Because a disaster is unfolding worldwide , a disaster which does not get the attention it deserves .
My group thus welcomes the fact that we are having this debate today in Strasbourg .
The figures speak for themselves .
Worldwide there are 33 million people who have full-blown AIDS or are HIV-positive , and a total of 25 million people worldwide have died of the disease .
But a lot of people act as if AIDS does not exist .
Because AIDS is associated with sex , many people prefer not to talk about it .
And that makes it hard - as the Commissioner says - to educate people about AIDS .
The younger generation of today is paying a high price for that .
Half of all new HIV infections are in people under the age of 25 .
In the time it takes me to say this , six more young people will have been infected with the virus and three children will have died of AIDS .
We are talking here of a generation which has not known a world without AIDS .
The disaster is not confined to Africa .
In recent years the number of HIV infections in Europe and Central Asia has doubled from 1.25 to 2.4 million .
It is high time for the European Union to do something .
This terrible disease , which destroys the lives of millions of families worldwide , is preventable .
AIDS can be fought by effective information , readier availability of condoms , and affordable drugs .
The Commissioner rightly points out that we have allowed AIDS to become a forgotten disease on our own continent .
Europe 's youngsters of today were not around for the big public awareness campaigns of the 1990s .
We must act vigorously if we do not want things to get out of hand here .
So , partly as a symbolic act and partly because we think it is a really important initiative , my group launched a campaign last month to get the tax on condoms reduced to 5 % throughout the European Union .
The fact that the rate of VAT on condoms varies so widely - in some countries it is as much as 25 % - shows that we do not in Europe have a shared approach to this shared problem , or at least that we are not doing enough about it .
The Portuguese Presidency has given solid backing to our campaign and we hope for a positive endorsement from Commissioner Kovács too when he launches the debate on the European VAT system at the end of next year .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' Yours for ever , AIDS ' were the words I read on a poster for World AIDS Day , which took place almost two weeks ago .
The message was that AIDS is treatable but not curable .
Many people , especially younger people , lose sight of that or choose to ignore it .
The infection rates , to which previous speakers have referred , speak for themselves .
Education is the only way to prevent HIV and AIDS , and I am pleased that the Commission subscribes to that view .
Education , however , must not be confined to poster campaigns or visits to schools by government ministers .
These things attract brief attention and may catch the eye of the media too , but they do not modify behaviour patterns , especially among young people .
AIDS and HIV were once the stuff of real-life horror stories in the press .
Many people felt insecure and afraid because nobody knew how dangerous the virus really was .
I have no wish to return to those days , but with the existence of HIV / AIDS having become a fact of life and treatments having become safer , the problem no longer automatically captures the same level of public attention today .
Many people have become accustomed to these messages , and some are even tired of hearing and seeing them .
That is irrational , but it is a fact .
Education must be adapted to take account of these changed circumstances .
Education must be designed to reach out and capture people 's attention , to address tailored messages to specific target groups in their own vernacular .
There are young people out there who misinterpret HIV as a negligible risk , and it is particularly important that we engage with them on their own cognitive ground and prompt them to think about the consequences of infection .
Many people still do think about the consequences , but unfortunately they start too late , namely when a doctor or social worker tells them they have tested positive .
Then the disease , which has hitherto been a dim and distant concept , suddenly becomes very real .
Only if we manage to make people think about HIV before it is too late shall we have made any progress .
Patient long-term efforts will be needed to achieve that goal .
There must be facilities , services and projects designed for target groups - the more differentiated and the closer to personal experience they are , the better they will be .
The organised AIDS charities , such as the AIDS-Hilfe associations in Germany , can continue to play an important role here if they rise to this new challenge .
That , unfortunately , is not happening everywhere .
Those who are HIV-positive today have a good chance of a long life , in western Europe at least .
In other parts of the world , such as Africa , it is a different matter .
This comfortable situation of ours , however , should not breed complacency .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am a doctor who has been working with AIDS for twenty years and I have to say that , frankly , I would have expected much more detailed and pragmatic proposals from the Commission .
In the European Union , sexual relations are the main channel of transmission .
To be more specific :
1 ) Is the Commission urging all the Member States to organise sex education classes in schools ?
2 ) Is it urging Member States to introduce price controls on condoms which are at present the only way of blocking sexual transmission ?
In Europe the second main channel of transmission is intravenous , especially among those using drugs .
What , then , is the Commission doing to urge Member States to implement damage limitation strategies which are the only way in which intravenous transmission can be reduced among those who are unable , cannot or do not want to give up drugs ?
As regards the rest of the world , I would have expected the Commission to come here and tell us : after eight months of deadlock with Parliament , we note that Parliament has voted to amend Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement and , while that that has not led to any amendment , the Commission is committed to fighting to amend the WTO rules .
At present , the TRIPS rules allow multinationals to hold patents for twenty year with the result that drugs do not get to Africa .
We have heard absolutely nothing about that !
If those rules are not changed , speaking of Africa is no more than hot air !
Lastly , how is it possible , when everyone is talking about the fight against AIDS , that you have Commissioner Mandelson writing letters to the Thai Government asking it not to pass laws making it possible to distribute generics and , in his letters , sponsoring and naming companies such as Sanofi-Avensis ?
In my view , the Commission should have something to say about that !
( FR ) Mr President , yes , AIDS has claimed too many victims - far too many .
It continues to claim them and will claim many more .
Tragically , many children will be infected before birth .
We have heard the figures , they are frightening , and I do not intend to go through them again .
Sadly , the spread of AIDS is continuing not only in the EU Member States but in non-member countries too , and to fight this new wave of the epidemic it is essential that we step up preventive action , provide more treatment , care and support and forge the partnerships that are absolutely vital to the effort .
Alongside prevention we need to improve access to information , and make it easier for people to obtain advice , treatment and social services .
We need to mitigate the negative impact of this disease - one of saddest aspects being that it is a taboo condition , something people dare not discuss freely .
To achieve all this , we need to mobilise available resources and focus research , coordinate our efforts and fund specific projects .
Only if everyone concerned works together in constructive partnership can we make a significant and lasting contribution to stemming this epidemic .
One striking thing is the fact that today 's young Europeans have never experienced the type of effective prevention campaigns that were run in the 1980s .
European societies need to shoulder their responsibility here and get the essential information about HIV and AIDS across to young people .
The most recent surveys show an astonishing level of ignorance about the disease among the young .
54 % of young people in the ' old ' EU Member States believe HIV can be contracted by drinking from the same glass as an infected person .
That shows how vital it is to improve awareness and to invest in prevention and in information about the use of condoms .
The cost of condoms is another issue that needs to be addressed .
The survey findings also show that we cannot relax our efforts ; we cannot overlook what is no longer a ' new ' disease .
In raising awareness , we need to deliver the right messages - messages better tailored to their audience .
Efforts are currently under way on this front .
The messages we put across need to be more up-to-date and they need to make a real impression on young people .
Until recently and largely for ethical reasons , it was left , in the main , to patients to seek advice and to request HIV testing .
In retrospect we can now identify two problems with that approach : firstly , the availability of services was poor and , secondly , people were afraid of being stigmatised and discriminated against .
In low-income countries the fact that testing is voluntary is a serious obstacle to combating the AIDS pandemic .
How can disadvantaged , poorly educated patients be expected to give informed consent ?
How can a person who has never heard of HIV consent to being tested for it ?
And what benefit does an individual derive from taking an HIV test in a country that has no social protection system ?
Recent surveys in sub-Saharan Africa show that only 12 % of men and 10 % of women have had the test and received results .
This disease is an ongoing threat and we must not lower our guard against it !
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , AIDS remains one of the great plagues of the 21st century despite the international community 's exceptional efforts to combat it over the last 20 years , albeit with occasional periods of slackening .
Number 6 on the list of UN Millennium Development Goals , adopted in September 2000 , is to halt and begin to reverse the spread of AIDS by 2015 .
However , the current situation in developing countries - and particularly in Africa where the death rate from AIDS is still rising - demands that we redouble our efforts if we are to achieve that target .
There are several potential avenues for European action here .
Firstly , we can strengthen cooperation arrangements , particularly with local authorities in the southern hemisphere because it is only at local level that lasting solutions can be found with regard to caring for sufferers , preventing the disease , supplying medicines , running information and prevention campaigns , and generally managing health services so that they meet local people 's needs .
Secondly , we must find ways of tackling the shortage of health professionals in low-income countries .
Europe needs to step in here with practical , properly funded programmes to enable health professionals to do the work they were trained for in their own countries , under proper conditions and within proper structures , with the necessary equipment and medicines .
Lastly , combating AIDS in the long term will require a firm commitment to give patients in developing countries access to the medicines they need at prices they can afford .
Given that many AIDS patients in the southern hemisphere have already developed resistance to the first-generation drugs they have been treated with , it is essential to find ways of making the latest treatments available in generic form in low-income countries .
For that reason I would ask the Commission specifically to ensure that bilateral and regional agreements currently being negotiated - especially EPAs - do not include any provisions that might make it harder for southern hemisphere countries to use all the flexibility available under the TRIPs agreement and the 2001 Doha Declaration for the purpose of protecting AIDS patients .
I have no more to say .
The unacceptable situation of millions of people dying of AIDS every year demands that the European Union face up to its responsibilities .
It is time to stop talking and to get to work .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I shall be brief , because I understand we are under pressure of time .
I just wish to make three or four points .
Firstly , this is a problem that affects the whole population and this is the message we try to convey .
It is no longer a question of risk groups and that the rest of us need not worry : it is an issue for the general population - young people , women .
We must raise awareness about this , and the political message has to go through as well .
In particular - because it was mentioned - on the issue of immigrants we take a particular approach .
The Portuguese Presidency had the issues of health and immigration as a theme of its Presidency , and access to treatment , testing and treatment and healthcare of the immigrants - even undocumented ones - is an important aspect .
This is something we are discussing not only for their protection and the human rights aspect of it , which , of course , is a priority , but also for the protection of society as a whole .
The issues that were raised , such as the possibility of the exchange of needles for drug-users , promoting condoms , sexual education in schools , the problems in prisons , are all part of our discussions with the Member States and the civil society .
We have a think-tank where everybody is involved : they have discussions and exchange best practice and experiences .
But , of course , within the European Union we realise that we do not have the competence : it is the responsibility of the Member States to implement these policies .
Therefore , we raise the profile at a political level , we hold discussions at technical level but , at the end of the day , it the responsibility of the Member States to take specific initiatives .
On the other issues raised by Mr Agnoletto , I have taken note with great interest of the issue of TRIPS .
I have noted that and also the effect it would have on access to medicine in developing countries and all the other issues he raised concerning dealing with countries outside Europe .
I will raise them with my colleagues who are responsible for these particular areas and I will inform them of the points raised by the honourable Member .
Finally , when it comes to access to ARV within the European Union , initially - and then hopefully we can extend it to other areas - we are supporting very actively the initiative of the German Presidency after the Bremen Conference to achieve access to cheap and affordable ARV treatment for all patients and those who need it .
We already have , if one can call it that , a first success story with Bulgaria .
But , of course , we will pursue it in the Presidency , with the support of the Commission , and hopefully once the model is established we can extend this approach outside the European Union .
We always have this as a target .
Once again , I should like to thank the Members for a very interesting debate and I have taken note of all the issues raised .
The debate is closed .
Shipping disaster in the Sea of Asov / Black Sea and the subsequent oil pollution ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the shipping disaster in the Sea of Asov / Black Sea and the subsequent oil pollution .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to say that my colleague Mr Dimas regrets not being able to be here today for this debate but , as you know , he is at the global warming conference and he has to represent the Community there .
This is a very important issue .
We know that heavy storms in the Black Sea region in November caused a tragic loss of life and property and of course damage to the environment , with an estimated leakage of 1 300 tons of fuel oil and the sinking of ships carrying sulphur .
Under a bilateral agreement , the Commission sent a team of five EU experts , who were joined by representatives of the Commission and the UN Environment Programme .
The EU experts found Ukrainian clear-up operations well underway .
Locally available technologies and resources were considered sufficient , and Ukraine expressed no need for additional emergency equipment .
The key results of the mission will be presented to the Ukrainian authorities in Kiev on 14 December .
During that meeting discussions will also focus on further strengthening cooperation with regard to improvements in the monitoring of the environmental quality of the Black Sea .
According to international oil spill statistics , the current oil spill can be considered of medium size and is not expected to be a major environmental disaster .
Of course , that does not mean that we are not just as concerned , in particular because there is always the possibility of secondary pollution .
The density of the environmental pressures , the presence of sensitive species in the strait , the political sensitivity of the area and the risk of further , similar accidents in the future all underline the need to assess the situation in a more comprehensive manner .
The European Commission is therefore considering follow-up through other instruments such as post-damage assessment missions , so I am looking forward to the debate on this issue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today 's opportunity to discuss last month 's Black Sea disaster is very welcome , for at least two reasons .
The first is that , with respect to many countries , including Russia , the European Parliament has a role to play as a substitute for public opinion .
Imagine what would happen in the European mass media if a similar disaster occurred , let us say , in the Baltic .
The television would regale us with pictures of damaged flora and fauna for days on end .
We would be subject to an onslaught of experts explaining the ominous effects of the disaster .
In Russia , however , the media are silent .
Only with great difficulty was I able to gather a few scraps of information , mainly from Ukrainian sources .
Our voice , therefore , is exceptionally important in this matter .

The second reason is what I would call broadening our European awareness : the awareness that regions to which we have hitherto paid little or no attention , like the Black Sea , are an integral part of our continent , not only in the geographical sense but in terms of nature , ecology , economics and culture - the awareness that we are parts of a common whole and that those parts affect each other .
Such awareness should increase our sense of responsibility , which should also extend to the Black Sea region .
Our responsibility entitles us to demand that the Black Sea basin be made much safer than hitherto .
It should be mentioned in passing that disasters on a smaller scale have occurred several times in the recent past .
In this respect the following demands are particularly important .
First and foremost , monitoring of the situation in the Black Sea - both now , barely a month after the disaster , and much later on .
The next demand is to get the European Union 's neighbouring countries , at long last , to begin modernising their fleets , especially their tankers .
The Black Sea is turning blacker and blacker , not from the natural causes to which it owes its name but from the colour of crude oil .
It could become one huge oil container .
Pressure must be brought to bear on the EU 's neighbouring countries to impose a swift ban on the use of obsolete single hull tankers .
I therefore ask the House to adopt the motion for a resolution that has been tabled , in which we call on the Council and Commission to step up cooperation with non-EU riparian states .
A land border can be closed relatively easily , but a sea border cannot .
As we shall not be building dams , the action proposed is also in our own interests .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( RO ) Mr. President , following the recent violent storms in the Black Sea , four ships sank and seven were damaged , among which there were two oil tankers .
The accidents happened in the Kerch strait , which connects the Black Sea with the Sea of Azov and represents the main route for the export of Russian oil to Europe .
2,000 tons of fuel oil spilled into the sea and the ships that sank were carrying over 7 tons of sulphur .
The Community Civil Protection Mechanism sent a team of 7 experts to the field to evaluate the effects and identify the necessary actions .
As rapporteur for the endorsement of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy of the European Parliament regarding the Commission 's Communication on the Black Sea Synergy , I asked the Union to become a leader in promoting the principles of the common maritime policy and developing maritime transport routes in this region .
The legislative package on maritime transport is important for the Black Sea region .
The Directive regarding port control and Directive 65 / 2005 on port security will increase the maritime transport safety in the region .
In 2006 , under the Black Sea Memorandum of Understanding , over 4,650 inspections of ships belonging to 83 flags were performed .
Following the inspections carried out by the authorities of Bulgaria , Georgia , Romania , the Russian Federation , Turkey and Ukraine , it was found that 69.39 % of the ships had deficiencies , and approximately 6 % of them were retained .
Out of the total retained ships , 8.7 % were cargo ships , 2.9 % passenger ships , 2.7 % ships carrying chemical substance and 0.5 % oil tankers .
These retentions were due to deficiencies in the systems for navigation safety , absence of rescue equipment and flaws of equipment and structures providing ship stability .
Also , the countries bordering the Black Sea , such as Georgia , are on the black list of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding , and the other 5 countries bordering the Black Sea are on the grey list .
I think that the Union should do more to increase the maritime transport safety in the region .
The European Maritime Safety Agency , together with the Secretariat of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding and the Member States , will finance studies and programmes to increase the maritime transport safety .
As of 2007 , the agency will support Member States , by providing assistance , to prepare capabilities for preventing and combating sea pollution with toxic substances .
Through the TEN-T budget , the Commission has already created projects for the development of maritime routes in the region of the Baltic Sea , the Mediterranean Sea and the seas situated in Western Europe .
I request that the Commission carry out a similar study for the Black Sea region as well and I also request the use of the CleanSeaNet service , developed by the agency , which allows the detection of oil spill and surveillance in European waters , in the Black Sea region as well .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
First of all I would like to thank Mr Costa , who tabled the motion for a resolution on the issue under debate on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Politically , though , I would like a much quicker reaction than merely emphasising the need for the Council not to delay in adopting a position on the seven legislative proposals in the third maritime safety package .
In my view , this solves nothing in the ecologically dangerous internal seas , such as the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea , which are surrounded by both EU Member States and the Russian state , as a coastal state .
In view of the level of oil prices and the profit levels involved , Russia 's oil exports by sea will grow very quickly in the future .
This corresponds to Russia 's transport policy : to export oil via its own country 's ports , while at the same time keeping the pipelines in the EU oil terminals at Ventspils and Būtingshut .
Can we expect an increase in demand for these tankers , and will Russia 's fleet of tankers receive the necessary investment to avoid further use of single-hull , 40-year-old tankers and vessels designed for river use ?
I think not .
The basic motivation for potential oil transport by sea will be wrecks that are as cheap as possible .
I believe that if stringent maritime safety measures are maintained only in the European Union , this will not save the environment in the seas adjoining it unless it can bring in international standards .
Thank you .
( HU ) We have seen explosive growth in many areas in recent decades , but nothing compares with the growth that has taken place in global trade and , in connection with this , the transportation of goods .
Sea transportation has played a prominent role in this explosion , since 90 % of the European Union 's external trade is in this area .
Since this is the biggest method of transportation , I feel that people are right to expect that this means of transporting people and goods should also be safe and clean , so that the risk of accidents occurring at sea and pollution caused by ships falls .
Over the last month three grave disasters have occurred , the total scale of which is the same as the Exxon Valdez pollution of 1989 , so this must have a sobering effect .
Attention must be drawn to the importance of prevention and effective measures .
The environmental damage caused by accidents like this does not stop at the borders of a country or two , or of a continent , but endangers and will ultimately destroy irrevocably our common values and our common natural treasures .
There is therefore an urgent need for more effective international coordination than there is now , and to play a serious role in active prevention and in remedial work after accidents .
It is also necessary to review the international legislation in this area without delay , to fill in the gaps , to prohibit ships designed for river traffic from going to sea , and to enforce effectively the ' polluter pays ' principle .
It is the overriding duty of the European Union to press for measures aimed at safe sea shipping at international level , as has already happened in the European Union .
Thank you .
( RO ) Mr. President , the incident in November caused ecological damage both to the Black Sea , and to the Sea of Azov , proving that sea waters have no borders and oil spills caused by accidents that happen outside the European space may also affect the coastal ecosystems of the Member States .
The sunk ships that caused the pollution of the Black Sea were designed for inland water navigation and not for sea navigation , thus causing the spillage of tons of oil into the sea and affecting the natural habitats of the sea .
Over 15,000 birds and dolphins were covered in fuel oil and several rare species of flora and fauna , from the Black Sea coast and bottom , were destroyed , requiring significant efforts in order to recover the integrity of the Black Sea ecosystem .
The degradation of aquatic life is full of negative consequences , since it influences the ecological security and the quality of life and health of the population .
The acute reduction of the Black Sea biodiversity is worrying due to the continuous degradation of the ecosystem , illegal fishing and overexploitation of natural resources , and oil spills contribute to the worsening of the environmental condition in this region , which is deemed the most polluted in the world .
The European Union Heads of State and Government have undertaken the commitment to stop the reduction of biodiversity by 2010 , and these objectives must be achieved in the sea sector as well .
In the European Union , we have to make sure that maritime transport is carried out under conditions of safety , and sea borders are protected as efficiently as possible from cross-border threats .
Moreover , the new Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes aims at a better implementation of the " polluter pays ” principle and I hope it will have a positive influence on the methods to prevent this type of ecological disaster .
( BG ) Mr. Chairman , Colleagues , The Black Sea is not only an external border of the European Union after the accession of Bulgaria and Romania but also a sea of huge economic potential for the development of our Union .
If we take the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea as a single region , its market has a foreign trade potential worth over 200 million Euro and a population exceeding 350 million .
Let me briefly recall the debate in September in the wake of the big floods and fires in Europe .
Then we discussed the need for the establishment of joint forces to help Member States cope with natural disasters like those which struck us this year .
A similar need could be identified now in the Black Sea region .
First and foremost , I appeal to the European Commission and , of course , the Member States , especially Bulgaria and Romania , to launch priority study of the need for a regional rescue centre for the Black Sea region to help countries cope with serious situations like the one we witnessed a few months ago .
Secondly , a thorough analysis should be made of the root causes of these disasters and all other disasters in the Black Sea region so that to learn the lessons and give recommendations for our policy in the region .
Thirdly , it is time to set up a regional navigation information centre for the Black Sea , which will contribute to the security of transport routes and , generally , navigation in the region .
The tragedy in the Strait of Kerch is something we have to live and cope with within the shortest possible time limits , especially those of us who border on the Black Sea region .
But let us use the occasion of this tragedy to seek both reasons and opportunities for cooperation among the Member States , the Commission and the other countries bordering the Black Sea so that to enhance the security of this important European route .
Thank you .
( RO ) Ladies and Gentlemen , as rapporteur on the Black Sea regional cooperation , I welcome the initiation of this debate , but I also deeply regret the fact that the theme of our discussion is , in reality , a sad acknowledgment of the fact that the Black Sea is still not subject to necessary attention from the European Union and a satisfactory level of implementation of the planned actions .
Nevertheless , I would like to remind you that , since Bulgaria and Romania joined the European Union , the Black Sea has become a partially internal sea and we cannot ignore its strategic importance for the entire world .
The Black Sea region is of major importance from the point of view of the European Union energy policy and transport policy .
Therefore , this forces us to develop a global and coherent strategy for the entire region , a strategy that would aim at ensuring security , sustainable development and thorough integration of environmental protection aspects .
More than that , in order to promote a veritable policy at regional level , joint efforts are required from all countries bordering the sea , which would exceed the national and bilateral framework .
Thus , I welcome the 2007 launching of the Black Sea Synergy , but I reiterate an essential aspect from my report , namely the need to take concrete and firm steps in order to develop and achieve this cooperation initiative , both within the region and between the region and the European Union .
The 11 November 2007 black tide tragedy has proved to us that , in this field , we need to combine our efforts .
The European Union has to play a central role entirely , both through increased involvement in the Black Sea Synergy development and by encouraging its neighbours and partners in this direction .
This is the only way in which we will be able to respond efficiently to the expectations and calls of our citizens who face the direct consequences of the 11 November disaster today .
( BG ) First and foremost , I would like to express my satisfaction with the fact that the Commission has come up with this opinion .
This debate comes to show that the Black Sea is now the focal point of European politics and European politicians .
I commend this approach and believe that it would benefit all citizens of the European Union .
As mentioned earlier , a lot more should be done to protect the Black Sea region .
The point is how to prevent disasters like the one which happened in the Strait of Kerch .
Because disasters can never be fully prevented but their root cause can certainly be minimized .
There are two ways to ensure better protection of our seas .
Fist , we have to contunue the promotion of regional cooperation .
Second , side by side with regional cooperation , better policies are needed in navigation .
The measures suggested in the third package of the maritime policy are in the right direction and they should be implemented in the best possible manner .
Their implementation is indispensable for the prevention of events like the one in the Strait of Kerch in the Black Sea region .
Since the European Parliament and the Commission expressed their support for the package of measures quite some time ago , it is time for the Council to become more active and undertake the necessary steps for the introduction of this package .
The successful implementation of the measures envisaged in the package , coupled with the enhanced level of regional cooperation , for instance the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the DABLAS initiative for protection of the environment . Could be an important contribution to the security of our seas and , at the same time , could ensure higher competitiveness of our navigation industry .
I believe that this disaster proves once again the importance of the issue related to our water basisns and the need for appropriate policies to prevent such accidents and to protect the environment .
Therefore I believe that the time has really come for the third package of measures within the framework of the maritime policy to become a reality and enter into force .
Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I should like to explain why we are tabling this motion for a resolution on the shipwrecks in the Kerch Strait in the Black Sea .
Our solidarity goes to the victims of that disaster !
We invite the Council and the Commission carefully to monitor the situation in the Black Sea and to take concrete measures to help to reduce the ecological impact of the disaster .
Europe does not yet have the panoply of regulations needed to prevent any repetition of very serious accidents along the lines of the Black Sea accident ; among other things , those regulations must make states responsible for the safety of the vessels flying their flags and for prosecuting , including through civil proceedings , those responsible for such environmental disasters .
Although the European Parliament adopted the third maritime safety package at first reading in April 2007 , it has not yet been fully approved by and is inexplicably blocked in the Council , despite the commitment that the Portuguese Presidency gave in this respect to the Transport Committee and Parliament .
The package , consisting of seven reports , is a comprehensive package : it steps up maritime safety standards , safeguards passengers , limits environmental damage in the event of accidents , and sets out obligations and responsibilities on the part of states , carriers and ship-owners .
Breaking up the debate and giving priority to some aspects and not others is proof that the Council does not want to tackle the issue of safety in a serious way and wants to put a brake on the package as a whole .
Maritime safety is too important an issue to be the subject of tactics , too serious because of the events that have already taken place : Erika , Prestige , more recently Segesta Jet in the Strait of Messina and Sea Diamond in Santorini !
Because of the accidents that have already happened and because increasing maritime traffic in Europe and the world could well increase the risks in future .
It is for that reason that the European Parliament considers that all seven of the proposals must be taken forward as soon as possible , before there is another environmental disaster with human losses : to harmonise types of classification , to compel states to monitor vessels flying their flags , to ensure that vessels are inspected in ports and to monitor their movements , to decide what action should be taken in the event of accidents and to monitor and manage responsibilities as regards both third parties and passengers .
We therefore urge the Council not to turn a blind eye to this tragic warning from the Black Sea .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , a few points .
First of all regarding Russia , a point raised by various Members .
I would like to begin by saying that the Community civil protection mechanism can be activated only upon a request by an affected country .
Official letters offering assistance were sent both to Ukraine and the Russian Federation and , while Ukraine answered positively , requesting assistance , Russia declined the offer .
But on the general issue of maritime safety , my colleague Vice-President Barrot wrote on 10 December to his colleague Mr Levitin , who is the Russian Minister of Transport , to raise these concerns and to stress the importance of strengthened EU-Russia cooperation in the Black Sea as well as the Baltic Sea - in order to improve maritime safety .
Addressing maritime environment problems at regional level is one of the cornerstones of the European Union 's marine strategy and the proposed Marine Strategy Directive , for which a second reading agreement between the Council and Parliament has been reached .
I think this is a very positive development .
The Commission has set out its views on a strategy in the region in its communication ' Black Sea synergy - a new regional cooperation initiative ' .
The proposal puts forward an initiative that would focus political attention at the regional level .
The recent accidents in the Black Sea have notably involved a special category of vessels , the so-called sea / river oil tankers , which can only sail in open seas under certain restrictions .
More generally the Commission is concerned by the possibility that this category of vessels will trade in other sea areas of the European Union or neighbouring the European Union , and in particular the Baltic Sea .
Within the EU we have strict rules on maritime safety and the condition of the vessels , but we are also concerned about what happens in international waters both because it could easily affect the European Union and because we are concerned about the global environment .
That is why these accidents also demonstrate the importance of maintaining pressure on maritime safety issues both at EU and at international level .
In this respect , as pointed out by Parliament and by Members already , it is important that examination of the seven proposals of the Third Maritime Safety Package is accelerated .
Finally , on the issue of response , the Commission is also committed to continually strengthening the Community response instruments , such as the civil protection mechanism , to ensure a rapid and effective response should such disasters occur again in the future .
This also involves cooperation with the EU 's neighbours such as the Black Sea countries and of course other third countries .
I would like to thank Members for the debate and of course I will talk to my colleague about the interesting points you have made .
I have received one motion for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) / 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.30 and resumed at 21.00 )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Deposit-guarantee schemes ( debate )
The next item is the report by Christian Ehler , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on deposit-guarantee schemes .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me pleasure to be able to present a report to you today that was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Before the vote in committee , the future of deposit-guarantee schemes was the subject of intense debate , particularly in the light of specific regional problems at the present time and of the recent crisis in the US property market .
At the end of 2006 the Commission presented a communication reviewing the 1994 Directive on deposit-guarantee schemes .
Before drafting the communication , the Commission conducted a consultation process .
On the basis of the empirical findings that emerged , we can conclude that the aims of the directive have essentially been achieved and that there is no need for any legislative intervention at the present time .
The increasingly cross-border nature of financial market structures in Europe , however , requires us to focus more sharply on the question of cooperation between the diverse deposit-guarantee schemes in Europe .
In its communication , the Commission identified the areas in which self-regulation measures or different treatment of the legal bases could bring about further improvements in the interests of consumers .
This approach should , in our view , be pursued further .
We believe that the dynamic discussion process involving the Commission , the Member States and the EFDI , the European Forum of Deposit Insurers , has a very useful role to play in enabling us to adapt as quickly as possible to changing circumstances .
The Nordea problem does not warrant calling for an expensive new amendment of the directive at the present moment .
I am therefore grateful to the Commission for making it crystal-clear that the Nordea problem , which is essentially about the reimbursement of contributions , must be resolved by the Member States .
Those who operate the deposit-guarantee schemes in the Scandinavian countries and the supervisory authorities there must decide for themselves whether contributions are to be reimbursed or whether deposit guarantees in those countries should be treated like insurance policies and not give rise to refund entitlements .
That is a fundamental problem , but it is a fundamental problem for the Member States .
The report can basically be divided into three parts .
The first part is a discussion of the study undertaken by the Commission and the adoption of a position on its findings , such as the amount of the minimum guarantee .
The second part addresses the question whether or not the diverse deposit-guarantee schemes in Europe cause unacceptable distortions of competition .
The third part deals with future crisis and risk management .
On the first part of my report I intend to be very brief , since it proved largely non-contentious and reflects the findings of the consultation process on deposit-guarantee schemes .
I believe our statement on the minimum coverage level , which should be adjusted for inflation when the directive is next revised , strikes a balance between the interests of the new Member States and those of the older ones .
I should like to emphasise that every Member State and every deposit guarantor already has the option of exceeding the European minimum when guaranteeing deposits .
Another important point that is reflected in the report is the examination of the question whether the diverse deposit-guarantee systems and the various methods used to fund them are distorting competition .
The Commission has set out its views and presented a study which , if its recommendations were implemented , would result in a harmonisation of funding for individual Member States .
If Member States with ex post systems were now to be asked to carry out a complete restructuring of their deposit-guarantee schemes at great expense , it would be necessary to analyse whether the diversity of the schemes and the accompanying unacceptable and expensive market distortions are at all justifiable in the internal market .
This has not yet been analysed , and such an analysis will be an important task for the future .
The third part of the report examines risk and crisis management .
The internal market and the increasing degree of cross-border interdependence require us to examine whether cross-border risk and crisis management works smoothly .
There is an urgent need for in-depth discussions with all stakeholders .
Long-standing issues such as the problem of free riders and the risk of moral hazard must be addressed in that context .
I believe that empirical studies analysing crisis and risk management are imperative if we are to work out viable arrangements for burden-sharing in the event of cross-border crises and common methods for early risk detection or develop a system for the introduction of risk-based contributions .
These studies should then determine the content of subsequent discussions .
Against this background I also flatly reject the PSE amendment , which postulates existing market distortions although there is currently no evidence of these .
We believe that the present process is the right approach .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would first like to warmly thank the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Christian Ehler , for supporting the policy set out in our communication .
I fully endorse your view that legislative proposals are not appropriate at this stage .
Some issues can be improved through set regulation without major cost impacts and by working together with the European Forum of Deposit Insurers ( EFDI ) .
The recent financial turmoil provides evidence that maintaining deposits or confidence is crucial during a financial crisis .
As to deposit guarantee schemes , two elements seem to be key - an appropriate coverage level and a short payout delay .
If depositors know that their deposit will be covered and if they feel confident that the insured deposits will be reimbursed rapidly , there is no need for them to join any queue outside a bank .
The existing directive has proven to be flexible and allows Member States to increase coverage according to their own economic situation .
Member States may take immediate action if their coverage level proves to be inappropriate .
The timely payout of insurer deposits can indeed be improved .
According to the directive , reimbursements should normally not exceed three months , but this reflects the technology available back in 1994 .
This is why we have asked the EFDI to identify obstacles to a rapid payout .
Depositors must also be made aware of the protection available to them .
The existing information obligations in the directive are applied differently across Europe .
Therefore , we have asked the EFDI to identify best practices to improve the dissemination of such information to depositors .
With regard to cross-border crisis , I share Parliament 's view on the need to have clarity about burden-sharing and the interactions between all involved parties before such a crisis occurs .
The ECOFIN conclusions of 9 October are clear on this point .
I have noted the suggestion that the EFDI participate in general burden-sharing discussions .
Let me underline that only very few schemes have powers which go beyond the mere reimbursement of depositors .
Their funds will also only cover a fraction of the amounts involved in a larger cross-border crisis .
Therefore , I am unable to support the suggestion to include the EFDI in general burden-sharing discussions .
The report also stresses the importance of eliminating possible market distortions .
As requested , we will examine this matter .
However , currently we do not think that the high cost of fully harmonising the present regulatory framework , estimated at between EUR 2.5 billion and EUR 4.5 billion , would be justified .
Some level-playing-field issues are already being dealt with .
For instance , we need to facilitate topping up , where a branch should be able to offer a level of protection in a host country that is higher than in its home country .
However , sometimes , arrangements between schemes in different Member States have not worked in practice , and we support the EFDI 's efforts to achieve a voluntary model agreement .
Some Member States already adjust the contributions through their schemes according to the individual risk of banks .
We would like to assist interested Member States , as this would contribute towards a level playing field for banks with similar risk profiles .
In conclusion , Europe needs deposit guarantee schemes that ensure depositor confidence in a financial crisis .
With the envisaged improvements , I am confident that we will come closer to this objective .
Madam President , first I would like to thank everyone because this is a very timely issue .
We all know that ongoing financial turmoil has underlined the importance of cross-border crisis management , and the October ECOFIN decision to have more ex-ante coordination between Member States and , especially , supervisory regimes cannot be more welcome .
Banks are at the heart of the payment system and deal with the savings of ordinary consumers who are not financial professionals .
Therefore , the proper functioning of the payment systems and clearing and settlement system is particularly sensitive .
Many of the banks are functioning cross-border now .
A scattered national regulatory framework is not adequate .
Currently , not even the types of account falling under the deficit guarantee scheme 's requirements are the same in every Member State .
We should not let this become a depositors ' problem .
The rapporteur , Mr Ehler , has done good work in the report and showed a lot of willingness to compromise .
In particular , the report rightly emphasises the importance of eliminating distortions of competition .
As the Commissioner said , it is very important to guarantee a level playing field .
However , I regret that the report finally does not address the issue of ex-ante deposit guarantee ( DG ) schemes .
While it has been argued by the Member States having ex-post DG systems that this is a problem specific to Scandinavia and Nordic markets , this is not .
It is actually anti-competitive for the whole single market on a wider scale .
In fact , most schemes in Europe are ex ante .
If the rules of refundability and transferability of funds paid into such schemes are not harmonised , this distorts the choice between branch and subsidiary models in the host country , and this leads to distortion of competition .
So it is very welcome that the Commission is studying this matter , analysing whether there are competition distortions and making possible future recommendations in this area , especially on refundability and transferability of ex ante deposit guarantees already paid in money .
So I welcome the Commission initiative and Mr Ehler 's report but further work needs to be done .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am grateful to the rapporteur for his text .
For once , I would echo many of the comments made by Mrs Kauppi .
We began working on this text back in the spring and I think that those of us who considered it very timely have been proved right by the events of the summer .
What happened this summer raises questions about deposit-guarantee schemes .
We simply cannot live with a system where many of the market players operate across a number of countries without deposit-guarantee arrangements that are at least harmonised or based on common principles , in the interests not only of competition by also of public confidence in market mechanisms .
I was very struck as I travelled around during the summer - and not just in the Scandinavian countries - at how this question of deposit-guarantee systems was raised systematically and was considered crucially important .
I know , of course , what the Commissioner will say : ' If you were to put together all the European-level guarantee schemes , the total would still be no more than a drop in the ocean by comparison with the sums needed to tackle the crises . '
That is a poor argument when we need to reduce our handicap in terms of both competitiveness and confidence in market mechanisms , particularly because it has the effect of distorting business strategies , as companies suddenly find themselves forced to arbitrate , for the wrong reasons , between their various subsidiaries and branches .
On the basis of all these arguments , I asked my group to support me .
The group tabled an amendment calling on the Commission to work faster and to recognise what people expect of it : while they may not express their demand loud and specifically , in terms of a priority , they do need reassurance about how Europe 's financial markets work and how accurately they respond to events .
A sound , European-level deposit-guarantee system is bound to make a contribution in this respect .
Commissioner , I believe it is part of your task to assess the level of confidence or otherwise in the functioning of the financial markets at European level .
It is hardly enough , I think , to sit back and await fresh research results .
You need to take action to accelerate the response and enable us to progress on a more harmonised basis , with a better and more transparent understanding of deposit-guarantee schemes and how they operate in the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , deposit-guarantee schemes have again been in the public spotlight in recent weeks .
The case of Northern Rock , whose branches were inundated with hundreds of customers rushing to withdraw their savings , and the question of investor compensation in the event of the Bank 's collapse are still fresh in our minds .
This illustrates all too well that the global integration of financial markets poses challenges for Europe too .
The increase in cross-border consolidation in the banking sector raises questions about supervisory jurisdiction , the appropriate coverage level of deposit-guarantee schemes and cross-border cooperation between these schemes .
As we know , the European minimum coverage level is set at EUR 20 000 , but of course it is actually far higher in many Member States .
The funding of the guarantee schemes , however , is a matter for the Member States , and the structures of the schemes are quite diverse .
For this reason the following points need to be clarified , and clarified quickly : the extent to which deposit-guarantee schemes need to be harmonised , their funding and the proactive ex ante use of resources for damage prevention .
In the case of cross-border institutions , attention focuses in the event of a crisis on the supervisory structure , particularly in the case of group supervision , and on burden-sharing .
If a subsidiary is operating in a host Member State and belongs to that country 's deposit-guarantee scheme but is subject to the supervisory authority of the home Member State by virtue of the principle of group supervision , a gulf is created between the supervision system and the deposit-guarantee scheme , and that is surely unacceptable and contrary to the interests of investors .
I do , however , support the line taken by the rapporteur .
Before we resort to legislative measures , the Member States should first eliminate remaining weaknesses in their deposit-guarantee schemes .
At the same time , the Commission , acting as quickly as possible , should conduct targeted studies of cross-border risk management and a detailed analysis of the ways in which the various schemes are funded .
On the basis of its findings , serious consideration can be given to legislative measures at a later date if they are shown to be expedient and necessary .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for underlining the need for studies and analyses , but also concluding that , if there are distortions on the market , something has to be done in order to achieve a level playing field .
I think it is important to conclude this from this debate .
If there are distortions , we can have different opinions - if they are there .
But if they are there , something needs to be done .
We need to do that because I think we all agree that we want more cross-border competition , and we also wish to secure the interests of the consumers .
It is relevant to discuss the difference between different systems , because if you have in some Member States ex-ante systems and in some Member States different ex-post systems , which in reality assumes that the state might bale out banks which cannot pay their customers , then you have a distortion .
It is my opinion that , due to the differences in opinion we have , there is a distortion already .
The distortion is even more serious if it is also based on the assumption that the state should help banks which are not able to pay their customers .
I think a good achievement with this report by Mr Ehler is that we have achieved that conclusion .
I think it is important that the Commission respond to that in future actions .
We might have differences in opinion about how the state of play is today .
But we do agree on the need for action to be taken if the studies to be done show that there are distortions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for that and also ask the Commissioner to respond to that with action .

( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Ehler for his work which comes ten years after the transposition of the 1994 Directive on deposit-guarantee schemes , in a period of financial upheaval when improvements to the European financial services market are under discussion .
There is currently considerable disparity between the positions adopted by the Member States and there are important issues to resolve .
Although the majority of the Member States apply the system based on an ex-ante fund , there are still significant disparities in the level of guarantees , the size of funds and their method of financing .
To give two examples : the sum guaranteed is eight times higher in the most protective state than in the least protective state , and the guarantee fund in one state alone amounts to 40 % of the European total .
This situation creates a distortion of competition .
The ex-post system threatens national and European financial stability in times of crisis .
Cross-border banking groups are also experiencing problems .
The consolidation of funds from different schemes poses practical difficulties .
A concentration of guarantees in a single system can only be achieved through a proliferation of regulations and agreements between states , something which fragments the system and makes it more vulnerable to an unacceptable accumulation of risk .
There are substantial questions marks over the aims of the deposit-guarantee scheme : harmonisation of levels of cover , risk-based contributions , utilisation of funds to provide liquidity , burden-sharing , handling of cross-border crises , liquidation of institutions and cooperation between authorities .
Deposit-guarantee schemes should provide a risk-based safety net capable of protecting depositors , ensuring fair and effective competition , providing stability for the money markets and contributing to an equitable sharing of the burden in crisis situations .
Therefore , extraction of all the possibilities from the existing framework should not stand in the way of a thorough and ambitious reform once the necessary studies have been carried out .
( BG ) Colleagues , I note the fact that financial crises are not new prehomena ; they are indicators of an asymmetry between the financial sector and the real economy .
The mortgage crisis in the USA has recently made financial experts say that the economies and the financial markets are interrelated and a large-scale discussion is needed to improve risk management .
The idea in the Ehler draft resolution to assess and improve the precuationary and early warning measures of the European Union with a view to ensuring the stability of the financial martkets , and the issue of guaranteeing deposits as a traditional form of savings in my country Bulgaria is very timely indeed .
In this context , I wish to emphasize that the responsibility of banks to carefully organize their porfolio and effectively manage the resources of their depositors is of paramount importance .
Of course , the greater awareness of citizens of the ways to use flexible schemes , the diversification of deposit forms and the mechanisms such as deposit guarantee funds further build confidence and promote financial stability .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I wish to thank Members for their contributions .
In closing , I would like to make two key points .
We do not believe that regulatory change is appropriate at the current time .
The directive has stood the test of time well .
It is able to adapt to changing circumstances .
In the longer term it will be crucial from a financial stability perspective for the positive guarantee schemes to contribute to smooth crisis management in an increasingly pan-European banking environment .
Any further steps towards more harmonised schemes in the European Union now depend therefore on the outcome of the wider work that is currently being conducted in the context of crisis management .
Concerning the problems raised by both Ms Kauppi and Mr Hökmark , the reimbursement of contributions to a bank that leaves the scheme , for whatever reason , is not covered by the existing directive and is therefore a matter for Member State legislation .
Harmonisation at European level would require full harmonisation of the funding method .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ehler , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , for their very constructive approach .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Asset management II ( debate )
The next item is the report by Wolf Klinz , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on Asset Management ΙΙ .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , since the adoption of the UCITS Directive in 1985 , European fund markets have experienced meteoric growth .
The directive has since been updated twice to take account of new market developments , and further modernisation is right at the top of next year 's agenda .
Not least among the sources of the Commission 's present reform project is the first resolution on asset management ( Asset Management I ) adopted by the European Parliament in April 2006 , which set out the main elements of the reform package .
I am grateful to the Commission for having adopted these recommendations and for its intention to have them implemented in a legislative instrument in the new year .
The present draft resolution , entitled Asset Management II , is similarly designed to pave the way for future initiatives on the part of the Commission .
To this end the draft provides for numerous measures which go beyond the content of next year 's planned revision package but which we deem necessary if the European funds industry is to become more competitive .
The following are the main points :
Firstly , the Commission should consider an extension of eligible assets to cover property funds and hedge funds .
Both products help to diversify the risk exposure of portfolios and offer attractive returns on investment .
Besides scope for adding these products to portfolios , consideration should also be given to a European depository passport , which would give private investors direct access to these products .
We welcome the establishment by the Commission of an expert group on open real-estate funds ( OREFs ) and its decision to conduct a study on non-harmonised retail funds .
Secondly , not only retail investors but also professional providers and institutional investors should be able to benefit fully from a single European market .
There has never been any scope for these groups , who can effectively do without the traditional consumer protection mechanisms , to operate across borders without very public notification procedures .
A European private placement regime can remedy that situation .
It must be designed in such a way that it does not restrict the existing schemes , some of which are very liberal , in individual Member States .
In order to guarantee this flexibility , Parliament is proposing that the CESR , the Committee of European Securities Regulators , should formulate recommendations for the organisation of such a regime .
The next step would then involve examining whether that was sufficient or whether there was a need for a universally binding directive .
Thirdly , the range of investment products for retail investors is constantly increasing , but the available product information does not permit comparison of the relative merits of products .
This is due in part to the highly fragmented legal framework in Europe .
If individual investors are to make informed decisions , however , information requirements and disclosure obligations must establish some degree of comparability between competing products .
The various industries should be able to compete on a level playing field under the same rules .
For this reason we call on the Commission to review the existing legal frameworks for the various product categories and to present proposals as to how the situation can be improved .
The aim is not to make products fully comparable .
Life assurance policies , certificates and funds differ intrinsically in their legal status and structure .
The aim is rather to establish equivalent information requirements .
Even maximum transparency , however , will count for nothing if investors do not possess at least a minimum level of knowledge about diverse financial products and the way they work .
It is therefore the responsibility of the Member States to encourage education initiatives in this domain .
Fourthly , investors should be able to benefit not only from a wide range of products but also from low costs .
At the present time , however , the European fund landscape is extremely fragmented , which breeds relative inefficiency and excessive costs , especially by comparison with competitor countries .
The Commission is planning to create a legal framework next year for fund mergers .
That is to be welcomed .
The Commission , however , is disregarding one of the main obstacles to cross-border mergers , namely taxation .
We therefore call for cross-border mergers to be treated in exactly the same way as national mergers for tax purposes ; in other words , they should not create any additional tax liability for investors .
We are not asking for any measures to be taken on tax rates or the like .
We are merely asking for cross-border mergers not to be treated differently from domestic mergers .
Fifthly , Parliament will produce a separate report assessing the potential utility of a European legal framework for hedge funds and private equity .
The Commission , however , should prepare itself to engage actively in the international discussions on these matters .
Lastly , I should like to thank my fellow committee members , especially the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups , for their close cooperation .
I hope that the Commission , as it did the first time , will again embrace our proposals so that we can make the opportunities of the single European market fully available to both investors and the fund industry .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to commend the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mr Klinz , for taking the initiative to elaborate an own-initiative report , and for the hard work put into that report .
I would like to take this opportunity also to thank the European Parliament for its valuable contribution to the asset management debate .
Parliament 's previous report on asset management was also an excellent contribution to our work on the UCITS Directive .
A long process of analysis and consultation has , we believe , succeeded in building a strong consensus on what needs to be done and how .
We should not overload our agenda , but we are not blind to other issues and problems .
Today 's report testifies to the wide range of other issues confronting the European funds industry .
We have already started work in many of the areas highlighted in the present report .
The aim is to build a robust body of evidence on which to base future decisions .
We are glad to see that a careful impact-assessment-driven process is endorsed by Parliament .
We strongly believe in that approach in the Commission .
It would ensure that future initiatives respond to real needs and provide effective solutions .
We are also applying this approach in our work on private placement .
By May 2008 , we plan to present a Commission communication assessing the need for , and the feasibility of , the European private placement regime .
The report before us today calls for speedy solutions to facilitate the cross-border passporting of retail non-harmonised funds .
We are also looking carefully at this important issue , and will report to the Council and Parliament in autumn 2008 .
We hope that this report will bring some empirical basis to this complex discussion .
Sometimes , listening to this debate , we might have the impression that solutions are identified before a problem has been properly specified .
We would caution against rushing to further enlarge the EU retail fund framework .
UCITS 3 already permits a wide range of innovative strategies , including some types of alternative investment .
We need to be clear about what is currently possible , and on whether risk management controls across the industry are up to scratch , before contemplating further enlargement of the retail fund framework .
We understand the European funds industry 's desire to explore its lead in innovation and financial creativity , but not at the price of investor confidence in the UCITS brand .
We acknowledge the concerns raised in the report with regard to the divergent regulatory requirements applicable to the distribution of substitute products , and stress that the Commission has an open mind on whether there is a substantive issue that needs to be tackled .
Responses to the call for evidence launched in October will allow us to assess whether the existing regulatory patchwork results in a real and significant risk of investor detriment .
In the light of responses and further follow-up work , the Commission will issue a communication in autumn 2008 on the need for EU-level action .
We welcome the report 's acknowledgement of the positive contribution that hedge funds provide to the functioning of markets and corporate efficiency .
Some recent industry-led initiatives to develop voluntary standards on best practices are a welcome and proportionate response to the demands for greater disclosure .
We appreciate that Parliament also considers that international responses are needed in these highly globalised businesses .
In summary , a lot has been achieved in the area of asset management .
There is a long road ahead .
New challenges constantly appear in this fast-moving business .
However , we will do ourselves no favours by rushing into hasty and ill-prepared responses .
We are glad to see that the Commission has , in Parliament , a valuable partner working towards the same goal , which is an integrated and efficient European fund market delivering for both industry and investors alike .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , in relation to this important own-initiative report on the Commission White Paper on investment funds , our position is that we have decided by general agreement to focus on the non-legislative aspects , given that the legislative proposal for revision of the UCITS III Directive will be tabled in early 2008 .
That said , the issues we have decided to address are vitally important to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities .
There is a risk that extending the range of eligible assets to include open property funds and alternative funds could mar the excellent worldwide reputation of UCITS products and negatively affect their distribution both within the European Union and to third countries .
To avoid any detriment to the investment fund industry in Europe , Parliament has asked the Commission to conduct an in-depth study of the possible consequences of including these non-harmonised retail funds among the assets eligible for branding as UCITS .
Investments in UCITS total thousands of billions of euros and account for around 80 % of the investment fund market in Europe .
The sector is impatiently awaiting revision of the UCITS Directive .
To prevent any unnecessary and counter-productive delay with that revision , however , Parliament has clearly proposed that no extension of eligible assets should take place until legislative reform of the UCITS Directive is complete .
On behalf of my group , I have consistently urged that line and I welcome the rapporteur 's readiness to compromise .
The report also calls for the creation of a harmonised framework for private placements within the Union , and I fully support its recommendations on that point .
The private placement regime needs to be based on an accurate definition of qualified investors , as provided for in the MiFID Directive .
Properly informed and qualified investors eligible to practise private placement should not , under any circumstances , face a bureaucratic surcharge as a result of rules that are not only unnecessary but actually counterproductive .
I have to oppose the Socialists ' amendment calling for equivalence between Member States ' systems of regulation and supervision in the context of applying the private placement regime , which would entail permitting reciprocal access to markets .
This kind of equivalence across Europe is simply unrealistic .
I must also highlight one point on which my group and I disagree with the rapporteur .
It concerns paragraph 19 on the question of so-called ' guarantee funds ' .
The very concept of these funds is controversial and we tried to protest at the mistaken definition of them .
I hope we shall manage to lose that paragraph .
I must nonetheless congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of his work , which enables us to prepare properly for the legislative proposal .
It means we can now look forward with equanimity to the work that lies ahead next year .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , may I say to Astrid that she should not always assume that Socialist motions will be untenable .
Let me begin by warmly thanking the rapporteur , Mr Klinz , for his balanced report .
I must tell the Commissioner that he need not always be so wary of overloading the agenda .
It is against the backdrop of the US financial and mortgage crisis that we are now dealing with the report on asset management .
Not even the European Central Bank is able to assess the full extent of the damage this crisis has caused to the European financial system and to European banks .
And there may - indeed there will - be more to come .
The global financial market is already so closely intertwined that there was no way of protecting the Union from such speculative escapades , for which all of us must ultimately carry the can .
Greedy bank executives , focused solely on shareholder value , still enjoy celebrity status , and the US rating agencies continue to do a roaring trade and to lead us up the garden path .
Knee-jerk legislation , however , is never warranted .
Nevertheless , there is a lot to be done in this field , and the Commission cannot leave the issue to resolve itself and let the market be .
One message I wish to highlight from the report is that more information and transparency lead to more consumer protection and greater consumer security .
That is a very sound starting point .
Another good thing is that the report refers to hedge funds and private equity , because more and more asset managers are investing in alternative investment products .
Hedge funds , open real-estate funds and other retail products should therefore be included in the UCITS III Directive - a task that still lies ahead .
To my mind the very concept of asset management implies steady development , whether through investment certificates , pension funds , life assurance companies , banks or private asset management .
Since 2003 we have had a directive on insider dealing and market manipulation .
Its implementation has been totally inadequate .
The fund industry in particular is always citing costly overregulation and refuses to extend its transparency and liability rules .
What we need here , Commissioner , is a clearly structured system that provides legal certainty .
I am pleased that my proposal for an improved corporate governance clause has been accepted but regret the rejection of my motion on EU supervision of financial markets .
We could and probably must think a bit further in this direction too , Commissioner .
It is nevertheless gratifying that a cross-party compromise was reached on the issue of guaranteed funds .
When all is said and done , we should and must make every effort to ensure that speculation by asset managers is restricted and that Parliament , the Commission and the Council do not distinguish themselves by collective inertia .
Commissioner , that was addressed to you .
Go to it , and do it well !
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to point out that this report , though well-balanced and generally acceptable , does not in fact reflect true reality .
The problem is that most of the financial institutions , as appears to be the case , judging from the data supplied , are not adhering to the rules and regulations we have recommended .
The main problem appears to be the abuse of the discrepancies occurring in these regulations .
For this reason we must examine the report in the context of the other reports and documents , like MiFID , with the aim of finding some kind of compatibility .
Another point that I would that like to highlight is that I support Mrs Lulling 's opinion : UCITS is a good name , and we therefore need to be very careful about including new products in the portfolio .
Why is that ?
Because we do not know what these products are like .
I am very sorry , but in this document , as well as in the Commission 's proposal , the portfolios and interests of a retail investor and an institutional , professional investor appear to be slightly jumbled .
Retail investors should have clear definitions and regulations .
However , when we have both UCITS and alternative investment funds , the reality is that in my country , for example , they are mixed together and presented to the retail investor , who then does not understand what he is investing in .
That is why we must have clearer definitions and a document that is structured unequivocally .
I do hope that next year the Commission will produce a document that is structured more clearly .
We really must protect retail investors .
Of course , private investors should have more rights , but these should be defined separately .
We should not advise people to invest in alternative funds that have not even been defined .
In my country any fund is branded alternative at present .

Madam President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Klinz , for his own-initiative report and also for taking on board all the proposals and opinions of the other groups .
Harmonising the environment for asset management and products on the fund market can bring huge benefits to the European economy , as proven also by the 1985 UCITS Directive .
The UCITS Directive has become a huge brand globally .
It sells well abroad .
UCITS represent the basis for a robust fund market in Europe and they make the economy more buoyant through increased stability and the productive reinvestment of savings .
However , the topic of this report is not the UCITS revision , which is forthcoming and which we welcome .
The report addresses , instead , non-harmonised retail funds that are outside the scope of UCITS , calling for a number of important measures .
I would particularly like to welcome the private placement regime , which was also mentioned by the Commissioner .
Initiative is very instrumental in achieving the European market in non-harmonised funds .
Second , fee transparency is a long-due and underrated feature for increasing investor information .
Other measures in the report go in the right direction as well , removing market distortions .
However - and coming back to UCITS ' success - we must not get greedy here or mix things up hastily .
I am , of course , referring to the debate on extending UCITS ' scope to new asset classes such as open-ended real estate funds or funds of hedge funds .
I do not think the time is right now to discuss these sensitive matters .
We might end up with a more rigid regime , and we would probably find ourselves in a different financial market environment .
I also think it is very important to discuss the role of guaranteed funds .
There is no such thing as a guaranteed fund .
Our group wanted to have some flexibility .
We do not think that having a capital adequacy regime for funds solves the problem .
Guaranteed funds do not exist , and this kind of definition should be removed from the regime .
That is why we have both put forward a proposal from the PPE-DE Group .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his text .
The issues it tackles are recurring ones .
For example , what exactly divides institutional and professional investors from private investors ?
Some people would have us think there is a sort of ' Great Wall of China ' between the two .
I am unconvinced , and recent events have shown the extent to which financial innovation spreads from one category of investor to another , right down to the individual saver .
The fiction that we can design legislation entirely around the existence of two types of investor - enlightened , professional investors on the one hand and small savers on the other - is , in my view , a dangerous one .
We are well aware of the gradual slippage of investment products .
The notion of two kinds of investor is all very well but we need to recognise very clearly how we apply it .
The second question I would like to raise - which is also reflected in other texts concerning the financial markets - is about information for investors .
This is obviously of key importance , yet we are starting from scratch because the complexity of financial innovation is something new that has not yet been properly acknowledged or confronted .
To leave it at that , however , is not good enough : there is no substitute for responsibility on the part of those engaged in product placement and we need to remember that .
Thirdly , Commissioner , I have to say that I think you slipped up with regard to the connection between implementation of the MiFID Directive and the UCITS Directive .
Does it make sense for the MiFID Directive to be implemented in the Member States before we even know how it will relate to the UCITS Directive ?
I think the current situation would be more balanced had we had proceeded otherwise .
With regard to taxation , the rapporteur has mentioned the implications for fund mergers .
I think we also need to bear in mind the implications for product placement , which could be complicated by obstacles of a purely fiscal nature .
I should also like to say something about the Socialists ' amendment because the reality of the market in these products differs between countries that produce them , countries that buy them and countries that both produce and buy them .
We have introduced the concept of reciprocity , which would apply not only to opening markets and to market access but also to the nature of regulatory provision and supervision .
I think these elements are essential because the idea of a non-EU country which only produced these products having access to our markets on any sort of terms simply because we had access to its market ( which might well be of no interest to European consumers ) seems either unrealistic or purely theoretical and I cannot accept it .
The rapporteur has suggested more than once that reciprocity would be in breach of WTO rules .
But Commissioner , I ask you : what did we do when we recognised equivalence rules with the United States ?
That is precisely the approach we are asking you to take here .
It is also suggested that the concept is unrealistic because we do not have harmonisation inside the European Union .
If , however , negotiating equivalence with third countries encouraged us to establish a common standard of regulation and supervision inside the Union , would that not constitute substantial progress ?
( HU ) Thank you , Madam President .
I hope I will be brief .
As an Easterner , from an area that is poor in capital , I am not enraptured by the fact that everyone is now biting their nails to see what will happen with hedge funds or private equity when the UCITS is extended because this does not affect our own region at all , or at least will not for a good few years .
Perhaps we will even experience something of this from the human side with property funds .
But I would perhaps emphasise what I might expect from the audit , as an Easterner .
One thing is that the banks , which very often operate as distributors within this mechanism and receive very large sums , should nevertheless be examined for some reason , since the sale cost currently accounts for 60 % of total costs , and I note that in my region the banks are unbelievably profitable in this way .
If we achieve something in this , we have taken a step forward .
The second thing is that the case of the MiFID inducement has also not said very much for transparency of costs since , for example , if a bank has the fund manager and the seller , we do not know what is going on in the in-house deal , and interestingly not even such in-house deals have been able to break down the different sale prices .
Thirdly , however , some Member States are doing a great deal or implementing provisions that virtually ensure that the custodian , the fund manager and their management keep their feet on the ground .
In my country , or our countries , there are very many capable young people , and they are able to perform management activities , for example , at a good price and to very high quality , if they can , and I feel that relocation is in everyone 's interests with a view to them coming onto the free market .
Finally , consumer protection .
I acknowledge that training really is very important , but alongside it we must highlight tax matters .
It cannot be that if I want to take out UCITS in another country , I will end up in a worse situation than if I did it in my own country .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Klinz for this report .
The European fund industry has made some big strides in recent years , and the UCITS Directive has been instrumental in this .
But , while the fund industry has experienced rapid growth , it has much more potential .
This potential can be unleashed through increased competition and mobility in the industry across the EU .
I would like to make some observations about the report .
I can see merit in the recommendation to extend the scope of UCITS to invest in open-ended real estate funds and funds of hedge funds , but this should be dealt with , in my opinion , in a separate directive or legislative instrument .
I also see merit in proposals to enhance the EU private placement regime and agree that the definition of eligible investors is crucial .
It is important to note that , while the definitions contained in the MiFID and the Prospectus Directive offer a good starting point , there may be some additional issues which might also need to be addressed .
With regard to investment policy and risk management , I want to remind the Parliament that , while CESR is conducting a review of how the risk management process requirements of the UCITS Directive are implemented across Member States , it is not CESR 's intention to harmonise these requirements .
Certain key areas where divergent practices exist could be explored with the objective of a more harmonised approach .
Guaranteed funds should be backed by capital advocacy requirements and this should be addressed by only allowing funds to be called guaranteed if they are backed by an adequate guarantee arrangement .
I have concerns regarding any call for a depository passport that would result in the depository being established in a different state from that of the UCITS .
This would create a regulatory gap because a UCITS and its depository would be subject to separate regulatory regimes , and complex legal issues might arise in the event of difficulties within the UCITS .
I thank my colleague for this report , which is a very useful one , and I hope that the Commissioner will be able to respond to the points I have raised .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , Parliament 's report shows that both our institutions ' approaches to moving forward in the area of asset management are very much aligned .
We also need future decisions to be based on a thorough analysis of impacts .
We both want efficient markets that respond to the needs and expectations of the European fund industry and European investors .
Important efforts have been made in that direction .
More important efforts are ahead of us .
We are committed to delivering , but we should be cautious .
We need to preserve the reforms and the repute of the UCITS brand .
We need to take the time to involve and consult with all stakeholders , and we need to avoid unnecessary intervention that risks distorting the market but does not bring about noticeable benefits .
Only when all those conditions are met can we be confident that our decisions are up to the challenge .
We look forward to further cooperation between our institutions in this very important area .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Cooperation between the Fundamental Rights Agency and the Council of Europe ( debate )
The next item is the report by Adamos Adamou , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision relating to the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and the Council of Europe on cooperation between the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe - C6-0311 / 2007 - .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank Parliament and , particularly , the rapporteur , Mr Adamou , for the continuous and constructive cooperation as well as the support in reaching this very important cooperation agreement .
The establishment of the Agency for Fundamental Rights was a big success for the promotion and respect of fundamental rights in the European Union .
It is also a success in terms of interinstitutional cooperation .
I have always been committed to ensuring that this important initiative is fully supported by the three institutions .
Smooth cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe is crucial for ensuring the success of the Agency .
The draft Council decision reflects this objective .
It represents the genuine will of the two organisations to work together , and I am delighted to see that the negotiations for the agreement have been swift and made in a very constructive way by both parties .
This important agreement will enable the Agency to work to the best of its capabilities .
Indeed , in order to be fully operational , a number of measures have already been taken , and some are still in the pipeline .
This agreement will help foster a comprehensive cooperation framework .
It will help to provide a structure platform for both bodies , making mutual dialogue and common action both more possible and more efficient .
It will also help avoid the duplication of work between the two bodies .
The agreement provides for regular contacts and meetings between officials of the Agency and the Council of Europe , as well as for the regular exchange of information .
The appointment of an independent person to sit on the management and executive boards of the Agency fosters an exchange of views and cooperation .
Finally , this agreement reinforces our shared objective to promote and to protect fundamental rights in the European Union .
rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , fellow Members , I would like to begin by expressing my satisfaction at the excellent cooperation so far , between the European Union 's Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe , especially in achieving an agreement with which both sides are satisfied .
I hope their future cooperation will continue smoothly on the same basis .
Despite the prolonged discussions and consultations with the shadow rapporteurs on the substantial content of the report , we were informed by the Tabling Office that under Rules 83 ( 7 ) and 51 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , it was not possible to amend the text of the Agreement and , in respect of the report itself , only procedural amendments would be admissible , a circumstance which led a number of members of the LIBE Committee to give their vote for the report under protest .
My report therefore simply approves the conclusion of the Agreement between the Council of Europe and the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
The EU 's system of principles for the protection of fundamental rights has been developed mainly through the case law of the European Court of Justice and confirmed by the express recognition contained in the EU treaties .
However , it is particularly important to ensure that this system of human rights protection is further strengthened whilst safeguarding basic principles such as non-discrimination , non-exclusion , respect for freedom of expression and religion , freedom of conscience , and social and economic rights .
The European Agency for Fundamental Rights could provide the relevant institutions , bodies , offices and agencies of the Community and its Member States with these safeguards during the implementation of Community law .
It is important to recognise that it is the Council of Europe that has developed , through its advanced work in this field , a comprehensive system of norms and legal and judicial instruments for the protection and promotion of human rights and the rule of law and has gathered extensive experience .
Therefore , the common aim of protection of fundamental rights , shared by the Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe , has to be achieved in a significant and positive manner , avoiding duplication and any risk of fragility in the well-established judicial and non-judicial system put in place by the Council of Europe for the protection of human rights and individual rights .
We must take care to ensure that there is no challenge to the legal precedent and the substantial content of human rights protection as established by the Council of Europe , an organisation with 47 member states .
I would also like to emphasise that any dangers of duplication of powers and procedures must be countered to avoid confusion as regards the aims and responsibilities of the two bodies , so that we can achieve harmonious cooperation between them .
This must be reflected , above all , in the Agency 's annual work programme , and in the strengthening of cohesion and complementarity between the two institutions .
As regards the exchange of information between the Council of Europe and the Agency for Fundamental Rights , it is of the utmost importance , as far as possible , that such exchange should take place under conditions of absolute confidentiality observed on both sides .
The Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe should agree on more precise rules regarding the implementation of Article 15 of the Agreement , which provides for grants to be received by the Council of Europe from the Agency , with the aim of achieving full transparency and avoiding any insinuation of excessive interdependence between the two institutions .
It is also essential to implement Article 7 of the Agreement in a way which will allow the two institutions to exchange , by mutual consent , as much information as possible , with due regard to their rules of procedure , as far as this is possible under the confidentiality rules in force .
This information should not be used by institutions other than those directly involved in the examination of the issues at stake , nor should it be made available to institutions or agencies of third countries , in the absence of guarantees and controls regarding its use .
As I have said , the cooperation between the Commission and the Council of Europe during the negotiations for the Agreement has proved fruitful , and it is expected that the two institutions will continue in future to work efficiently together , in the same spirit of cooperation , transparency and complementarily .
However , it is enormously important that the European Parliament should participate in this process , through periodic reports , and that the Council of Europe should be called on to state its opinion on all the surveys and assessments carried out , with a view to complementarity , non-duplication of work , and the transparency of the operations of the two institutions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I am glad to speak today as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group concerning this report on the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and the Council of Europe on cooperation between the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe .
We have had long debates and a lot of questions whether there is a need for an Agency ; whether the Council of Europe can accept this ; whether there will be real , useful cooperation between the two .
All the time both Parliament and the Commission said clearly : yes , we need the Agency , we see the sense of this institution and we foresee good cooperation between the Council of Europe and the Agency .
Therefore I welcome the fact that , now this Agreement is here , we can talk about institutionalised cooperation .
On the other hand , I am sorry that we could not really improve this text by amending certain aspects , because I would have underlined the need to take into account , whenever the Agency is dealing with concrete issues , all the experience , the expertise , gathered by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , with its reporting system in its various committees , for example in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights where there is excellent expertise and experience in dealing with these issues .
But nevertheless I am glad , because the conclusion of this Agreement is signalling the need for this body , for the Agency , to start its work as soon as possible .
The Agency was officially inaugurated on 1 March but it still does not have its operating and management structure in place .
It is imperative to proceed and improve the situation so as to go further .
I have been following this dossier since the very beginning of my mandate , noting the extreme difficulties of designing its scope , area of competence and decision-making structures to the satisfaction of all actors involved .
We are all concerned since the Agency will gather and compile data and prepare recommendations to the institutions in the field , a remit that is hard to define in its boundaries , which is horizontal and which cross-cuts all Community policies .
We can only be satisfied if we create a credible and responsible Agency that is entrusted with enough power and an adequate budget to cope with its task .
This Agreement can help this .
We will ensure that any overlap of these tasks and duplication of work is avoided .
Let us hope that the solemn proclamation of the Charter on Fundamental Rights today will stand as one side and the Agency will stand as the other side of the same coin : a first practical step towards a future Union policy on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , what we are discussing today is an atypical procedure , as the European Parliament is pronouncing on the advisability of a cooperation agreement between the European Union and the Council of Europe .
We have no opportunity to intervene in this agreement : we are simply assessing it and giving our opinion .
The Council of Europe is the oldest European organisation concerned with human rights and the promotion of democracy .
No one here needs reminding that cooperation between the Council of Europe and the European Union - and previously the European Communities - has existed since the beginning .
Accession to membership by a state wishing to join the European Union is conditional upon respect for values that are inscribed in the Statute of the Council of Europe : the rule of law , democracy and , above all , respect for human rights .
It is thus good that these two institutions , the European Communities - now the European Union - and the Council of Europe , should cooperate , not only by sitting side by side in Strasbourg but by engaging in common fields of action .
The agreement we are discussing today is neither highly original nor new , just as the Agency for Fundamental Rights is not an entirely new institution .
As we know , the Agency for Fundamental Rights replaced the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , based in Vienna , and the Centre had a similar cooperation agreement with the Council of Europe .
That agreement , concluded in 1999 , respected both sides and was in force to the present time , i.e. to the moment when the Centre was replaced by the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
However , since a new EU body is involved , we must examine the new agreement on cooperation with the Council of Europe to ensure that what appear to be two similar institutions do not compete with each other but cooperate .
I have to say that the agreement was negotiated quickly but well .
We have no great reservations concerning its content , nor could we have .
It establishes a framework for cooperation , provides for regular contacts and , most importantly , creates personal links , since it provides for the Council of Europe to call upon an outside person - and a deputy for that person - sitting on the Agency 's management and executive boards .
All of which inclines me to full support for the motion and acceptance of the agreement , which will serve both institutions well .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the opportunity to speak .
The report deals with possible conflicts of interest between the European Fundamental Rights Agency and the Council of Europe .
In my view , this issue is secondary .
The real difficulty arises between the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg and the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
Both these Courts have the authority to act in the area of breaches of human rights and there are some rulings where the two bodies contradict each other .
The majority of these cases relate to Articles 6 and 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and concern proceedings on infringements of competition rules , such as the cases involving National Panasonic , Hoechst AG , Niemetz , etc .
Finally , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , endorsed by the European Union , are two similar yet distinct documents .
The European Fundamental Rights Agency 's competences focus on monitoring and support .
The Agreement concluded in accordance with Article 300 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which will clarify individual competences , is therefore to be welcomed .
The fact that the Council of Europe will have a representative on the Management Board is also to be welcomed .
As the Agency 's competences are limited , I believe that its activities will complement rather than compete with those of the Council of Europe .
In any case , we will have to continue debating this topic in the light of the changes to the legal status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in recent months , four decisive steps have been taken by the European Union to promote and protect human rights .
Firstly , the special Agency for Fundamental Rights has been set up .
Secondly , a clause on the legally binding force of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and a clause on the accession of the European Union to the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950 have been included in the Reform Treaty .
Thirdly , the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been solemnly signed in Parliament today ; with its formal proclamation , it becomes part of the European acquis .
A modern code of human rights !
Fourthly , the conclusion - which we are discussing today - of the agreement between the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights and the Council of Europe , signals exactly what the European Union stands for - the promotion of human rights - and shows that this element is fundamental to every modern society , to every modern state .
We see no subordination , no duplication , no replacement of the role of the Council of Europe , which is secure in its place as an international guardian of human rights .
On the contrary , a new phase of cooperation , not antagonism , has been initiated .
I therefore agree with my compatriot , the rapporteur , on everything he has said on this issue , and fully endorse his report , and I congratulate him on this .
I am an honorary member of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , which I feel to be an honour ; but today I also feel great pride and joy because the two institutions , the European Union and the Council of Europe , are inaugurating their cooperation in this area , and I hope this century will earn its place in world history as the century of human rights .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights in Vienna is yet another costly institution that , in addition , arrogates to itself the right to monitor and lecture the Member States on compliance with the Charter of Fundamental Rights and other matters .
It is hard to resist the impression that European taxpayers ' money is being given over to yet another agenda for strengthening the authorities in Brussels and the emerging Eurostate .
The Council of Europe and the OSCE are existing institutions that deal with the same matters at international , not supranational , level .
What we are seeing is a duplication of already existing institutions that increases the powers of the European Union and the EU bureaucracy .
The countries of Europe - including my own country , Poland - are obliged to protect and promote human rights by complying , inter alia , with the European Convention on Human Rights .
The Agency for Fundamental Rights , however , alongside other agencies that are being set up at an impressive rate , is not only a waste of money but a further dubious , not to say harmful , initiative on the part of Brussels .
( RO ) Ladies and Gentlemen , this plenary session was marked by various European actions in the field of human rights , as well as by the possibility to achieve their assessment for the year 2007 .
At the same time , with the creation of the Agency for Fundamental Rights and the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the decision to conclude a cooperation agreement between the above-mentioned agency and the Council of Europe is part of the European Union 's efforts to consolidate its performance and role of human rights promoter , both internally and externally .
I would like to point out two aspects I believe important in this field .
First of all , I welcome the intention to achieve a double objective by this agreement , namely , on the one hand , the efficiency and consolidation of the European policy in the field of human rights and coherence and avoidance of duplication , on the other hand .
This is the only way in which we will be able to continue to promote the respect of the fundamental principles established by the European Convention for Human Rights and supplemented by the Charter of Fundamental Rights , including by consolidating our own mechanisms for this purpose .
Secondly , I welcome the intention to consolidate cooperation in the specific human rights protection projects launched by the Council of Europe .
This type of interaction will allow us to further contribute to improving the human rights situation , acting in specific cases , both internally and externally .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that such cooperation should be promoted especially in the European countries bordering the European Union , in order to create a true area of democracy at the external border of the Union .
As rapporteur on the Black Sea regional cooperation , I ask the European institutions to support the regional cooperation projects .
I consider the initiative to create a Black Sea Euroregion for promoting democracy at regional level , which was launched by the Council of Europe , a good starting point in this direction and I invite the Commission to manifest its entire support for their success .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Maintenance obligations ( debate )
The next item is the report by Genowefa Grabowska , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation on international jurisdiction , applicable law , recognition and enforcement of decisions and cooperation in matters relating to maintenance obligations - C6-0079 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the proposed instrument on maintenance obligations seeks to improve the precarious situation of people who depend on maintenance to meet their everyday needs .
In the European Union , where people are increasingly mobile , maintenance creditors - especially children - should not face obstacles to recover money due to them , particularly when the debtor , such as a parent , leaves or has moved abroad .
I would like to thank Ms Grabowska , as rapporteur , for the efforts she has made to give a voice to stakeholders such as non-governmental organisations assisting maintenance creditors during the very important public hearing on 11 September .
We generally welcome Ms Grabowska 's report , which supports the proposal in its essential elements .
I have just a few remarks on some proposed amendments .
First of all , on the legal basis .
We are of the opinion that the current instrument relates to family law .
However , I understand Parliament 's concerns , given the existing legal context .
That is why we have invited the Council , in a communication adopted at the same time as the proposed regulation , to decide - in accordance with Article 67 ( 2 ) of the Treaty - that the present instrument be adopted according to the codecision procedure .
That is my opinion , and I will continue to ask Council to act on this invitation .
Concerning the other amendments on the rules on applicable law .
Last month , negotiations on a worldwide convention on maintenance obligations were finalised successfully at the Hague Conference on Private International Law .
Given the satisfactory results of the Convention and the accompanying protocol on applicable law , the Community and its Member States would like to adhere to those international rules .
Consequently , the rules of the regulation and related amendments proposed should be revised in order to ensure consistency with the international rules .
The report proposes allowing the courts to apply their own law when cases come before them and when this would accelerate the resolution of the dispute .
While we recognise the concern to speed up litigation , we believe that the proposed solution does not allow for sufficient legal certainty , and there is the danger that it would not serve the interest of maintenance creditors , who should be protected by application of the same substantive law , regardless of which court is considering the case .
Finally , Parliament is now voting on its report . An international legal context has become clear .
I strongly hope this project will be resumed at full speed in 2008 .
I very much trust that the Council will give it the highest priority in the coming months .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , let me begin by expressing my thanks .
I want to thank the European Commission very much for its excellent cooperation at working level .
I also thank the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the shadow rapporteurs , especially the Committee on Legal Affairs and Diana Wallis , who drafted its opinion , for their truly excellent cooperation .
Mrs Wallis took on the heavy burden of convincing the Commission of the need for amendments to the legal basis .
I should perhaps start with the legal basis , given that the proposed resolution was referred to us under a procedure that is not acceptable to Parliament .
We wanted the regulation to be adopted according to the codecision procedure , rather than the consultation procedure .
I was therefore pleased to hear what the Commissioner told us , and I am aware of the Communication to the Council inviting it to give us that opportunity .
I would add only one thing to what the Commissioner said .
I do not question the fact that the maintenance relationship arises out of family law .
I would argue , however , that , taken as a whole , the maintenance relationship has a mixed character .
The fact that it originates in family law does not mean that it remains within those bounds .
It has consequences for the common market and the economic situation of both parties , i.e. that of the maintenance creditor and that of the debtor .
We are accordingly entitled to extract the maintenance relationship from its origin in family law and associate the execution of maintenance obligations , not with family law , but with areas in which this Parliament holds itself competent , namely the common market , family care and human rights .
In which case , it seems to me , there should be no difficulty in changing the procedure .
I therefore consider that this proposal warrants not only Council 's attention but acceptance by Council .
In preparing this regulation we held hearings that were , in truth , one uninterrupted lament .
Women , mainly , told us of the difficult situation in which they find themselves when they try to enforce maintenance payments for children whose other parent lives in a different country and appears not very interested in raising his child or paying for its upbringing .
Many different tricks are employed .
I shall not mention them all but confine myself to one example .
It is enough to change a single letter of ones surname in order to disappear in Europe almost without trace , and the maintenance obligation vanishes along with the debtor .
By means of this regulation we seek to ensure that no maintenance debtor in Europe feels safe in thinking that by leaving the country in which a child remains for whom maintenance is not paid , by moving away into the open European Union in which internal borders have been lifted - especially now when the new Member States will be joining the Schengen area in a few days ' time - he can take advantage of a situation that works in favour of a person who does not take responsibility for his family .
Let me mention the two measures in the resolution that seem to me the most important and constitute an innovation .
A maintenance order issued in the state in which the creditor normally resides will not have to be confirmed in the state in which the maintenance debtor is living .
The regulation thus proposes abolishment of the ' exequatur ' procedure .
I realise this is something new , but if we want to ensure effective enforcement of maintenance obligations we must take that step .
If we keep ' exequatur ' , the whole attempt to achieve effective enforcement falls by the wayside .
I realise we shall be respecting all the provisions adopted in the framework of the Hague Convention and Conference , but the international system grinds exceedingly slow , and the ratification of agreements in the sphere of private international law can take years .
The European Union must go forward and ensure that children are provided for when their fathers or mothers forget about them .
This regulation must therefore be implemented quickly for the good of the children .
It not only takes care of the children but also protects the creditor .
Therefore , thanking the Portuguese presidency for the work it put into preparation of the text , I place the matter in the hands of the Slovenian presidency in full confidence that it will see the text through to conclusion and that we shall obtain a good regulation .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his very positive statement .
I should also like to thank Ms Grabowska for her wonderful cooperation on this matter .
This is one of those proposals that could make Europe a reality for those we serve .
It could add practical value at difficult times in their lives .
I do not know how many times , as an elected MEP , I have been contacted by constituents who are having difficulties getting maintenance from somebody in another Member State .
All too often , I have been unable to give a practical and positive answer .
With this regulation , I hope that in most circumstances we would be able to do much better .
The proposal potentially allows the EU to go much further than states can through the Hague Conference process , which has already been mentioned .
We should indeed be able to go further .
After all , we have encouraged our citizens to move freely across old national borders within the EU , and should be able to provide an answer , in the form of a good , simple , functioning justice system , when they hit rough times in their marriages or partnerships breaking down .
Above all , we should be able to offer help to children suffering the financial consequences of marriage breakdown .
This proposal would give us a simplified one-step process , instead of the current nightmare of applying in one court and then having to go through more or less the same process of enforcement in a foreign court .
That is too much for people at vulnerable and desperate moments in their lives .
The Legal Affairs Committee has been happy to endorse most of this proposal , whilst trying to make some technical improvements .
In this respect I am very grateful to my colleague , Mr Casini .
However , like the rapporteur , we cannot accept the choice of legal base .
It should have been codecision , not consultation .
I believe the Member States have been entirely unreasonable , both in terms of the content of the legislation , and as regards the implications for our citizens .
I hope they will respond to the Commissioner 's appeal .
Speaking on behalf of my Group , we do not want to see the effectiveness of this one-step system undermined .
We must , of course , respect the rights of the defence - the judgement debtor - but this should apply to the originating court .
We should not allow the re-opening of the case in the enforcing court , or we will destroy the very benefits we are seeking to deliver .
We therefore want to see deletion of Article 33 ( a ) , and have grave doubts about amendment 61 , which still leaves the door open too wide .
Finally , I want to make some comments as a UK Member of this Parliament .
The UK opt-out or failure to opt in to this instrument is bad news for many EU nationals from other Member States now living in the UK , and is also bad news for many Brits whose partners move to another Member State .
Indeed , there are all sorts of permutations where the opt-out will create chaos and confusion .
People will be second-class citizens in respect of the justice system available to them .
However , what I most regret is the failure of the British Government to appreciate the untenable position of British MEPs in these issues .
Should we actually be working on , speaking on - and , more importantly , voting on -proposals on things that , as they currently stand , will have no application to those who elected us ?
Others are beginning to question the legitimacy of our position .
These opt-outs are democratically untenable and destructive to the coherence of the EU civil justice system .
Pick-and-mix , opt-in and opt-out merely hits those who are vulnerable and in most need of the law 's protection .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Grabowska , on her initiative in raising this issue and on the very positive view she has expressed this evening .
Fellow Members , the round of consultations of the Hague Conference , which began seven years ago , is drawing to a close .
The question arises : what progress has been made on the issue of mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments in international private law ?
Where is the declaration that the principle of mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments is the cornerstone of judicial and police cooperation in the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice ?
The answer is that no great progress has been made in this direction .
The 2004 Hague Programme has not been promoted to the degree that was needed , despite the efforts and initiatives of the Commissioner responsible , Mr Frattini .
Unfortunately , the misuse of appeals to national sovereignty by some Member States is a hindrance to the harmonisation of the law , not only on substantive matters , but also on questions of procedure .
These general observations do not , of course , negate the value and significance of the proposal we are discussing .
On the contrary , they underline the need to adopt further proposals for Council regulations , covering the whole field of family law : divorce , separation , maintenance and property matters .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2201 / 2003 on recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and matters of parental responsibility is in need of radical reform and modernisation .
This need is indeed being addressed to a large extent with the proposal for the amending regulation , but unfortunately only on the question of maintenance .
The differences in the substantive law of the Member States , under the vital heading of justice , remain .
There is still a long way to go .
Even so , where there is scope for convergence , this harmonisation of the law should be pushed forward .
The amendments proposed by the European Parliament fill many of the gaps in the proposal and improve its content .
Above all , they overcome many obstacles which hinder the enforcement of maintenance judgments anywhere in the European Union , and they limit the debtor parent 's or spouse 's scope for evading justice when he or she has moved from one EU Member State to another .
Precisely this point is addressed by the amendment which I have tabled to Article 33a , in which I attempt , firstly , not to leave unlimited scope for non-enforcement of an order on grounds of a change of circumstances and , secondly , to allow latitude for dealing with the situation in this way when there are serious , really serious , pertinent circumstances which give the court precisely this right to revise its opinion .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Genowefa Grabowska , most warmly for the work she has put into the regulation before us and her report .
The splendid result does not surprise me , as Professor Grabowska is one of Poland 's leading experts on European law .
Bearing in mind that the number of divorces and separations in the European Union is rising , the problem of legal impediments to the recognition and enforcement of decisions on maintenance obligations is increasingly important .
Furthermore , given the degree of integration of the Member States and the still large number of binding legal sources within the European Union , an advanced legal system is essential .
There is no harmonised system in force in this field at European Union level at the present time .
I am therefore in favour of the regulation , which contains highly pertinent proposals concerning the problems we are discussing .
It should be noted that it is the outcome of a long-term programme of work , the Hague Programme for strengthening freedom , security and justice in the European Union .
I agree that effective enforcement of maintenance obligations will improve the living conditions and education of many children who are first-line maintenance creditors .
That is a very important matter for European socialists .
The proposed regulation not only tackles certain problems of modern society : it can also help improve the operation of the internal market , specifically by removing barriers to the free movement of persons who could suffer as a result of differences in Member States ' legislation on the execution of maintenance obligations .
For the good of all citizens of the European Union , we must strive to achieve rapid and , if possible , cost-free execution of maintenance payments .
At present , institutions must sometimes resort to drastic measures to enforce the payment of maintenance , while creditors often live in reduced circumstances .
I also support the idea that court decisions should have the same force as they have in the Member State in which they were issued , without any additional formalities .
Finally , I would stress the need for greater involvement of the European Parliament in the adoption of decisions on matters of such importance for the future functioning of the European Union and the internal market .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of the report we are examining is to eliminate most of the obstacles to the recovery of maintenance in Europe , making it possible to establish a legal context in keeping with the legitimate expectations of maintenance creditors .
The most significant starting point is that in the vast majority of cases the maintenance creditor is the weaker party and therefore needs very vigorous protection , and it is evident that the main problem lies in the actual circumstances of maintenance debtors .
However , it is advisable to do at least what is possible , i.e. to eliminate any unnecessary red tape and to make the applicable law certain , to establish a preference for the law of the place of residence of the creditor and to give immediate effect to the legal decision under which maintenance has to be paid , even in countries other than the country in which the decision has been given .
The Committee on Legal Affairs , called upon to give an opinion under the enhanced cooperation procedure on jurisdiction , applicable law and enforcement of decisions in matters relating to maintenance obligations , has played an important role in the drafting of the text , achieving a major compromise agreement between the main political groups , for which I should like publicly to thank Mrs Wallis .
The main aims of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs are to draw up a clear definition of maintenance obligations , extend the scope of application , protect the most vulnerable parties involved and simplify the proposed text .
It has been necessary to draw up an unambiguous definition of maintenance obligations and to include in the scope of the regulation all orders relating to the payment of lump sums .
Particular attention has been paid - as I have said - to the most vulnerable parties and , here , the text of the regulation needs to be further simplified .
In conclusion , as my speaking time has come to a end , I am sure that the PPE-DE Group will give this decision its full support .
( PL ) Mr President , the regrettable increase in marital breakdown , coupled with the growing mobility of people living in the European Union , is inevitably leading to an increase in the number of cross-border conflicts concerning maintenance claims .
At the present time , in order to enforce a claim against a maintenance debtor living in another Member State it is necessary to apply to the judiciary of the state in which the decision is to be executed .
Unfortunately , that does not always work , so there is clearly a real need to lay down detailed rules on jurisdiction in regard to maintenance claims .
The purpose of the draft resolution is to reduce the formal requirements for a court decision to be delivered in any Member State and to ensure its effective execution .
Upon entry into force , the new regulation will enable an entitled person to obtain a binding enforcement order anywhere in the European Union .
It will also simplify and unify the enforcement system .
While welcoming the measures adopted by the Hague Conference , I fully agree with the rapporteur that the regulations applying in this matter in the European Union must be more progressive and more rapidly implemented .
The increasing mobility of EU citizens is leading to any increase in the number of marriages in which spouses are of different nationalities and live in different states , or live in a Member State of which neither is a national .
Where an international couple decide to divorce , they may therefore invoke different laws .
The broad subjective and objective scope of the regulation is justified by the frighteningly low rate of obtention of maintenance payments in certain EU Member States .
In my own country , Poland , for example , the figure is just 10 % .
The regulation will also enable the mother of an illegitimate child to claim from the child 's father payment of the costs associated with pregnancy and childbirth , as well as the costs of her upkeep during childbirth .
At present such a claim is not recognised in many Member States as a claim for maintenance , which makes it considerably more difficult to pursue .
Before my country joined the European Union , more than one thousand claims for maintenance from abroad were lodged in the courts every year .
As a result of the opening of borders , all forecasts predict a drastic rise in the number of such claims , both in Poland and in other countries .
The opening of borders and labour markets may lead some fathers to run away from their maintenance obligations , and it is mainly the children who will suffer .
This we cannot accept .
Member of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be very brief .
I would like to thank all those who have spoken , the rapporteur and Members who have taken part in this work .
In forthcoming months , we shall , in my view , have three objectives before us and I hope that the Slovenian Presidency will be able to take them forward successfully .
First : to convince the Council that if we feel it is useful to amend a legal base under Article 67 of the Treaty , we do so to give a better democratic basis to an initiative which objectively protects vulnerable groups of people , especially children following the breakdown of the family unit .
The second objective is to ensure that creditors receive the same protection irrespective of the place at which the matter has been brought before the courts : it would be very odd if the so-called lex fori criterion led to a substantial variation in the protection afforded to creditors .
Another essential objective is therefore to try to harmonise the rules .
The third objective , where , in my view , work is needed , is that of actual enforcement : in too many cases we affirm the principle of protection of creditors in family matters , but then we do not ensure that it is enforced , or we allow the substance of the case to be reopened when a payment order should be made .
That does not work in the case of maintenance ; were it the case , the measure would be deprived of any meaning .
We have drawn up fairly innovative proposals : temporarily freezing a proportion of the debtor 's bank account if the debtor does not want to pay , or a mandatory periodic payment order against the debtor 's assets for the sum that the debtor should pay .
As you know , there has been dissent and opposition from the majority of the Member States in the Council because that is what really makes a difference for a regulation : either the measure can be genuinely enforced or it is pointless to continue to affirm the importance of protecting children or separated spouses who are maintenance creditors !
We shall have to work on these three issues in the coming months and , clearly , in this case , more than in others , the Commission and Parliament are in agreement and we shall have to persuade the Council that this is the right road to take .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) For the moment , there is no single European system to acknowledge and enforce the legal obligation to grant maintenance abroad .
The Community provisions in this field are insufficient instruments for pursuing debtors who try to avoid their obligations to pay maintenance .
According to the present regulation , any judgment regarding maintenance given in a Member State must be rapidly and correctly enforced in any other Member State .
Thus has ensured the simplification of citizens ' lives , namely the recovery of child maintenance from the parent or other debtors when such persons reside in a different country to the child , implementation of one of the European fundamental rights , the right to private and family life and child protection , homogenization and simplification of the European legal norms on the entire EU territory and construction of the European space of freedom , security , justice and facilitation of internal market operation .
I think that the courts notified should check the independent status and competence of legal consultancies and take into consideration the situation of the parties during the proceedings .
The creditor of the maintenance obligation should benefit from the legal provisions in the country of residence , litigations in this field should be solved less expensively and searching for the most favourable jurisdiction should be avoided .
Ovine and caprine animals : electronic identification ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 21 / 2004 as regards the date of introduction of electronic identification for ovine and caprine animals - C6-0448 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as we all know , traceability is a key element of ensuring high standards in animal health and food safety .
We have had recent experience with certain diseases in the European Union , such as foot-and-mouth disease and bluetongue , which has once again shown the importance of efficient identification systems .
Individual identification cannot function properly without electronic identification .
The Commission was requested to confirm or amend , in its report , the date of implementation of electronic identification , not to question the principles of the regulation .
That is why it is a technical report on the various methods and technology involved .
The Commission report only focuses on the best way to implement electronic identification .
However , in order to produce a report , we needed data and input from the Member States , and in particular those Member States already working on the system .
The studies and trials necessary for the preparation of the report lasted much longer than was originally foreseen , which explains the delay in the report .
We strongly appreciate and thank Parliament for agreeing to handle this matter as urgent .
That will prevent a situation of legal uncertainty in January 2008 .
The report concludes that technical conditions for electronic identification of sheep and goats have been fulfilled , but that Member States need a reasonable time frame to prepare the implementation of electronic identification .
We agree with , and accept , Parliament 's position to have a fixed date for introduction of the system .
On the other hand , we cannot accept the other amendments proposed , which would call into question the very principles of the regulation , since the question now is what the actual date of implementation should be .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the speedy work he has done , and Parliament for agreeing to treat this matter as urgent .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kyprianou , we have complied with the request to handle this matter swiftly .
We are dealing here with something urgent , which is precisely why we are still here at this late hour .
The question is , of course , how this urgent situation arose .
You have said something about that .
I had a look through the documentation and came across the very regulation that we want to amend today .
It dates from 17 December 2003 .
That regulation prescribes that , with effect from 1 January 2008 , ' electronic identification according to the guidelines referred to in paragraph 1 [ ... ] shall be obligatory for all animals ' .
There are one or two exemption clauses , which I shall omit , and then it says , ' The Commission shall submit to the Council , by 30 June 2006 , a report on the implementation of the electronic identification scheme , accompanied by appropriate proposals , on which the Council shall vote by qualified majority ' .
In short , the matter lies very far back in the past .
The Commission 's report to the Council was evidently never submitted , and there was no comeback from the Council .
Are you signalling something ?
If you did submit the report , all the better , but then there was no response from the Member States .
And then we got into this pickle , realising that the deadline could not be met .
So far , so bad , but then you proposed that , instead of perhaps setting a new deadline , we should leave it to the comitology procedure to set the date .
In other words , the setting of the deadline would be your decision .
We should then have taken all this trouble for nothing , and so the committee decided that the provision on compulsory electronic tagging should enter into force on 31 December 2009 and be applicable from 1 January 2010 , two years later than prescribed in the original regulation .
Be that as it may , the important thing is that we have a date .
The committee also said that a report should be submitted on this matter too .
The problem with your proposal , of course , is that you are drawing more and more decision-making into the realm of comitology , just as you did with the old regulation of 17 December 2003 , in which the provisions and application arrangements relating to the regime of electronic identification were delegated to the Commission through the comitology procedure .
At that time there was also to be a report to the Council but no report to Parliament .
As a result of this practice of subjecting everything to comitology , Parliament is divested of its decision-making rights and its powers of scrutiny , and so we only discover at some later date that obligations have not been honoured .
If you had not come with these amendments now and requested urgent treatment because you were under pressure to meet the deadline , we should have thought that everything was alright .
But things were not alright !
That must be a warning to us in Parliament not to delegate too much to the Commission but to continue exercising our powers of scrutiny .
Now there have been a couple of amendments .
You said you could not accept them .
The committee stipulated that the rules should be binding .
That , in fact , is also laid down in the basic regulation , which , as we all know , is not being repealed but only amended .
Now there are amendments tabled by you , Mr Stevenson , one of them jointly with Mrs McGuinness , which propose that the system be made voluntary .
Well , if we make it voluntary , we might as well forget the whole thing .
What would then be left to prescribe ?
We could resign ourselves to the fact that all cats are grey in the dark .
I therefore believe that we must stick with compulsory rules and that these compulsory rules must include a date and a report to the European Parliament .
It will be a lesson to us that this report has made us stumble more or less by chance across this truly unusual way of proceeding on the part of the Commission and the Council .
I hope , Mr Kyprianou , that I am not being unduly harsh in my criticism , but you can imagine that , as I drafted the report and prepared myself for this evening and consulted the relevant documentation , I had to rub my eyes when I saw all the things that can happen in our European institutions .
Both Parliament and the Commission - and we as individuals too , as far as I am concerned - surely have an interest in ensuring that this sort of thing does not recur and become a habit .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , let me start by answering a question that was put to me by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
He was asking why my amendments seek to make this system voluntary .
I can tell Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf very quickly why I seek to make it voluntary .
Last week in my constituency in Scotland , cast ewes - for the non-agricultural people in the Chamber ( there are not many people in the Chamber ) , they are old female sheep - were selling for GBP 2 a head .
A year ago they were selling for GBP 60 a head ; this year , GBP 2 a head .
I ask the rapporteur : how is a farmer who is only getting two quid a head for his sheep supposed to fit microchips and buy expensive scanners and readers that can comply with a mandatory electronic ID system ?
This is the economic problem .
The original Commission proposal was perfectly correct in seeking stakeholder consultation and in seeking economic-impact cost-benefit analysis .
I have not seen all the figures .
I do not know what the intention would be for the sheep farmers in my constituency .
I have to remind the Members in this House that the UK has the biggest sheep flock in the whole of Europe - by far the biggest .
The impact of this would be catastrophic with the economic situation the way it is .
It would actually mean - if this becomes mandatory and we go by the dates set by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in their vote on Monday night , and we set 31 December 2009 as the mandatory introduction - that a whole group of sheep farmers in Britain will close down and go out of business .
The upland areas and the hills that have been looked after by sheep farmers and grazed by sheep for centuries will go wild and then the public will realise the damage that has been done .
While we are wreaking this damage in a flock that already has the best traceability in Europe - we have absolute guaranteed traceability in the UK at the present time and the sheep farmers cannot understand why we want to impose a new system of electronic identification when they already have high-quality traceability - we are importing sheep meat into the EU from outside , from countries that do not respect our levels of hygiene and welfare and the rigorous regulations that we apply to our sheep farmers .
So , let us have a little bit of sensitivity here .
I hope that when we come to vote on this tomorrow the Members will see the reason why we are asking for a voluntary system and not yet fixing a mandatory date for the introduction of electronic ID .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I am one who always listens carefully to Mr Stevenson whenever he speaks , and I have been listening to him for several years now , but this speech surprises me , because it is one which would have been better made in 2003 and not 2007 , nearly 2008 in fact .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf put it very well : this is a 2004 regulation , we debated it in Parliament in 2003 , and the regulation provides that the date of entry into force for the system of electronic identification for ovine and caprine animals is to be 1 January 2008 .
So , Mr Stevenson - I have no doubt whatever that you have ovine animals in your constituency , as I do myself - the five Member States with the biggest ovine and caprine flocks are , besides your country and mine , France , Italy and Greece .
Well now , these four Member States have undertaken the task , which seems so abhorrent to you , of convincing their farmers to tag ovine and caprine animals , because we were told that the regulation said that electronic identification was going to be obligatory from 1 January 2008 .
I , as a Member of this Parliament , entirely understand this .
I also understand that there are Member States - such as yours , which is why I have just been listening to you - which have not fulfilled their duties , and with this in mind , I voluntarily proposed a date - which has moreover been accepted by the Committee on Agriculture - extending that time-limit slightly , but , as you know , whereas they might pay two pounds an animal in your constituency , in mine they only pay one pound .
At this point in time , with animal disease problems being prevalent in Europe , I think that a system such as this provides a guarantee and a way of enhancing the value of what our farmers are producing .
It is an identification system which enables us to know the provenance of any animal transiting Community territory and be assured that it is in good health ; it is a guarantee for the consumer and that has to be good for the farmer , because he is going to get more for his meat .
If they are not going to get any more for their meat , that is just where we are now with bluetongue , foot-and-mouth disease and the chikungunya mosquito .
If that is the case then there is no hope for us .
So , please , let us just get to work , let us be coherent and read and examine the regulation referred to by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf -which I would repeat is a 2004 regulation - let us read it carefully , let us recognise that there are a few exceptions in it , but it is not a matter of do-as-you-please , because the date cannot be voluntary .
It cannot be voluntary because we , the Commission and the Council decided that it was obligatory .
In other words , I cannot turn the clock back to three years ago and tell my farmers that all their efforts up until now are completely pointless because the British forgot to ask their farmers to do the same .
Do you understand me ?
I am asking you to read my amendment carefully .
My group is definitely not about to question the obligatory nature of the system , because that would create unlawful discrimination between Member States and within the European Union itself , although it would not surprise me - and I am not referring to you , Mr Stevenson - that someone who had the gall to reject the Charter of Fundamental Rights in this House today could display equal or greater gall in rejecting the identification of ovine and caprine animals .
Here we are then : I think we have a regulation , the Commission has made us a reasonable proposal , we have also made a reasonable proposal to the Commission , so let us try to finish this matter this morning without too much damage on either side .

Mr President , I rise very much to support what Mr Stevenson has just said and also very much to support what the Commission is trying to do .
I think we do have to realise the scale of sheep farming and the number of animals involved .
You are talking about 25 million sheep in the UK , 8.5 million in France , 3 million in Ireland and significant numbers in Spain and other countries .
The system has got to be right .
If we are going to introduce an electronic system , it has got to be practical and cost-effective , and farmers have got to be able to use it practically .
As Mr Stevenson has quite rightly said , the sheep is an animal that is not of huge value , so all of this is not going to be done by veterinarians .
A lot of this is going to have to be carried out by farmers , and when they come to read those tags , it is has got to be practically done up the side of a mountain in wet conditions , and all sorts of things .
I have seen a lot of these electronic systems work in hotel rooms as you move people through different doorways , and they say there is no collision between the different tags .
You also want a system where , when a lorry-load of sheep drives into a market , in ideal circumstances , you want to be able to electronically check every sheep that is in that lorry .
This is the ideal system .
What I say to you quite clearly is that there is no point in moving forward on electronic tagging until we have got a practical system , cost-effective and ready to use .
Therefore , I think you are absolutely right to say , ' Come back at the end of 2009 and see where we are ' .
As Mr Stevenson has quite rightly said , let us use this as a voluntary system when Member States are ready , when there is a lot of movement of sheep , and when we have got a system that works .
Please do not bring it in too quickly , before we are ready .
Mr President , once again we are here to debate the tagging of sheep .
All I can say is that it is an awful pity that the Commission did not listen to us way back in the early days when we questioned what they were proposing then and advised them .
I would say to Ms Miguélez Ramos : yes , we did make these speeches way back at the beginning when there was the discussion on tagging sheep .
But unfortunately what we said was not listened to , even when we said it would be unworkable .
So we did warn you and you would not listen .
The reality is that sheep farmers could never afford the cost of electronic tagging because they are receiving less now for their lambs than they were 20 years ago !
You tell me of any other part of any other business of any other industry that is asked to put out tremendous expenditure and receive less for what they are producing than they did 20 years ago .
I know this is the case from personal experience .
The present system we have is sufficient .
So , let us kick this very much into the long grass for the future .
I can accept coming back and looking at it in 2009 .
Maybe , over that period of time , the electronic tagging technology , which at the moment is far too expensive , may , like many other areas of technology , become more affordable with a combination of lower costs and better returns to the sheep producer .
Then we could examine this all over again .
The big challenge to sheep production is to achieve profitability and when that happens we can move forward with confidence .
I must say it was with great interest that I heard Ms Miguélez Ramos and Mr Stevenson having an exchange of views over sheep because they usually have an exchange of views over fish , which is totally different !
It is probably even more argumentative than over sheep as they are doing tonight .
But for sheep farmers , receiving such small rewards for hard work , as has been outlined by Mr Parish , makes this is a very difficult job .
There are thousands of sheep on the top of mountains for all of the summertime .
You try and catch them ; you try and tag them ; you try and follow them .
I have to say to the Commissioner : I just wish you would send some of your officials who draw up some of these plans out to these areas and see what the sheep farmers have to put up with , see what they have to go through .
Then you might understand how we feel and why we put forward these views .
Yes , let us do it on a voluntary basis .
Let us do it when we are ready .
Let us move at a proper pace and let us take it at a speed which we can afford .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will be very brief , as it is late .
I would like to remind the honourable Members that what we are discussing today is the date of introduction of the system .
A decision was correctly taken to put the system in place , but the date was left open , or rather a date was fixed which , it was decided , we should subsequently amend or confirm .
The data from a number of Member States showed two things .
First of all that implementation was feasible , both technically and economically - as is stated in the report - and also that more time was needed for the Member States to introduce the system , meaning that a more realistic date was needed .
The truth is that the Commission did propose to have this date set at a later stage .
I can assure you there was no intention to circumvent Parliament , and that is precisely why we chose this way of proceeding - having this debate , and not inserting an article in the regulation , which would have allowed us to take a decision with the Council alone .
There was never any intention on the part of the Commission not to include or involve Parliament in these decisions .
The setting of a date was considered to be a technical question .
Since the principle had already been adopted , we thought that this technical question could be adopted through comitology and , to repeat what I said earlier , we have no problem in accepting the amendment setting a specific date , which I believe allows Member States enough time - two years - to prepare .
However , we would be reluctant to agree to voluntary systems , since the regulation concerns traceability , and traceability has to be effective and applied equally in the Member States .
It is also a specific reflection of the animal health situation in the European Union .
One can look at the direct cost of the system as it appears , but , if you take the longer-term benefits of the savings generated by the reduction in losses and animal diseases , we believe it will eventually be of benefit from the economic point of view .
Nevertheless , we are ready to accept the amendment by Parliament , which we believe will also be adopted by the Council next week .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has the floor on a point of order .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Allow me to ask the Commissioner one more question .
Commissioner Kyprianou , I tabled an amendment providing for certain exceptions , which are not intended to be implemented on a voluntary basis , and indeed the original instrument also allows for a variation , an updating , if it is done in accordance with Article 9 ( 4 ) .
In certain circumstances - and these must not include voluntary arrangements , which would render the whole exercise pointless - it would be possible to give some consideration to ways in which the concerns that my fellow Members have expressed here could be met in practice .
This is only intended as a suggestion and a question to which you might like to give some thought .
That was not a point of order , but would the Commissioner care to answer the question ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as I said , we have a problem accepting amendments that will affect the main principles and aspects of the regulation .
We will look at it again but , nevertheless , this is a concern .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 13 December 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I do not believe that sufficient information has been provided on the efficiency and effectiveness of electronic identification ( EID ) for sheep and goats .
Furthermore , I believe that an economic assessment , notably a cost-benefit analysis of the impact on producers , is necessary before fixing a date for the introduction of EID .
I do not believe there is any justification for setting a date for the introduction of this scheme until the impact of EID , particularly in relation to traceability and disease control , has been assessed .
In Ireland , the sheep sector is melting down , with many farmers exiting the industry and therefore the imposition of these measures and costs on this sector at this time is unwelcome .
If there is a legitimate justification for EID in this sector , stock owners would be responsive and would set about introducing it themselves on a voluntary basis .
If and when this EID scheme is introduced it should take place on a voluntary rather than a compulsory basis .
Furthermore , should EID be introduced it should only apply to animals born after a certain date and should not apply to existing stock .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.25 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9. a.m. )
Mr President , on a point of order , I rise to inquire about the potential use of Rule 147 of our Rules of Procedure , following the disgraceful events of yesterday where some of our colleagues behaved , frankly , like hooligans .
I would urge the President and the Conference of Presidents to look into this - to take their time and do it properly , but this , surely , is an instance where the imposition of penalties as foreseen under Rule 147 should be , at least , considered .
We revised this rule last year to distinguish very clearly between protests that are measured , that are visual but do not disrupt the sitting , and those sorts of behaviour which actually disrupt the parliamentary sitting .
Yesterday , speakers - including our guest , the Prime Minister of Portugal - were shouted down so that they could not be heard .
That is no way to behave in a pluralist , democratic parliament where we thrive on proper debate , not shouting people down .
I would urge the President to look into this and , perhaps at the January sitting , announce what penalties he intends to impose : at the very least a reprimand , as foreseen , but perhaps some of the more vigorous penalties that are provided for in our Rules of Procedure .
Mr Corbett , leaving aside my personal opinions , where I tend to agree with your feelings and opinion , the problem will certainly be referred to the Bureau under the terms of Rule 147 and I am sure the President will follow it up in accordance with the provisions of Rule 147 .

( FR ) Mr President , on this matter I totally agree with what Mr Corbett said to us .
I would just like to add that I was there at the sitting this morning , to hear the apology made by the group chairman , Mr Bonde , for what happened yesterday regarding the ushers .
What is unacceptable is that a member of Parliament 's staff , who was only doing his duty as the President and Presidency required of him , should be attacked using words or phrases that I will not say were too strong , but frankly crap - excuse the term , but I am just using the same language .
I do not see any official apologies , so we must take the necessary measures to defend Parliament 's staff .
That is why I am here this morning .
Thank you , Mr Daul .
I will conclude the requests to speak on this point , which is a procedural matter , by asking Mr Beazley to speak .
Mr President , I shall be very brief .
I just wanted to agree wholeheartedly with both Mr Corbett and my group chairman , Mr Daul .
What happened yesterday was utterly inexcusable .
However , I would caution , perhaps , that the Conference of Presidents remembers the - perhaps wise - advice of Mr Cohn-Bendit not to give these people the prominence they seek through their quite unacceptable behaviour .
I was wondering whether , perhaps , the services of Parliament might investigate whether additional facilities for Parliament 's crèche might be found , so that those suffering from what apparently is described as ' offensive Faragia ' syndrome - the symptoms of which are feeling far out and outrageous ; it can , in its extreme form , become contagious - but for those who feel obliged to go to this crèche , and I propose Mr Farage as its custodian , the only known therapy is for them to march up and down with a placard with single words on it and shout at each other at the top of their voice .

When the fever subsides , they may rest and rejoin the grown-ups .
So , I wish those who held up those absurd posters yesterday and those who behaved appallingly a merry Christmas ; if they have time over the yuletide to reflect on their behaviour , they might even think what they would like to do when they grow up .
We will also take account of your suggestion , though personally I have some difficulty imagining these fellow Members in a crèche since , in view of the violent tendencies shown by some of them , we could run the risk of a ' Massacre of the Innocents ' .
We will act exactly as laid down in Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure and will certainly be consistent with it .
Action taken on Parliament 's resolutions : see Minutes
Tenth anniversary of the mine ban treaty ( Ottawa Convention ) ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Textiles ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission on the expiry of the Memorandum of Understanding between the EU and China on imports of certain textile and clothing products , by Pedro Guerreiro , Jacky Hénin , Roberto Musacchio , Marco Rizzo , Ilda Figueiredo and Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group - B6-0388 / 2007 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission on textiles by Gianluca Susta , Ignasi Guardans Cambó and Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Robert Sturdy , Tokia Saïfi , Georgios Papastamkos and Vasco Graça Moura , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , Erika Mann , Glyn Ford , Kader Arif and Elisa Ferreira , on behalf of the PSE Group , Cristiana Muscardini and Eugenijus Maldeikis , on behalf of the UEN Group , Caroline Lucas and Alain Lipietz , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group - B6-0383 / 2007 ) .
deputising for the author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am also speaking on behalf of my colleague Gianluca Susta , the first signatory of the question , who is absent today because of important commitments that have arisen in Italy .
Once again , Parliament wants to tackle the complex situation of the textile industry , asking the Commission for more decisive and appropriate intervention .
The sector employs millions of workers in Europe , and accounts for significant turnover in many countries , making Europe the second largest exporter in the world and therefore making a very important contribution to European exports .
In my opinion , it is wrong to consider it a mature sector , because in many cases there is scope for modernisation through technological innovation and research into new materials , and it has strong links with fashion , styling and other specialities in which many European countries have genuine expertise recognised the world over .
Naturally , this requires substantial support for the sector through industrial policies that put it in the position of being truly capable of facing global competition .
These are also suggestions made by the High Level Group that was set up , and consequently we are asking the Commission just what follow-up and implementation action it has taken .
In the immediate future , the urgent problems concern the measures to be taken for the fateful date of 1 January 2008 .


I will mention just three problems : the need for very careful checks : how does the Commission intend to implement the surveillance system to ensure there are effective safeguards ; how it will cope with the risk of indirect movements and therefore the problem of twin checking of licences ?
Basically , for all instruments that look good on paper , the problem is how to put them into practice .
There is the matter of how to guarantee the authenticity of products and thus the need to keep fighting counterfeiting , piracy and unfair commercial practices , and we hope that the Council - which is not here today - will adopt the ' made in ' regulation , which is truly necessary and would be a genuine safeguard measure .
There is the problem of consumer protection , including from the point of view of health and safety .
We should apply the same health and safety standards to imported products that we use for the manufacture of products within the European market .
Finally - and we are directing this to the Commission - there is the problem of willingness to act .
If at the beginning of 2008 there should again be a boom in imports , if there should be peaks again , as happened in the past , we are asking for a genuine willingness to use new instruments and possibly new measures and safeguard clauses .
author . - Mr President , Commissioner , two years ago , following the removal of the quotas , the textile sector experienced a veritable big bang .
To try to cope with the crisis , Commissioner , you were recommending temporary palliative measures with the aim of controlling and restricting imports of some Chinese textiles .
In a few days time , these safeguards will no longer exist and trade in textiles will be subject to joint European Union / Chinese surveillance , which I hope will be attentive and vigilant .
Today , our concern is about the way this system of joint surveillance will be set up .
What guarantees do we have that this twin checking system will be both adequate and effective ?
The textiles sector is one that has always been globalist , both in terms of production and consumption , but it is one that has paid the price for globalisation .
However , globalisation can be anticipated and regulated .
For this to happen there needs to be the political will to set up a competitive framework for our European textile industries .
We need to work towards fair and reciprocal conditions of market access .
We need to continue to be fearless in using the instruments at the EU 's disposal to defend our trade ; being protective is not the same thing as being protectionist .
We need to prioritise the fight against counterfeiting .
The Europe of tomorrow will no longer have any industry if we do not stand up for its intellectual copyrights and expertise .
Having the same rules applied by everyone for everyone is the only way of offering all of the parties concerned a win-win scenario .
I therefore wish for 2008 , Mr Mandelson , that together we can consider the textile sector 's bright future in a more peaceful climate .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few weeks after the end of negotiations on the Memorandum of Understanding introducing restrictions on imports of Chinese textiles , it is essential that the European Parliament adopts a strong position on the future of its textiles sector , the structures and organisational methods of which are threatened by its sudden entry into competition with China .
The joint resolution we are proposing today asks for a clear commitment from the European Commission and the Member States on several points .
Firstly , for companies and workers in the sector who face major restructuring risks to be fully supported by adequate social measures and by the granting of European funds to support the modernisation of their production facilities .
Next , we need to commit ourselves to improving the competitiveness of the European textiles sector within the more general framework of a strong and ambitious European industrial policy .
This objective cannot be achieved until words turn into actions and until we invest heavily in research and development .
Furthermore , in view of unfair competition from some of our competitors , who base their competitive advantages on social and environmental dumping , or both , Europe needs effective tools to defend itself .
Greater efficiency will not be achieved by means of hurried reform , which will weaken the EU 's means of protection , but by the more transparent and predictable use of existing instruments .
Finally , Europe needs to use the Euro-Mediterranean partnership as the foundation for an integrated manufacturing area that makes the most of the proximity of the Mediterranean countries to increase competitiveness in the international textiles market .
The development of the Mediterranean countries with which we want to create a partnership depends on our ability to offer them firm commitments on policies and sectors of common interest .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a few days away from the fateful deadline of 31 December 2007 , when the quotas system for textiles from China will be abolished for good , concerns are growing within European industry .
China joined the World Trade Organisation some time ago , and has enjoyed many benefits as a result of this , starting with the ban on reintroducing quotas on its textile exports .
Having accepted these advantages , it should have reciprocated by meeting requirements defined and ratified by the World Trade Organisation .
It does not seem to us that this has happened , and this is bad for international competition , which is still far from fair , and still far from having the same rules for everyone .
I am not talking about the comparative social and environmental advantages that unfortunately still remain outside any legal framework in multilateral trade negotiations and that one day , very soon I hope , must be brought into the framework of trade that can truly be described as fair .
Today , I am talking about the rules that govern the strenuous fight against counterfeits , the safety standards of many products from toys to medicines , and access by our companies to markets like China , which is not the only one where , not just for textiles but also for other sectors , there are still tariff barriers and especially non-tariff barriers that make it very difficult for European industry and small and medium-sized enterprises in the sector to break into the Chinese market .
In view of situations like this in international trade , we should not be afraid , provided that the legal and economic requirements are met , to use the legitimate instruments available , which have been put in place by multilateral international agreements to protect and safeguard the textile industry , specifically to counterbalance the potential negative effects of the ending of quotas .
I am talking about the function and effectiveness of the High Level Group for surveillance of the textile market , which will have the task of monitoring the operation of the market in Europe through the import and export licence twin checking system .
This is one method that should identify indirect trade movements and provide information about flows of imports .
We need to have the courage and strength to implement the safeguard clause on the basis of the WTO rules and to reintroduce the quotas , at least temporarily , if there is serious damage to our industry from abnormal import levels .
I am thinking about the constant use of trade protection instruments , such as anti-dumping and anti-subsidy rules and , more generally , about keeping a channel of comparison open between China and the European Union at all times .
Our textile industry is not afraid of competition , but it must be put in a position to be able to cope with it .
Consequently , we need to act on two different fronts .
On the one hand it is important to encourage the modernisation and restructuring process that will make the sector more competitive , with social shock absorbers to cope with a possible backlash , and on the other we need to ensure the sector is fighting on a level playing field , with the same rules for everyone .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is also why we are inviting the Commission and the Council to get the identification of product origins off to a stronger and more incisive start .
author . - Mr President , I should like to emphasise that the Greens are very aware that the consequences of a totally liberalised textile and apparel market for EU-based producers is still a very pressing issue , particularly for certain production zones within the EU in which the industry is highly concentrated .
Several hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost since the beginning of 2005 , albeit fewer than some of the worst predictions .
The Greens have from the start flagged our concern about the impact of competition on European producers .
I think we need to monitor the situation carefully and be ready to apply import restrictions if import surges in the next year overwhelm the capacity of EU-based apparel industries to adapt , as well , of course , as channelling research and development resources to that sector .
However , we need to be aware that the problem is very much harder for certain poor countries in the South , like Bangladesh and the Philippines , which have been induced by the World Bank and other donors to invest heavily in exporting clothing and apparel products and now find themselves with shrinking export opportunities , a continuous debt burden , no financial means for adjustment of the sector , and misery - especially for millions of women who work for almost nothing in nightshifts in order to undercut the cheapest offer on the market with an even cheaper one .
It is , in fact , that latter perspective that emphasises that in certain sectors , where too many producers produce too many products , some kind of management tools to control supply are necessary and in the interests of the majority .
That is why I urge colleagues to support the amendment that the Greens and Socialists have filed together , which reads : ' Calls on the Commission to evaluate the usefulness of supply-side management tools for the clothing sector , in order to level off global competition and prevent a lowest-common-denominator approach to social and environmental standards . '
A completely liberalised market in sectors characterised by overproduction capacities brings misery to all but a few .
In that respect I think we should use the example of the apparel industry to press for new thinking about the way in which policy ought to regulate markets for the benefit of all .
The reintroduction of some kind of quotas should be considered in this evaluation of supply-side management tools .
Another option mentioned in the joint resolution which deserves a more comprehensive evaluation is the creation of a Euromed production zone of the clothing and apparel industry .
Indeed , that option not only points towards the improvement of opportunities for development in the southern Mediterranean rim states , but also gives opportunities to the southern European textile and apparel producers who would profit from shorter transportation times to EU markets .
It is one of the good examples of how a Euromed economic zone could be sensitively managed without dragging the whole of the Mediterranean region in all-out liberalisation through a free trade agreement .
From my Group 's perspective , we regard this proposal as an option in its own right that should be fostered independently of the contested 2010 Euromed free-trade-agreement project , which , according to the sustainability impact assessments done by DG Trade in the Commission , would involve a significant number of quite negative social and environmental consequences .
author . - ( PT ) We are glad to be having this debate to which my parliamentary group has contributed a great deal .
We hope that the debate will help to protect jobs and the activity of the textile and clothing sector , a strategic sector for the European Union , which has been so little protected and so undervalued .
As regards the questions to the Commission , we have nothing to add ; they have been tabled .
As regards the joint motion for a resolution , due to be adopted by the European Parliament today , we should like to point out that , although it contains certain points that might in practice protect and promote the textile and clothing sector in the European Union , we have reservations about some other points .
To give just three examples : the ' Globalisation Adjustment Fund ' should not be used as a temporary cushion against the unacceptable social and economic costs of closure and relocation of undertakings , with the consequent destruction of jobs .
That is , we should intervene on the causes , not the effects .
The current liberalisation policies need to be reversed and financial means made available that effectively help to protect jobs , to modernise the sector and also to promote the introduction of other industries , including those linked to textiles and clothing , thus making for industrial diversification in regions where that activity is currently concentrated .
It would not make much sense to urge the European Union to encourage others to review their monetary policies if the EU does not first critically reappraise the strong euro policy and its impact on some EU countries ' exports .
Nor would it make sense to call for trade defence instruments in relation to China , whilst simultaneously supporting the setting up of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area .
I do not have time in this speech to summarise all our proposals on the European Union 's clothing and textile industry .
They are set out in our motion for a resolution .
However , we should like to mention some of the amendments tabled to the joint resolution .
They aim at making up for the lack of any mention of the serious consequences of the liberalisation of the textile and clothing industry at global level , with the closure and relocation of numerous undertakings , in particular to North Africa and Asia , leaving a trail of unemployment and serious socio-economic crises ; stressing also that the double-checking ' surveillance system ' will serve no purpose unless it prevents any repetition of the situation that occurred in 2005 , underscoring the need for new safeguard measures so as to enable employment in , and the business of , the textiles and clothing sector to be safeguarded and promoted in the EU .
The proposals highlight that some countries have adopted safeguard measures applying until the end of 2008 and it is therefore difficult to understand why the EU has not followed suit .
The proposals also express disquiet at the Commission 's intentions to review trade defence instruments according to the interests of firms which are relocating their production to countries where , because of the low wages and social and environmental standards , production costs are lower .
They propose that a Community programme should be drawn up for the textiles and clothing sector , and especially for the more disadvantaged regions that depend on it and aid for SMEs .
They are proposals which maintain that a regulatory framework needs to be laid down to penalise company relocations , making public aid to businesses subject to long-term commitments regarding regional development and employment , including the requirement to pay back aid if such conditions are not met .
Finally , they are proposals which call for a stronger role for workers ' representatives in company boards and in fundamental organisational decision-making .
They are proposals that we hope will have the support of the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as Members of this House know , back in 2005 the EU and China agreed a memorandum of understanding that included a two-and-a-half-year transition arrangement designed to give some extra breathing space to EU textile producers following the liberalisation of global trade in textiles and clothing .
The arrangement capped growth each year for 10 particularly sensitive textile and clothing products .
These caps expire on 31 December 2007 , although the memorandum itself remains valid until the end of 2008 , and it commits industry and government on both sides to work for a stable transition to free trade in textiles .
It was always my intention to hold China to that responsibility .
The Commission negotiated with China a double-checking surveillance system for 2008 that will cover eight textile-product categories with particular sensitivities .
What this means is that China will issue an export licence for all exports and , in parallel , the EU licensing offices in the Member States will issue an import licence .
It is a familiar system , and manufacturers , importers and retailers have all welcomed it .
Its value lies in allowing us to monitor textile import patterns and , because imports have to be licensed before they leave the dock in China , it allows us to see likely developments in advance .
I am the first to acknowledge the fact that the textile and clothing industry is going through a long period of structural change .
This started long before the dismantling of quotas .
Successful European companies are not taking the mass producers head on but are investing in technology and in quality .
We remain - it is always worth saying it - the second biggest textile exporter in the world .
We have more fashion and quality brands than the rest of the world put together .
It is a sign of the European textile producers ' confidence and resilience that they have not called for quotas to be further extended .
They have argued that their competitiveness depends more now on effective action on counterfeiting and market access in China .
It goes without saying that I intend to throw the entire weight of our trade policy behind these two problems .
On market access , we will be seeking new access for textile goods in the Doha Round and in all our new FTAs .
We have also set up a specific working group for textiles as part of the renewed market access strategy .
Europe is well poised to exploit huge new markets for consumer goods in the emerging economies and we will not simply be sitting back and hoping that these trends go our way .
Counterfeiting is , if anything , an even greater problem .
Protecting trademarks and design rights is absolutely central to the textile industry and I raise these issues with the Chinese in every single meeting I have with them .
We have done some useful collaborative work with the Chinese customs service and trade fair organisers , and the Chinese patent office .
But , on balance , China remains a huge problem for intellectual property rights holders .
The counterfeit markets are cleared out one day and the traders creep back in the next .
As I have said in the past , we have not ruled out the prospect of using the WTO if the situation does not improve .
Ms Toia mentioned the ' Made in ' proposal to assist textiles : I made this proposal , I presented it to the Commission , it was agreed by the Commission but it has not been agreed , I am afraid , by the majority of Member States .
In view of this , I cannot press the proposal further or do more than I have done .
Last month , at the EU-China summit in Beijing , I was very careful to pass on some frank messages , and they apply in the textile sector as much as anywhere .
The EU-China trade relationship has been transformed in the last two decades .
Both sides have benefited from it immensely but it has become badly imbalanced .
While China dominates our import markets , our businesses are losing out in China because of counterfeiting and market-access barriers amounting to EUR 55 million a day in lost business opportunities .
Our spiralling trade deficit reflects both these things .
This is not because of a lack of competitiveness by European producers .
We have a surplus in goods trade with the rest of the world and , where we are allowed to compete freely , we are a match for anyone .
This is not the case in China .
Instead of a level playing field , it is seriously tilted against us .
We face trade and investment restrictions , rampant counterfeiting and regulatory barriers in virtually every sector .
China 's WTO obligations six years after it became a member are still too often unmet .
I see the textiles problems as emblematic of the broader problems we face in China .
We are China 's largest client for clothing and textiles .
We have respected China 's comparative advantage in labour and production costs .
We are focusing on our own comparative advantages .
We are moving up the value chain in what we produce .
We expect the same sort of equal opportunity and fair treatment in China 's market that Chinese producers receive in ours .
At the recent summit , the Premier of China , Wen Jiabao , appeared to hear and understand our strong concern and offered to create a high-level strategic mechanism with the EU to focus on rebalancing our trade deficit with China .
I welcome this , with one obvious caveat : it is not one more dialogue or one more roadmap we need , it is action - on the ground , in the markets , in the courts , where it matters to European exporters .
And action not just by the Ministry of Commerce but across the board by the regulating agencies and ministries which restrict market access and law enforcement in all parts of China 's economy .
The openness of Europe 's own markets to China will not be politically sustainable if this action does not occur .
I talk of textiles and clothing products , but also all sectors where Europe has export interests .
The practical delivery of real change by the new high-level trade deficit mechanism , which I and my trade counterpart are charged with designing and launching , will be the definitive test of China 's sincerity .
I hope their sincerity matches our own in wishing to resolve the issues before us without resorting to avoidable confrontation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I should like to say to the Commissioner that I find myself almost speechless for once .
Congratulations !
I think it is exactly what this House wanted to hear and I certainly hope he continues with the points that he has raised today in his negotiations with China .
It is encouraging , and it looks to me as though he has a total and utter grasp of the situation .
He would not expect me to say that , but I am saying it because I think he has done exactly what is wanted .
I would just say one thing , or two or three things , very briefly .
Yesterday , I heard in this House one of the best speeches that I have ever heard any head of state give , and that was by the King of Jordan .
One of the things that he mentioned was the situation with Euromed , which has a specific relevance to textiles and , of course , is very important for the stability of the whole European / Mediterranean region .
Perhaps the Commissioner could just add his comments on that , because it is coming up for negotiations .
I think it is particularly important , particularly as we have Turkey on one side and Morocco on the other ; all would be particularly affected by our relationships with China .
Secondly , as one who does not believe in trade defence instruments and believes more in a free market , but in a free and fair market where competition is equal , I am pleased to hear that he is following those lines .
Thirdly , what exactly will happen after the Commission 's double checking finishes - I believe the Commissioner said at the end of 2008 - bearing in mind the United States has just put in place very strict import conditions ?
Will this mean more products coming on to the European market than we already have ?
Finally , Commissioner , may I take this opportunity of wishing yourself , Renate and the rest of your staff a very happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , what will the year 2008 bring to the textile industry in the European Union ?
Certainly nothing good .
China has developed into the most aggressive textile power in the world and in 2006 alone , 50 to 60 % of high technology in textiles was bought for China in the ring-spinning , weaving and texturing machine sector .
Capacities are now waiting in the wings .
European retailers and manufacturers are no longer ordering , but are waiting for better offers from China .
Further bankruptcies are imminent .
The European focus on trade will create even bigger problems for us in other sectors , not just in textiles .
The volume of products we are offered will , of course , increase .
The variety of textiles , however , will fall .
If the issue is still to have any meaning , then further restructuring of the industry in the European Union must be flanked and more effectively cushioned in social terms .
Only a very few niche producers will survive .
This development also has an extra dimension , however .
In China , working and pay conditions for textile , garment and leather workers are still abysmal .
European retailers and investors are in addition beating down prices in China .
Alongside all the competitive advantages in China , survival is made more difficult because of the strong European support given to the remaining European textile industry .
A fast buck is always at the expense of the smallest players .
As a trade unionist , I would expect the sports economy staging the Olympics in China to reveal what it is like for the female workforce there .
Today 350 to 400 people already die on a daily basis in China 's textile factories .
Up to 100 sustain mutilations to their hands every day .
Nine out of ten Chinese manufacturers violate international labour standards and even labour standards laid down in Chinese legislation !
However , business is going well for us in the retail trade .
As a trade unionist and as Vice-President of the International Textile , Garment and Leather Workers ' Federation , I would say to you that it is too late , but not too late for us to take social measures .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I think that the speeches that we are hearing are all along the same lines .
There have been very few debates recently in which we have heard people from different sides of the House representing different political sensibilities all talking the same language , with exactly the same objective .
We support free trade , without a doubt , and we support it as a very clear principle .
It is therefore not about creating barriers : it is about ensuring that the rules of the game are the same for everyone and accepting that the unfair competition by China , through imposing restrictions on access to the market and through extremely serious , permanent and systematic infringements of intellectual and industrial property rights , or the lack of controls on imports , or the question of exchange rate differences , which obviously not only affect textiles but also many other spheres of our commercial relationship , and other measures on the part of China are placing the industry in an extremely serious and very delicate situation .
The industry is continuing to exist and defend itself in order to survive and is not asking for protection , as Commissioner Mandelson rightly said in his speech , on which I certainly congratulate him .
It is not asking for barriers , it is asking for the rules of the game to be equal for everyone , and it is asking to be able to play on equal terms .
In fact the situation is changing entirely from the end of the year , and the Commission cannot just note this , observing it as if it was a meteorological phenomenon It has a large number of weapons and tools at its disposal , such as import controls , with which to ensure that the rules of the game are indeed the same , and it can use the defence mechanisms that it has at its disposal .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner Mandelson , like a British gentleman , wishes to play chess ; it is just that his opponent , the Chinese partner , really wants to play another game altogether with totally different rules .
Obviously we can talk here about monitoring , about controls on imports from China , but let us not forget something known as re-export , which is where China sends certain items to , for example , African countries , and those items then come to us as African products , although really they are products made in Chinese factories located in those countries , or actually manufactured in China .
I would like to emphasise something about which too little is said here : the matter of artificial lowering of the value of the Chinese currency .
Obviously this facilitates exports to Europe .
This is a serious threat .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Commissioner Mandelson most warmly for his clear arguments .
I had already read about them in detail in the European press .
Now for my contribution .
The future of the European textile sector in the light of China 's economic rise is at the forefront of this debate .
Time after time , the Union reveals itself as unable to anticipate China 's development adequately .
The reason for this is the Union 's inability to develop an unambiguous trade policy .
The European Union is divided into a northern and a southern camp , be it on the subject of quotas for textile products or of the reform of trade defence measures .
It is high time , therefore , that the Member States learned to see beyond their own interests alone .
An initial step in this regard is the recognition by the northern camp that the protection of its own industry against piracy and illegal State aid is not protectionism , and that an effective set of instruments is required for that protection .
The southern camp must realise that China 's rise has consequences .
The Union must no longer let itself be caught off guard , as happened in 2005 when the Multifiber Agreement expired .
Europe 's industries must seek niche markets in good time .
After all , the options for reintroducing quotas are limited until the end of 2008 .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the Memorandum of Understanding between the EU and China set to expire imminently , it seems to me that the questions presented clearly express the valid concerns of industry and those in the sector regarding the impact , in the past and present , of the importing - or rather the massive invasion - of Chinese products into the EU Member States .
On several occasions I have highlighted the fact - and I have not been the only one to do so - that genuine competition and competitiveness for our products in the internal market , more so than in the external market , is assured not only or not so much by a system of quotas , but chiefly by defending the sector from unfair competition .
Such competition is unfair because it is based on vastly lower cost and production conditions .
The added value of Chinese production at that cost is disproportionate , because of well-known production factors that are inconsistent with those on our much more civilised continent .
How can we imagine we can compete with manufacturing where the costs are infinitely lower but where , even in terms of comparative quality , the products are now almost equal to many European products ?
I believe there is really only one option open to us , the only thing that can re-establish a bit of what I might call fair trade and sustainable competition : a surveillance system over Chinese imports should be based , in my opinion , on checking that manufacturing conditions are not very different from those our industry has to provide .
We may not be able to demand that labour costs are the same but we can demand that products are definitely made without the use of child labour or in conditions that are shameful or akin to slavery , and that they are made without causing massive damage to the environment , beyond the insufficiently verified environmental safety , consumer safety and certified quality .
A different policy should also be applied to European industries that relocate outside the EU and engage in unfair competition with respect to industries that continue to manufacture within the EU , perhaps through tax measures that counteract the advantage over companies that do not relocate , to achieve a new balance .
To conclude , distribution conditions in Europe should also be monitored more closely , in view of what is certainly going on in Italy at least , where what is actually wholesale marketing masquerades as retail distribution .
( EL ) Mr President , we , as the European Union , are being called upon - even now - to redraft our strategy for the important sector of textiles and clothing .
The outlines of an overall European strategy could be drawn as follows : firstly , ensuring improved access for European products to foreign markets , through the greatest possible worldwide convergence of customs duties at low levels ; and eliminating customs barriers .
Secondly , achieving effective application of the rules of origin to imports .
Thirdly , giving substantial support , through the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , to small and medium-sized enterprises affected by liberalisation .
I think it would also be useful to set up a Community programme to support the sector , especially in the less-favoured regions of the Union .
Fourthly , ensuring that there is an effective way of combating piracy and counterfeiting , given that the textile and clothing sector accounts for more than 50 % of the recorded cases .
Fifthly , maintaining and strengthening the trade defence instruments , which are absolutely essential for combating illicit practices which harm competition .
Sixthly , guaranteeing that products imported into the European Union are subject to equivalent safety and consumer protection rules .
As regards China , we express our concern at the application of the double-checking system instead of the extension of quotas to the ten categories of products .
In any case , we ask of the Commission - we ask of you , Commissioner Mandelson - that the system be applied rigorously and effectively .
I also remind you of the ' ultimum remedium ' of the safeguards which the European Union is entitled to activate .
To conclude , Mr President , liberalisation of the world trading system does not mean tolerance of unfair competition , illegal trade tactics or , in the end , disruption of the economic and social model .
( ES ) Mr President , allow me to congratulate you , Commissioner , on your firmness and on the agreement reached in October with China regarding the system of double control of textile exports to the European Union .
In view of the removal of the quota system , which is concluding this year , the agreement will help , or should help , at least , to guarantee that the transition to a free market throughout 2008 is done correctly .
This is essential for European manufacturing companies , which have already had to deal with huge challenges , as other speakers have said .
The industry and the authorities will have to work together in order to closely monitor the development of trade patterns with China and prevent a repeat of the situation that occurred in 2005 .
We do , however , regret the fact that the categories covered by the June 2005 agreement only included eight of the 10 products that were subject to limits until 31 December of this year , and on this point I would like you to clarify what the Commission 's strategy is going to be for monitoring the two categories of products that have been excluded from the agreed double control system , which are cotton fabrics and table and kitchen linen .
There is , however , no doubt that in addition to this agreement we will need to continue to act in other areas in order to guarantee that European industry can compete under fair and reciprocal conditions , for example by making progress on the indication of origin marking - although there are the difficulties that you pointed out - or by promoting working , social and environmental conditions in the negotiation of trade agreements .
All the institutions and businesses must focus on R & D , using the wide range of possibilities offered by the Seventh Framework Programme , and we need to anticipate the changes and , at the same time , take into account the effects of restructuring by adopting the social measures needed to support workers .
Finally , I would like to welcome the agreement reached on the occasion of the Tenth Europe-China Summit that you mentioned , through which a high-level working group will be created to tackle key issues such as the trade deficit , difficulties accessing the Chinese market and intellectual property rights .
This is another step in the right direction in terms of improving our relations with China and promoting an advantageous environment for both parties .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is there still a future for the European textile industry ?
The answer lies to a great extent with the European Commission .
Last month in Beijing , Commissioner Mandelson denounced the poor safety of Chinese products , the enormous influx of counterfeit goods and the dumping of Chinese export goods .
Quite rightly , he threatened to lodge a complaint with the WTO .
Europe 's daily imports from China amount to half a billion euro , and eight out of ten of the counterfeit goods intercepted originate from that country .
As well as from counterfeits , however , the European textile sector is currently suffering from the weakness of the US dollar .
The weak dollar not only mortgages our exports , but also gives an artificial advantage to countries continuing to use the dollar as a currency .
Coincidentally , those countries are situated mainly in Asia , and , not so coincidentally , China is holding on to the dollar .
This is intolerable for the textile sector , which works with large volumes and low profit margins .
Our industry cannot and must not fall victim to a strong European currency .
Hence the need to use the euro more and more in our trade relations .
After all , that was , I thought , one of the reasons for the introduction of our single currency five years ago .
( PT ) The consequence of globalisation within the European area is that productive undertakings are the losers and undertakings exporting technology are the winners .
That is all very clearly reflected in internal cohesion .
In the case of the textile industry , the fact that the sector is mainly made up of small and medium-sized enterprises is a disadvantage on the market that represents 6 % of total world trade and an estimated turnover of EUR 566 billion .
In addition , many producer regions are suffering the consequences of economic restructuring , so that it is difficult to achieve sustainability in the sector .
European production is forced to compete with that of countries that artificially devalue their currency , do not respect environmental protection rules or bear the costs of environmental protection , that frequently infringe intellectual property rights or , even more seriously , on the social and employment front , apart from having much lower wage costs , do not apply such stringent worker protection measures as Europe does .
It is therefore all the more pressing to make sure that WTO rules are respected and that the Commission is able to monitor imports , not allowing a veil to be artificially drawn over the excesses noted in practice with China as regards textile imports , as has happened in the past .
The Commission must adopt all the measures needed to safeguard the interests of the European Union , including if necessary the imposition of quotas on China , possibly up to the end of 2008 , within the WTO legal framework and must also insist upon total respect for the rules of fair play .
European producers lack incentives for research and development and for improving the skills of the labour force , they do not have appropriate access to external markets or an effective means of preventing counterfeiting .
Intellectual property is basic to the added value of the sector and must be defended at all costs in order to encourage production with a high added value .
Finally , Mr President , Commissioner , consumer safety must not be forgotten .
It falls to the Commission to prevent any product that might be harmful to our families from coming into the homes of Europe 's citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , in Europe , and particularly in Greece , the textile sector consists mainly of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Many of these enterprises are developing in the region .
We , as the European Union , have a duty to ensure the viability of the sector within our borders , and to guarantee protection for our businesses against unfair competition and illegal trade .
The European textile sector must become more competitive at international level .
We need to support measures for the modernisation of our enterprises , innovation , research and development .
Of course we must take serious account of the fact that on 1 January 2008 the transition period for quotas on imports of textile products from China ends .
In the wider context , however , and for the sake of European consumers , we shall also have to ensure the enforcement of binding rules on ' made in ... ' labelling for textile products , and effective application of the surveillance system for imports from third countries .
( FR ) Mr President , when I spoke in this chamber on this same subject in July 2005 , I said that the lessons we would learn from the textiles crisis would eventually help us to maintain and develop other sectors of the European economy .
I think we have made some progress , but not very much .
Here we are , still demanding more research and development and asking the Commission to make sure that intellectual copyrights are respected .
These are decisive factors but they are not enough .
It makes me think that , instead of being a factor of the growth of trade and economic development , the WTO and its rules act as a brake .
Trade is obviously a source of growth , but in order to be so , it needs to work in both directions .
The textiles issue in fact throws up two fundamental problems : the absence of an EU industrial policy and the question of the European interest .
As regards the European interest , I welcome with some satisfaction the Commission communication entitled ' The European Interest : Succeeding in the age of globalisation ' , published in early October , which says that we need : ' to have ground rules which do not impinge on our capacity to protect our interests and to safeguard our high product standards relating to health , safety , the environment and consumer protection ' .
We will not tolerate third countries that want to operate in the European Union bending the rules applied to the internal market .
Commissioner , let us start by applying these principles to the textile industry .
( NL ) Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for his clear intervention .
I should like to address two remarks to him , however .
The textile industry is not only important to southern Europe , as Belgium , too , for example , still has a very flourishing textile industry , which provides 25 000 jobs .
Commissioner , the disappearance of quotas for the 10 finished products on 1 January threatens to have serious repercussions again not only for the sectors concerned , but also for upstream businesses .
Taking the example of the jeans sector , if this is swamped with Chinese products , whether or not at dumping prices , the producers of the denim material and of the thread are also directly affected .
Thus , of course , the ramifications are much broader than they seem at first glance .
My second remark , Commissioner , is that the ' monitoring system ' currently only monitors the volume of the imported goods .
It would be much more efficient if monitoring were also carried out on the basis of prices - and this a priori , or at the time licences are issued .
Only in this way is a genuinely proactive , preventive approach possible .
Commissioner Mandelson , we should also like you to tell us when the Commission is planning to take action , as this is rather confusing and vague .
In other words , how big do imports from China have to grow and how much do the prices of these imports have to decrease before you actually start to take action ?
It strikes us as no more than logical that we obtain some clarity on this , too , in advance .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I find myself in broad agreement with most of the sentiments that have been expressed during this debate .
However , I would at the outset reject Mr Belder 's view that we do not have a common trade policy in the EU , and that the Member States are so divided that we cannot pursue a policy on , for example , textiles .
Our experience in textiles demonstrates only too clearly that we do , in fact , have a common trade policy , through which we have been able to bring together Member States with different emphases and different orientations , to weld together their views and to produce a common trade policy in textiles that has been consistently pursued .
There may be differences on the use of trade defence instruments , but through the review and anticipated reform I want to build fresh consensus and solidarity amongst Member States on the use of those trade defence instruments , and notably on their greater use by SMEs , for which I want to bring forward proposals .
Some specific points have been made , for example about the double-checking surveillance which will be in operation in 2008 .
The Commission will monitor textile imports from China in as close to real time as possible .
This includes double-checking surveillance and any other monitoring means at the Commission 's disposal , such as the TAXUD surveillance , which provides trade data on the basis of actual trade .
In the face of a sudden surge of Chinese textiles , the Commission stands ready to use all the instruments at its disposal , should the situation so require .
However , I would stress that the 2005 deal was a once-and-for-all deal , and the Commission does not intend to make proposals for the extension of the levels agreed .
As such , it is not opposed to more trade , and an increase could be expected .
Should the upsurge , however , take such dimensions that action is justified , this will be based on existing requirements and criteria .
We do rely on the co-responsibility of China for this smooth transition .
China is well aware that it is not in its interests to repeat what happened in 2005 .
We also rely on the economic operators ' self-interest to avoid a recurrence of 2005 .
Textiles are now moving into the same category as any other product , so the usual instruments - including trade defence instruments - apply , with the usual standards .
The issue of EU assistance for the textiles industry has been raised .
Let me make two last points on this .
At the EU level , the Commission has committed over EUR 70 million , for research and development under the sixth framework programme , to textile and clothing projects , while two innovation project proposals have acquired funding within the Europe Innova framework .
As far as the Globalisation Fund is concerned , it is as open to the textile sector as to other sectors .
There have , so far , been eight formal applications for a contribution from the European Globalisation Fund , of which four concern textiles .
None of these textile cases have yet been approved by the budgetary authority .
They are all still being assessed by the Commission services .
Lastly , I turn to the issue of the Euro-Mediterranean , raised by Mr Sturdy .
The Commission has set up a formal Euro-Mediterranean dialogue on the future of the textile and clothing industry , in order to define common strategies towards achieving better competitiveness of the industry in the Euro-Mediterranean zone .
The objective of the dialogue is to bring Euro-Mediterranean countries and candidate countries together , in order to find common solutions for improving their competitiveness .
I look forward to receiving proposals emerging from that dialogue .
I have received six motions for a resolution submitted in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Economic and trade relations with Korea ( debate )
The next item is the report by David Martin , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the trade and economic relations with Korea .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this report had to be put together rather quickly , because we anticipated - we even hoped - that the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and Korea might be concluded by the end of this year .
That is clearly not going to be the case but , nevertheless , we are pleased that Parliament is able to report today and we hope , through our report today , that we will be able to influence the Commission 's position .
To get to where we are today , some of my colleagues had to work extremely hard , and I would like to thank Christopher Ford from the Trade Committee and Emmanuelle Le Texier from the PSE Group , who worked above and beyond the normal call of duty to get this report prepared in time .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Mandelson and his services for the good cooperation I have had from the Commission in producing this report , and also the Korean Ambassador , whose assistance enabled me to get an insight into the Korean position on these negotiations .
Historically , free trade agreements between the European Union and Asian countries have been trade-light , despite their name .
I think this could be the exception to the rule .
Korea has shown a willingness and an ability to negotiate a far-reaching and comprehensive bilateral trade agreement .
Korea is a significant player in the region in Asia .
It is now a wealthy country , the 11th largest economy in the world .
Its per capita income is comparable to Spain .
It is an economy that is growing quickly , and trade between our two regions - between Korea and the European Union - reached EUR 60 billion last year .
So it is a deal worth doing , and , if we can get it right , I think it is a win-win situation .
The Korean manufacturing industry , for example , can win through access to European services , enabling Korean manufacturing to expand and to compete more favourably .
We can win , through access to the Korean market for some of our key goods and services .
The timetable , as I mentioned , was originally set for conclusion by the end of this year .
It now realistically looks like May next year will be the earliest negotiations can be concluded , but I am encouraged that , after five rounds of negotiations , talks seem to be getting down to the nitty gritty and seem to be getting serious .
There are clearly still significant gaps between the European Union position on issues like country-of-origin labelling , technical standards for the automobile industry and on tariff concessions for goods . But the key point is that negotiations are now being conducted at a serious and detailed level .
My main concerns come in the field of , firstly , social and environmental standards .
Even with this delay , the Korean agreement looks like being the first of the new generation of FTAs that we agree .
As such , it can be a template for further FTAs , and I would like to see our ambitions in relation to environmental and social standards raised .
I would like to ensure that there is a dispute settlement mechanism in the Agreement .
I do not believe that we should settle for anything less than the United States have settled for , and they have got a dispute settlement mechanism in their report .
I believe issues like ratification of key ILO conventions and the post-2012 application of any new climate change agreement cannot be left to mere gentlemen 's agreements or simply encouraging people to do things .
We have to actually have some mechanism for settling disputes .
I hope the Commission will look at this again .
I also want to argue that the Kaesong Industrial Complex should be looked at sympathetically in relation to such an agreement .
I accept the Commission 's approach that , firstly , we have to get the Free Trade Agreement ; but if we can get the FTA , before signature we should look at how we can assist South Korea in terms of encouraging North Korea to come into the real world .
The Kaesong Industrial Complex , based in North Korea but run by South Korean companies , is a way of engaging North Korea with the rest of the world , and it is a process that we should be encouraging .
I believe that , through our trade agreement , we can do much to assist South Korea in this process .
It is not just a matter of interest for South Korea but it is a matter of interest for the world .
It makes the world a safer place if North and South Korea can cooperate .
I believe this is an important free trade agreement .
I believe it is one that both the EU and Korea can win if we get the right deal .
I support the Commission 's view that we should not rush to a settlement , and that a good settlement is better late than a bad settlement that we get early .
I hope , when Korea changes president at the beginning of next year , that the new president will instruct his administration to work tirelessly to reach this agreement before the summer .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome the excellent and speedy work done by the rapporteur , Mr Martin , and his colleagues and staff .
Together they have produced a comprehensive and balanced report , which I commend .
Parliament 's endorsement of this motion for a resolution will send a clear signal of support for the Commission 's policy of seeking an ambitious and comprehensive free trade agreement ( FTA ) with South Korea , as part of the strategy laid out in the Global Europe Communication of October 2006 .
The choice of South Korea as partner for this generation of free trade agreements reflects the important economic and political potential of the country , but it is also an acknowledgement of the reality that important barriers exist and persist to stronger economic and trade ties between us .
The motion is timely : free trade negotiations with South Korea were launched in May 2007 , and have progressed rapidly so far .
We are ready to work for an early conclusion so long as the substance and quality of the outcome are right .
That is our bottom line and it will remain so .
Our FTA with South Korea should be fully WTO-compatible .
That goes without saying .
We seek far-reaching liberalisation in trade in goods and services , as well as in investment .
We are paying special attention to non-tariff barriers and to rules and regulations in key areas , such as intellectual property rights , competition and government procurement .
I fully agree with the importance the report attaches to non-tariff barriers and to effective dispute settlement machinery in this and other aspects of the prospective agreement .
Studies have suggested that , in some sectors in Korea , non-tariff barriers are now more important than the tariffs themselves .
Substantial improvements on these behind-the-border barriers to trade , creating real market access for EU exports to South Korea , will be absolutely key to conclusion of the FTA .
On a few of the specific concerns that have been raised , the question of Kaesong raises complex technical and political questions .
We welcome the amendments proposed in this regard , because they highlight the complexity of the question , which will require careful consideration .
The recognition and promotion of the social and environmental aspects of trade - sustainable development - will be an integral part of the free trade agreement with South Korea .
I agree that effective enforcement of standards is key to securing an ambitious and effective result on sustainable development in this agreement .
However , a cooperative tone can achieve much more in this area than the appearance of coercion .
We expect to cover a greater number of multilateral environmental agreements , and to include issues such as decent work and a stronger commitment to ILO core conventions , and expect to go beyond other recent agreements , such as those covered by the Korea-US FTA .
We will also aim to involve the social partners and civil society in this cooperation .
The sustainability impact assessment has been launched .
The main findings of draft reports in the different phases will be discussed with civil society .
We have set up the SIA to ensure that there will be continuous and rapid feedback into the negotiation process .
This builds on the initial contacts we had with civil society at the start of the negotiations .
We have also worked closely with Parliament .
The cooperation with the rapporteur and the Committee on International Trade has been excellent .
I myself , as well as the Director-General , have regularly updated that Committee .
As far as the ratification procedure is concerned , this will depend on the content of the agreement itself , but the Commission is in favour of involving Parliament as much as is possible under the Treaty .
Finally , a possible future FTA covering the bilateral trade relations with South Korea will be part of an overall and coherent framework of EU relations with South Korea .
The existing bilateral framework agreement will continue to govern bilateral cooperation and political dialogue .
To conclude , the goal of this FTA is to complement an ambitious Doha outcome by going deeper and further bilaterally with South Korea .
Past experience shows that such agreements can road test liberalisation solutions and become stepping-stones for the future evolution of the WTO .
An ambitious and comprehensive FTA with South Korea is not just commercially significant , but will also mean an important upgrading of the bilateral EU-Korea relationship .
It is also a recognition of the engagement of the EU on the Korean Peninsula and in the region .
In a wider sense , it is part of our broader commitment to ensuring that EU trade policy in Asia is keeping up with the dramatic development of that region , and securing the benefits in terms of jobs , growth and growing trade for both sides .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy thanks the rapporteur for adopting our proposals .
We think an agreement is reasonable , but would nevertheless point out that there have been considerable sectoral problems with Korea in the past .
I am thinking here of the discussion on dumping prices in the shipbuilding industry in recent years , for instance , where we also had lawsuits .
We wish to ascertain whether these sectoral problems are being resolved in order to ensure that both sides really are opening up and Korea is not the unilateral beneficiary , and that - even when we think of our pharmaceutical industry , the car industry , of the many industrial sectors - reciprocity is guaranteed .
One particular subject was Kaesong .
The Commissioner has just addressed the issue of how to involve these North Korean special zones .
According to what I am hearing , eight other special zones are planned .
In the opinion of the Committee on Industry , international standards must apply here .
We cannot undermine our own free trade agreements in this way .
We therefore ask that this aspect in particular be thoroughly checked .
Otherwise , many thanks - to the Commission , too - for these negotiations !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , let me first congratulate my colleague , the rapporteur Mr Martin , for a high-quality and comprehensive report .
Our negotiators should take note of it .
We should also learn from the recently completed USA-Korea FTA , which shows that speed of conclusion is important , but should not be the top priority .
The main goal should clearly be to accomplish high quality and an even playing field in flows of trade .
Today , those flows are still seriously impeded by non-trade barriers .
Korea does not apply international norms or labelling requirements regarding automotive products or other important products such as pharmaceuticals , cosmetics and electronics .
There is also a need for clarification in the area of intellectual property rights and counterfeiting .
These issues need to be resolved before we sign this FTA , in order to ensure free and fair trade .
Unless all these issues are resolved to our complete satisfaction , I would advise the Commission not to sign this agreement .
I admire the economic miracle of South Korea , which is reflected in the fact that it is the European Union 's fourth largest trading partner .
Having a strong democracy has obviously benefited them greatly , and one has to feel sorry for their brothers and sisters in North Korea .
We should be prepared to do all we can to bring about an emotional reunion similar to the one we saw in the late 1980s between East and West Germany .
This should , of course , be based on the principle of democracy , which has brought so much success to South Korea .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to address three aspects .
First of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Martin , on behalf of my group .
The report has been written with great care and it actually alludes to all the points that are important and have to be debated .
It also advises on the appropriate caution to be exercised on certain subjects , e.g. in the automotive sector .
In this respect I believe it is an excellent report , which is a good prerequisite and should accordingly be considered by the Commission and the Council .
I am pleased to hear that the Commissioner has responded so meticulously to it .
Secondly , I should like to ask the Commissioner : how will negotiations with Korea generally proceed , in your view ?
Negotiations are indeed underway and are at a very difficult stage .
It seemed very much better at the beginning , I believe , than we have thought in the meantime .
Parallel negotiations with all the ASEAN nations are also being added , of course .
These negotiations are also - as far as I have gathered from the Minutes - at a very difficult stage .
What is the Commission 's assessment of this ?
What influence will our ongoing negotiations with ASEAN have on negotiations with Korea ?
My last question to the Commissioner relates to the fact that the Heads of State or Government are just about to sign the Reform Treaty today , 13 December .
Under this Reform Treaty , Parliament will in future have a great deal more influence in the retail sector , for which we in this Parliament have been fighting for a very long time .
I should like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Mandelson in particular for always having backed this .
My question , however , is this : can you imagine that the Commission will support us when we ask the Council for the right that has already been brought forward under the upcoming free trade agreement and that Parliament will therefore keep the relevant endorsement obligation ?
Can we assume that we have you on our side in this , Commissioner ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would also , on behalf of my group and very formally , like to congratulate the rapporteur David Martin on the excellent quality of the report that he is presenting to the House .
In reality , not all reports are equal .
It is important that , although here we vote on all sorts of documents , we point out when some of them have a content and a solidity that enable them to be examined in detail , and cover all the subjects that are up for discussion .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur and the team that supported him in making this happen .
It is true that we do not talk about Korea very much here ; we do not talk about it enough , although it is undoubtedly one of our major commercial allies , and indeed the fourth largest outside of Europe , as the report states .
The European Union is the leading investor in Korea , which is also , undoubtedly , one of the strongest democracies in the whole of that region .
If we consider what I have just said , on the one hand , therefore , and on the other hand the difficulties in the multilateral context and the reality that there are obstacles to accessing the market for European products and services , which are major non-tariff obstacles , it is obvious that this makes it a very clear candidate for a bilateral agreement that has the full support of Parliament .
This agreement , however , needs to be well put together , well negotiated and ambitious .
There are difficulties in very specific areas .
I would highlight the subject of services , which has already been mentioned , and the subject of intellectual piracy , in one of the countries with the greatest Internet penetration in the world , and where , therefore , there are very specific problems resulting from the fact that copyright and rights protecting the audiovisual sphere are not taken seriously .
Finally , on the question of Kaesong : my group is going to support the text as it is in the report ; in other words , we recognise and understand the political content of this area between South Korea and North Korea , but we understand that , if free trade with the European Union were simply introduced into this context , it could cause serious problems , and therefore we would not support the simple inclusion of the Kaesong area in a possible agreement with the European Union .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in rising to speak on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in the debate on economic and trade relations between the European Union and Korea , I wish to draw attention to the following matters .
In a situation where Korea has signed a Free Trade Agreement with EFTA and ASEAN and also with the United States , but will not sign such an agreement with the European Union , the competitiveness of European companies taking advantage of duty-free access to the Korean market will decline .
This will have a negative impact on the level of economic growth and the level of employment in EU countries .
Secondly , according to analyses carried out by independent research centres , as a result of the conclusion of a free trade agreement , two thirds of the benefits accruing from such an agreement would go to Korea , and only one third to the European Union .
It is therefore necessary for Korea , in addition to this agreement , to make a commitment to the EU in which Korea undertakes to observe European social standards , and in particular the basic elements linked to decent work , as well as environmental and consumer protection standards .
Thirdly , this approach gives an opportunity to lead on to honest competition between Korean and European companies .
It is only then that Korean companies will include in their manufacturing costs the overall costs of labour , environmental protection and consumer protection , and thus the price of their products will reflect the full manufacturing cost .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , let me start by thanking Mr David Martin for his report and by underlining the crucial importance of this dossier .
The EU-Korea Treaty will be the first application of the new EU trade doctrine Global Europe , a doctrine that is highly controversial , not least because it seeks such deep market access conditions through the removal of all kinds of barriers to all-out import penetration , precisely at a time when more and more people are becoming aware that there are very many losers as well as some winners in a completely liberalised global economy .
On the positive side , the report sets out some very good standards for trade and social and environmental fields , which Greens absolutely support , and in that respect I think the report sets a very important precedent for further upcoming parliamentary responses to other free trade agreements , with India and ASEAN , for example .
So we welcome the fact that the report insists that there must be no exceptions to the rule that access to the European market is conditional on compliance with environmental protection standards .
We welcome the fact that it demands that the trade agreement with Korea incorporates binding social and environmental clauses and , to our mind , this by itself makes it difficult to contemplate that the North Korean Kaesong industrial complex would be included within the FTA rules .
Most importantly , it intends to give teeth to those binding clauses by demanding that they are subject to the standard dispute settlement mechanism .
But we do have some serious misgivings about this report as well .
First , there is the demand to scrap all non-tariff barriers ( NTBs ) to trade without any attempt at differentiating what really constitutes a legitimate NTB and what does not .
We should not assume that everything that prevents unfettered free trade is an illegitimate obstacle .
There are some very good reasons to qualify trade , especially when public policy wants to put in place controls for social , health or environmental reasons .
We are also opposed to the full introduction of the so-called ' Singapore issues ' into the free trade agreement .
Again there are good reasons why total investment freedom or public procurement should remain outside the scope of a trade agreement .
Korea had a devastating experience with the free flow of capital in the late 1990s and they have used sheltered public procurement policies to get back on their feet since then .
Now , it is not up to us to judge whether they should offer those items on their side , but we are allowed to judge for our side , and my Group does not support giving unlimited freedom to foreign investors in Europe or destroying the possibility of engaging in public spending for social goals through specific domestic procurement policies .
( NL ) Mr President , South Korea is one of the EU 's main trading partners outside Europe , something that is highlighted clearly in this balanced report .
It is a country that arouses sympathy owing to its contiguity with the most backward , most totalitarian communist regime in the world .
Trade relations have grown substantially in recent years , which in itself is a very good thing , but that does not mean there are no problems .
If we conclude a free trade agreement with South Korea , it must be based on complete reciprocity .
South Korea still has far too many tariff and non-tariff barriers for us to really talk of reciprocity .
Europe must insist on the elimination of all these barriers , and must be able to come to agreements that are at least as advantageous as those of the free trade agreement between South Korea and the United States .
( DE ) Mr President , as leader of the European Parliament Delegation for relations with the Korean Peninsula , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur specifically and say that I am very happy to back this report .
I should also like to emphasise something that many still do not know : that the Republic of Korea is an important trading partner .
Precisely for this reason it is important that we conclude a free trade agreement .
The aim of this agreement must be to achieve fair and equitable trading conditions to our mutual advantage and our mutual benefit .
I can also say that I am pleased that the negotiations have been running substantially better in the fifth round than they did in the fourth round .
I should like to encourage Korea to support EU proposals for the faster and reciprocal abolition of import duties .
The EU 's target for this would be 2015 .
As we all know , the motor vehicle sector is and remains a challenge in the negotiations .
What we as the European Union expect is that our safety standards are accepted by Korea just as we , too , accept Korea 's standards in this sector .
I am optimistic that the barriers in the pharmaceutical products and services sectors , and particularly in the banking and legal advice sectors , can be removed .
With regard to Kaesong , I should like to say that it would be significant for the negotiating partners to find a way of supporting the Kaesong project and other projects , on economic and political grounds , particularly for introducing North Korea to the international community of states .
We are generally on the right track and I hope that there will be a conclusion at the beginning or in the first half of 2008 .
( FR ) Mr President , I would first like to thank Mr Martin for the quality of his report .
When negotiating this future trade agreement with Korea , we would do well to remember that our priority should remain multilateralism , because we know that the excessive proliferation of bilateral agreements is damaging to the regulated multilateral structure that we belong to .
That is why , if we enter a new era of bilateral trade agreements , these should include guarantees and principles , some of which are mentioned in Mr Martin 's report .
The future free trade agreement with Korea should be up-to-date and include restrictive environmental and social requirements such as those in the fundamental ILO conventions , which aim to promote proper working conditions .
Moreover , following Parliament 's commitment to enable better access to generic medicines , I am delighted that the provisions on public health have been included and that our wish has been respected that any demands that would limit our partners ' ability to make use of the flexibilities provided for in the atypical Doha declaration agreement should not be included .
On the other hand , despite its positive points , it is unacceptable that this text makes no reference to the fate of workers in the Kaesong free trade area , as our rapporteur wanted , and I deplore this .
( PL ) Mr President , Korea is one of the leading economies in the world , but at the same time it has the greatest difference in income among the OECD states .
Korea is the EU 's fourth largest trade partner outside Europe , whereas in 2006 the EU was the largest foreign investor in Korea .
The main problem in our bilateral trade relations is difficulty of access to the market across non-tariff barriers , including a lack of accepted norms and international standards .
A free trade agreement with Korea should include protection for foreign investments , a competition policy , public order transparency and trade facilitation .
We must also bear in mind , though , that this agreement could have a negative impact on the European automobile industry , so the Commission must give careful consideration to the strategy of gradual removal of EU import duties .
First of all , non-tariff barriers on the Korean side must be withdrawn , so that it does not turn out that the sole beneficiary of this cooperation is Korea .

Mr President , I wish to join with the other speakers in congratulating Mr Martin on his report on a free trade agreement with South Korea , which is the EU 's fourth largest trading partner outside Europe and the world 's eleventh largest economy .
I want to deal briefly with two issues .
Firstly , the opposition of trade union and farmers ' groups to the free trade agreement with Korea and , secondly , the case of the industrial zone .
In the first case , we need to place the opposition in perspective .
Thousands demonstrated against the US agreement with Korea and a number of people burnt themselves to death .
Rather than thousands , we have only dozens protesting , possibly because we are attempting to include in our free trade agreement an associated political cooperation agreement - social , political and labour clauses that will help protect labour standards in the south and may well enhance them .
At the same time , we will not have the discussion over rice which Korea had with the United States .
With respect to Kaesong , we are not arguing that this should be included .
We are arguing that we should not automatically exclude it .
That is a rather different position , and I hope that on that basis the Liberals will be able to change the way they vote .
As the former Prime Minister of Jamaica once said , the only thing worse than being exploited is not being exploited .
Some of us had the opportunity to visit Kaesong last month , as part of an EU workshop on economic reform held in North Korea .
I saw thousands of happy North Koreans flooding from the zone , smartly dressed , because they have standards of living six times higher than in the North .
This is an opportunity , politically and economically , to actually change that regime and move things in the right direction .
Kaesong can transform the North and , allowing for the difficulties , should be encouraged and not killed .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me make three brief points .
First of all , on the issue of Kaesong , I think that Mr Ford 's formulation - that we should not automatically exclude Kaesong - is the right approach to take .
We in the Commission will be very prudent on this subject , but I think , on that basis , the amendment is probably a worthwhile one .
Secondly , I was asked about the overall prospects for the negotiation .
Well , in this job I have not discovered a trade negotiation that is not in some difficulty .
However , I would say that this negotiation is in less difficulty than some other trade negotiations I could identify .
Lastly , Ms Mann asks whether the European Parliament can obtain rights earlier than the Treaty ratification in respect of this agreement .
When asked about this in a different context , I overstepped my collective Commission responsibility in my enthusiasm , so today I shall be a little bit more careful and simply stress that we will seek to involve Parliament as much as possible .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
1 .
Financial year 2008 as modified by the Council ( vote )
- Financial year 2008
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , the second reading budget conciliation between the two arms of the Budgetary Authority was held on 23 November 2007 .
Parliament achieved a budget for results on its major objectives : financing for Galileo ( EUR 2.4 billion ) via a revision of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) and the use of the flexibility instrument ( EUR 200 million ) ; significant further use of the flexibility instrument ( EUR 70 million ) to finance an increase in the spending on common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
The Committee on Budgets voted its second reading amendments , further to the conciliation outcome , on 29 November 2007 .
After the technical check of the figures , a small number of technical adjustments were necessary to ensure full respect of the conciliation outcome of 23 November as regards revised financial framework ceilings and the overall level of payments .
The agreed modifications are the following :
First , in heading 1a , commitment appropriations are adjusted as follows :
Amendment 335 :
06 02 09 01 ( Galileo Supervisory Authority ) to EUR 7 460 000
06 02 09 02 ( Galileo Supervisory Authority ) to EUR 3 100 000
08 07 01 ( Research Cooperation - Transport ) to EUR 348 922 000
Amendment 331 :
02 02 01 ( Competitiveness and Innovation ) to EUR 126 300 000
Amendment 69 :
06 03 03 ( TENs - T ) to EUR 955 852 600
Second , in heading 1b , in order to meet the overall level of payments agreed at the conciliation , payment appropriations are modified on lines :
Amendment 27 :
04 02 17 ( ESF ) to EUR 3 823 198 181
Amendment 140 :
13 03 16 ( ERDF convergence ) to EUR 10 606 637 496
Amendment 141 :
13 03 18 ( ERDF competitiveness ) to EUR 2 540 832 078
All these technical adjustments were unanimously approved by the Committee on Budgets on Monday 10 December .
Third , a number of technical / nomenclature changes will be made , mainly as regards pilot projects and preparatory actions .
These changes have been presented to the President of Parliament .
These modifications do not change any figures , nor do they change any MFF classifications .
( The technical adjustments were accepted )
- After the vote :
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I emphasise , before going on to comment on the results of the approval of the European Union budget for 2008 , that today is a particularly pleasing day for me , not only as a European , but also as a citizen of Portugal .
I am of course referring to that historic event - the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon - due to take place in just over an hour in my country 's capital .
Following the enlargement of the European Union to 27 Member States , it is another decisive step in European integration , that will make Europe more democratic , more representative , more flexible and effective in the way it works than it was before .
If I might make a brief and early summing up of the achievements of the Portuguese Presidency , I would point to three important areas of success for the future of the European Union .
They are the agreement making it possible for the EU Reform Treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon , to be signed today , the holding of the EU-Africa Summit and of the EU-Brazil Summit .
To that we might now also add the important agreement we were able to reach on the financing of the strategic Galileo Programme .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we have the second reading of the 2008 budget , the final stage of a long process of negotiation which finally ended very successfully .
I am pleased to report the agreement reached between our two institutions in the concertation meeting on 23 November , that dealt in full with all the budget proposals for 2008 on which we had agreed by that date .
In accordance with the procedures , I must point out that the Council will be able to accept the maximum rate of increase resulting from your second reading .
I note , however , that some small adjustments are still needed as regards the classification of expenditure on which the Council reserves its rights .


In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity to express once more my gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Böge and to the two rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , to my colleagues in the Council , to Commissioner Grybauskaité and to all those who have helped to bring this very demanding budgetary procedure to a successful conclusion , culminating in Parliament 's approval .
Minister , you have uttered , among other things , the sentence I was waiting for .
I therefore note that the budgetary procedure has been completed in accordance with the treaty provisions and the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 .
I also note that , in accordance with Article 13 of the interinstitutional agreement , the Council and Parliament agree to accept the maximum rate of increase of non-compulsory expenditure that comes out of the second reading in Parliament .
Consequently , the budgetary procedure can be declared complete and the budget definitively adopted .
( Applause )
As you know , the President is currently in Lisbon where a small signature ceremony is taking place .
My powers as vice-president end here .
The official signature of the budget for the financial year 2008 will be on Tuesday , 18 December , at the plenary session in Brussels .
2 .
Draft general budget 2008 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) ( vote )
- Report : Kyösti Virrankoski , Ville Itälä
3 .
EC / Montenegro : Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( vote )
- Recommendation : Marcello Vernola
4 .
Cooperation between the Fundamental Rights Agency and the Council of Europe ( vote )
- Report : Adamos Adamou
5 .
Ovine and caprine animals : electronic identification ( vote )
- Report : Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf
6 .
Maintenance obligations ( vote )
- Report : Genowefa Grabowska
7 .
10th Anniversary of the Mine Ban Treaty ( Ottawa Convention ) ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution ( B6-0518 / 2207 )
8 .
EU-China Summit - EU-China human rights dialogue ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
- After the vote :
( NL ) Mr President , on a point of order under Rules 114 and 166 , which Commissioner Mandelson will recognise : when we are received in China , we use an official symbol , the flag .
Now this is being removed from the Treaty , and I would call on all countries to follow Germany 's lead and recognise this officially as a symbol once more , so that we can be received with an official symbol throughout the world .
This will all be passed on to the competent authorities .
9 .
Combating the rise of extremism in Europe ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
10 .
Montenegro ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
11 .
Shipwrecks in the Sea of Asov / Black Sea and the subsequent oil pollution ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
12 .
Deposit-guarantee schemes ( vote )
- Report : Christian Ehler
13 .
Asset management II ( vote )
- Report : Wolf Klinz
- Before the vote on Amendment 2 :
Mr President , I would like to clarify our amendment and insert the words : ' indirectly , for example ' , so the text now reads : ' ... the product to retail investors directly or indirectly , for example by bundling it with other retail products ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
14 .
Textile imports ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
Before we proceed to the vote on the last report , allow me to dedicate this last vote to a fellow Member who will be leaving us in a few days ' time and who has done a wonderful job for us here , at the European Parliament , and for the whole of Europe .
It is , of course , Jean-Louis Bourlanges .
( Applause )
Mr Bourlanges , I hope that the warmth of this applause tells you , more than any speech , how much we will miss you .
We wish you all the best .
15 .
Economic and trade relations with Korea ( vote )
- Report : David Martin
Voting time
Before starting the votes , Mr Schulz has asked to speak on a point of order .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have asked to speak on behalf of my group for two reasons : firstly , for one very general reason - on account of yesterday 's events here in this House - and secondly , because I have a request in connection with the forthcoming votes .
I should like to deal with the general reason first , however .
Mr President , would you please issue a statement about yesterday 's events on behalf of my group , particularly about the very specific case , the case concerning our ushers here in this House .
I wish to say : it is every man and every woman 's absolute right to be able to express their opinion in this House .
We are also accustomed to seeing posters and T-shirts and to everyone being free to express their opinion here .
Anyone who is in favour of a referendum is entitled to express this in this House .
What we experienced yesterday , however , is not acceptable in the context of this freedom of opinion .
( Applause )
We can argue here about what individual fellow Members are doing here , how they conduct themselves , whether or not they shout .
One thing is not acceptable , however , and that is that the ushers in this House , for whom - and I speak on behalf of all my fellow Members , of almost all Members , I believe , in this House - I have the greatest personal and professional respect ...
( Applause )
What is not right - and I also speak specifically on behalf of my fellow Member Mr Daul and , I think , also , on behalf of Mr Watson , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Wurtz - is that ushers in this House are physically and verbally assaulted in a heated debate : ushers , who have been discharging the duties of their office , and were described yesterday as the Gestapo and SS .
This is a disgrace , Mr President !
I think the House should express its total solidarity with the ushers .
( Sustained applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , the ushers in this House are not private individuals ; they are officials of this Parliament .
They are the long arm of the President in this House .
When an usher is physically assaulted here , when an usher is punched here , only one thing is possible : the Member who has done this must be identified !
The offence must be reported to the police and his or her immunity must be removed immediately !
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of my Group I should like to address the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , particularly Mr Crowley , although I do not know whether he is here , with regard to the votes - that is , the votes on the resolutions on extremism , the EU / China human rights dialogue , Montenegro and the ban on land mines .
The UEN Group is a co-signatory to these resolutions .
As long as no official apology is forthcoming from the UEN Group for yesterday 's incidents in this House , I see myself , as representative of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , being unable to continue to cooperate with the UEN Group .
In particular I refer to the resolution on combating the rise of extremism in Europe .
It was pointed out in the third recital on behalf of the UEN Group , among others , that we condemn racism in Europe and we do so with reference to the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This should have been signed here yesterday and was shouted down by a large proportion of the members of that group .
Please withdraw your signature under this joint resolution .
You cannot adopt a resolution relating to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which you all hooted down yesterday !
( Applause and uproar )
Yesterday you expressed the fact that you do not want this Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Remove your signature !
Our cooperation with you is finished !
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I have this stack of paper in front of me , which gives you an idea of the amount of work we still have to get through this morning .
Some of my fellow Members have nevertheless asked to speak .
I do not wish to start a lengthy debate .
Mr Daul has asked to speak , as has Mrs Muscardini , so I will let them speak for one minute and no more .
( Noise )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will be very brief .
I was in the chamber at nine o 'clock this morning awaiting an apology for the personal attack on the ushers .
As one was not forthcoming I made my statement at nine o 'clock this morning , and I am not going to make it again .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have been sitting in this Parliament for more than 18 years , and in this Parliament , with my fellow Members , I have always defended human and civil rights and my speeches in the Chamber and questions and motions for resolutions bear witness to this .
I will not take lessons from Mr Schulz because Mr Schulz is not the repository of the truth , either in this Chamber or outside it .
Democracy , Mr President , is a value that must be defended , and this includes showing respect for individuals and groups .
I feel embarrassed for Mr Schulz because he has said things he must feel ashamed of .
The UEN Group is behind all Parliament 's officials , and particularly the ushers , who on many occasions this year have tried to defend the right to speech and expression that has so often been denied by a few majority groups in Parliament .
For this reason , Mr President , the UEN supports the ushers , the UEN believes in fundamental rights , and the UEN calls for respect for duties and respect for people .
Mr Schulz , take your own signature off !
Ladies and gentlemen , are there any other group chairmen or women here who would like to speak ?
I deliberately say ' group chairmen or women ' because I am not going to let all 785 members speak on this matter .
I cannot see any group chairmen or women , so this item is closed .
( Applause )
I will simply add something that a poet once said , which is that the most beautiful hymns are sung when bombs are falling .
I think the one we heard here yesterday was wonderful , for that very reason !
( Applause )
Mr Salafranca wishes to speak on another matter .
( ES ) Mr President , yesterday there was a brutal terrorist attack in the city of Beirut , in which the Lebanese general François el Hajj was killed .
As the House is aware , Mr President , Lebanon is linked to the European Union by an Association Agreement .
At the mini-plenary session in Brussels , Parliament adopted an important report granting macro-financial aid to that country and , to take an obvious example , a delegation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , made up of Mrs De Keyser , Mrs Gomes , Mr Belder and myself , visited the country last week , so that , like various ministers from the Member States , we could express our solidarity with the cause of peace , for understanding , harmony and reconciliation in the country .
I would ask the President to pass on our support to Prime Minister Siniora in response to this brutal terrorist attack and our unquestionable and irrevocable commitment to the cause of a sovereign , democratic , stable , viable and peaceful Lebanon .
( Applause )
Mr Salafranca , I think the applause from your fellow Members shows quite clearly that the assembly supports your declaration .
It will be passed on .
The last request to speak is from Mr Pirker , on a point of order , and then we will proceed to the vote .
( DE ) Mr President , this does not really have anything to do with the debate , and I actually wanted to say this immediately after the last debate : it is simply unbearably cold in this House .
It may have been quite good yesterday because feelings were not running so high there as they would perhaps otherwise have been .
However , in general it is simply too cold and I wanted to suggest , in connection with the debate on the Free Trade Agreement with Korea , that we try to achieve a reasonable temperature perhaps once with a Korean air conditioning system , should we not manage to do so with our European one .
I think we have covered everything we wanted to cover before launching into the vote .
The next item is therefore Voting time .
( For results and other details of the votes : see Minutes )
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) Mr President , I should just like to say that I did not endorse the resolution on the EU / China human rights dialogue for a number of reasons .
In particular , I think that we in this Hemicycle have already churned out more than enough overblown texts , and that the European institutions rarely , if ever , follow these overblown texts and overblown statements with action .
With the Beijing Olympic Games around the corner , their European Excellencies will be once more attempting to curry favour with the Chinese authorities .
This is already clear from the present resolution , which , alongside very many sensible elements , asserts that , at the recent Chinese Communist Party National Congress - and I quote - ' perspectives ... arose towards the implementation of higher international human rights benchmarks ' .
How unworldly of this House ; as the reality in today 's Beijing is one of intimidation , deportations , arrests and labour camps .
It is time the European Union abandoned its policy of double standards towards China .
( BG ) I voted against the resolution on extremism because it is the fruit of that hatred it is called upon to condemn .
And who is lecturing us on extremism ?
Comrade Schulz and Comrade Cohn-Bendit , these champions of Marxism and Leninism , that very ideology which massacred dozens of millions of Russians and Ukrainians in the beginning of last century ?
Or Comrade Vigenin whose party held the Bulgarian people in its clutches for fifty years and killed thousands Bulgarians in its concentration camps ?
Are you the ones to teach us what extremism is like ?
Thank you .
( NL ) Mr President , yes , that is the way it goes in this House .
Unless your name is Mr Schulz , you have to use the explanations of vote to be able to express your opinions .
This House has once again laid its periodic egg about the ' necessity ' of combating ' extremism ' - but is not talking about real extremism and real violence , for example that of the rising Islam in Europe .
Instead , it is talking for the umpteenth time about curbing the freedom of expression of those peacefully standing up for the right to individuality , the right to protect and preserve our languages , identities , cultures and freedom .
It is little short of tragic that this House is constantly speaking about freedom and human rights whilst imposing the severest , most drastic muzzling rules on people who have differing opinions on the matter and , for example , do not simply join the rest of this House in worshipping the sacred cow of the proverbial multicultural society .
I , for my part , do not take this resolution seriously and , as far as I am concerned , there can be no freedom without total freedom of political expression .
( NL ) Mr President , I too voted against the resolution on extremism .
This is not because I feel that the term concerns me - the reverse is true - but because , for the umpteenth time , a legitimate political discourse against further mass-immigration and for a firm adjustment policy is being consciously bound up with extremism and violence .
Even the title of the resolution is misleading and biased .
Left-wing extremism is evidently something that by definition cannot exist , and clearly no-one here has heard of the rising Islamic fundamentalism .
This is straight out of Kafka .
It would be funny if it were not so depressing .
Anyone not falling into line with political correctness is criminalised .
Perhaps someone could explain how this kind of thing relates to the Charter of Fundamental Rights we signed yesterday .
( NL ) Mr President , I too voted wholeheartedly against this resolution , as when the fox preaches , look to your geese .
I have rarely set eyes on a more hypocritical document than this motion for a resolution on ' rising extremism ' in Europe - and God knows that Europe and this House have already broken records for hypocrisy .
After all , as my colleagues have already said , there is no such thing as left-wing extremism . Indeed , the finger is not even pointed at Islamic extremism .
The suburbs of Paris burned , but the problem apparently lies with the small nonconformist minority that has become the bane of the life of this lofty institution .
Perhaps we should open the gates of the Gulag again for those who still dare to criticise the cult of Europe and the sacrosanct multicultural society - complete with an inquisition and banishment to Devil 's Island for the heretics .
Only then will Europe be purged of its last critics , and the cult of Europe will be able to continue its conversion mission undisturbed .

( DA ) Mr President , this resolution contains a justified critique of neo-fascist and fundamentalist movements in certain European countries . However , it appears that as a whole it is unilaterally oriented towards a problem that is described as European citizens with fascist and racist attitudes , and it makes the resolution meaningless .
Repeated opinion polls in Denmark have indicated that immigrants from non-Western nations do not feel that they are being subjected to any form of racism or hostile treatment .
However , some immigrants from non-European nations have perpetrated very widespread violence towards both Danish citizens and other immigrants .
In the official crime statistics , immigrants from non-Western nations are disproportionately over-represented .
Week after week in recent months there have been many shooting incidents on the open streets involving immigrant gangs , as well as individual attacks .
Immigrant officials , who are themselves of non-Danish ethnic origin , have had their lives threatened and been told to leave their job , not by Danes , but by people from foreign cultures , who they are trying to help integrate into Danish society .
We have a prominent immigrant politician of Syrian origin .
He must be protected 24 hours a day , not against Danes but against fundamentalists of an Islamic background .
Our intelligence service is constantly involved in preventing violent attacks against Danes and Danish social institutions , not from Danes but from foreigners .
Therefore , from a Danish perspective this resolution is absurd .
In Denmark , violent racism is directed towards democracy and human rights .
On this basis I have been unable to vote in favour of this resolution .
( SK ) Mr President , the Black Sea is becoming one of the main routes for increasing oil exports in this region and in recent years has unfortunately often been a place of frequent accidents involving tankers and cargo carriers .
Twelve vessels sank or ran aground here during a severe storm .
These events had serious consequences , affected people 's lives and caused large-scale ecological disasters .
The Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska more than 18 years ago is an example of a large-scale disaster , the consequences of which are felt to this day .
Considering that approximately 200 tankers travel the world 's seas every day , I am of the opinion that the situation should be regularly and closely monitored not only in the Black Sea but also in other seas .
The Member States , as well as other countries neighbouring the European Union , should ensure more rigorous application of existing Community legislation and maritime safety standards .
In this context , I am calling on the Council to speed up its deliberations and to adopt common positions on the remaining legislative acts in the third maritime package on maritime safety .
( CS ) Mr President , abolishing quotas and introducing monitoring of Chinese textile imports next year will undoubtedly result in improved control mechanisms .
However , I do not agree that woollens should not be subject to monitoring .
Our resolution is a political appeal to the Commission , an expression of our wish that greater emphasis be placed on demanding that international obligations are met , and it is a protest against Chinese barriers to imports of European products .
I welcome the fact that China will have to issue import licences , which will make it possible to carry out control procedures in Chinese ports and so better protect Europe from counterfeit goods .
At the same time it is the Commission 's duty to protect European consumers against toxic substances , for example azo dyes that are sometimes present in Chinese goods .
Therefore , I call on the Commission to push for the confiscation of textiles presenting health risks at the borders of the European Union .
Written explanations of vote
The Council and the European Parliament have reached agreement on the additional financing for the Galileo satellite system and expenditure on foreign affairs , including the police mission in Kosovo .
To this end , they have increased the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework and used the flexibility instrument , and there have also been redeployments within the existing budget lines .
These redeployments could have been more far reaching .
The main things I have problems with are the adjustment of the previously agreed ceiling for EU funds for the period until 2013 and the use of the flexibility instrument for this purpose .
The use of this instrument must be avoided , and at all costs must remain limited to very exceptional circumstances .
Any changes in costs must be primarily absorbed by reducing other budget lines .
I am thinking mainly of the expenditure that does not concern the central objectives of the European Union and the budget lines whose implementation is already falling behind in respect of the planned expenditure .
in writing . - ( PT ) The agreement reached between the Commission , the Council and Parliament for the 2008 EU budget reveals the true weight of the ' big countries ' and the ' rich countries ' as it responds to their demands to limit the EU budget ceiling as much as possible .
In spite of all the attempts to hide it , the truth is that the Commission 's , the Council 's and the EP 's proposals for the EU budget , and this agreement , were below the figure for 2008 envisaged in the 2007-2013 financial framework .
That was also the case last year and in the 2000-2006 financial framework .
In reality , this EU budget for 2008 represents a reduction of more than EUR 9 billion in terms of payments as compared with what was agreed in the financial framework for 2008 - that is , in terms of payments , the EU budget has been reduced from 1.04 % to 0.96 % of the Community GNI .
On the other hand , the EU budget has progressively moved its priorities towards financing the neoliberal , federalist and militaristic policies of the EU .
We therefore reject this agreement .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the basic principles of the EU budget for 2008 and stress that it must give the taxpayers good value for money .
The frameworks set by the financial perspective must be respected and we therefore welcome the fact that the budget will be kept within these frameworks by a good margin .
Agricultural support is one of the areas in which there is scope for cutbacks to the advantage of aims which are more in line with the Lisbon ambitions , that is that the EU should develop into the world 's economically most successful region .
in writing . - During Budget negotiations , Parliament decided with Council to redeploy EUR 50 million from the Decentralised Agencies to part-finance the European GNSS programmes ( EGNOS / GALILEO ) and the European Institute of Technology .
It was not indicated which agencies would be affected .
The reprogramming concerns the agencies under heading 1A under which Eurofound , the European Foundation for the Improvement of Working and Living standards , belongs .
Eurofound is based in Dublin .
This foundation provides an important service in the area of the labour market and working conditions , and a cut would be intolerable and counterproductive .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the proposed 2008 budget , firstly because the proposal is clearly in line with the principles set out in the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective .
Secondly , because the proposal put to the vote , after being negotiated with the Commission and the Council , finally overcame the serious problems that arose concerning the financing of Galileo .
The solution to this is also very positive , making it possible to provide a reasonable level of financing for projects included in the trans-European networks .
Thirdly , I think that the treasury solutions found are very positive as regards the budget for payments for items financing European Social Fund and European Regional Development Fund projects , which are very important for enabling Portugal to develop the projects it needs to achieve much higher rates of economic growth than in recent years and thus to come closer to the EU average .
in writing . - ( PT ) Approximately 50 years ago the Council of Europe devised a system of rules and legal and judicial instruments for the purposes of protecting and promoting Fundamental Rights that has become a benchmark for Human Rights , the Rule of Law and Democracy in Europe .
The Agency for Fundamental Rights , which is a legal successor of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , should help to enhance the coherence and consistency of EU Fundamental Rights Policy .
Since both institutions share the same objective ( strengthening the protection of Fundamental Rights ) , it is essential to ensure that they collaborate closely .
This Agreement aims to ensure complementarity and added value and to avoid duplication with the activities of the Council of Europe , as laid down in Article 9 of the Regulation establishing a European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
I support the conclusion of this Agreement in a spirit of cooperation , transparency and complementarity , in particular the establishing of a cooperation framework between the two institutions entailing regular contacts and meetings , exchange of information and coordination of activities in order to avoid duplication and to guarantee the best possible use of resources .
in writing . - ( FR ) The paradox , or perhaps the hypocrisy of the European Parliament , is that it goes about preaching democratic principles and values but flouts them by refusing to apply them when it is inconvenient to do so .
Such was the case yesterday when the European Parliament , meeting in plenary , formally proclaimed the Charter of Fundamental Rights amid general uproar , thus ignoring the protests from the separatists demanding a referendum for the adoption of the new constitutional treaty .
The European Parliament is discrediting itself by refusing any discussion and stigmatising its own elected Members who are committed to promoting the maintenance of national identity and sovereignty .
Freedom of expression only has value if one 's political opponents enjoy it too .
According to the conservative political groups , it seems that some speech is illegitimate and needs to be prevented at any cost .
As the European Parliament compromises itself by laying claim to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the elected Members from the Front National are stating loud and clear that they do not have the same idea of human rights and will continue to fight for respect for the sovereignty and identity of the nations of Europe .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting in favour of the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf since it is becoming urgent to introduce a system of electronic identification for ovine and caprine animals .
I regret the 17 month delay in the Commission proposal .
I agree with the amendment to the Commission proposal to the effect that a specific date should be set for the system to come into force , 31 December 2009 being the most appropriate date , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's report suggests .
I do not agree with Amendments 4 and 5 which would delay the swift implementation of the system .
Nor do I agree with Amendment 3 , since in my view the document in question aims to set a timetable rather than discuss principles .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted for the report since it is important to remove the current obstacles to the collection of maintenance contributions from a citizen with residence in a Member State other than that of the person entitled to maintenance .
In this connection it is particularly important to protect the weaker party in the collection procedure .
However , we are opposed to the wording of Amendments 9 and 26 which require the parties , after independent legal advice , to enter into a written agreement on the jurisdiction of the court and on the national law which should be applied in order that the agreement should be effective in the court .
Such requirements are not compatible with the Swedish legal tradition .
in writing . - ( PT ) Increasing mobility in the EU , combined with the growing number of couples separating , has brought an increase in the number of cross-border disputes regarding maintenance claims .
The current procedures for obtaining maintenance claims tend to be too long and complicated and in many cases impossible in terms of obtaining results .
In the meantime , maintenance creditors , the large majority of them children , live in very poor circumstances and often do not even have money to survive .
This initiative is therefore very important , since it should facilitate the functioning of the internal market and freedom of movement , by the elimination of obstacles created by the discrepancies between the Member States , as regards enforcing maintenance obligations .
It should ensure that such decisions are recognised and enforced throughout the European Union in the quickest and most effective way at the lowest possible cost .
It will simplify citizens ' lives and should at the same time have positive social effects in that it will make it easier for maintenance creditors living in another Member State to take a claim to a competent court and , once the court decision has been given , it will be recognised in all the Member States without further formalities .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction , applicable law , recognition and enforcement of decisions and cooperation in matters relating to maintenance obligations - C6-0079 / 2006 - .
Mrs Grabowska is correct in her assessment that there is currently no common , harmonised system of recognition and enforcement of maintenance decisions at EU level .
I agree with the initiative for the quick , free-of-charge enforcement of maintenance claims , especially in the context of cross-border movements of persons .
The report rightly stresses the need for the introduction of such actions in order for a decision to have the same effect as it has in the Member State in which it was issued , without any additional formalities .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since 1997 , when the Ottawa Convention was signed , on the basis of data available last November , 156 States have signed the Convention .
Significantly and regrettably , the USA is not one of those States .
Quite correctly , the resolution adopted today points out the inconsistency between the European Commission 's action in announcing its intention actively to strive for the destruction of anti-personnel mines and support for victims who for the most part , remember , are children , whilst at the same time deleting the specific anti-personnel mine budget line at the end of 2006 .
In view of the importance of this action and the fact that victim support is nowhere near sufficient to respond to their needs , we think that a specific anti-personnel mine budget line for the financing of anti-mine actions , victim assistance , and stockpile destruction should be reinstated ; furthermore , we would add that there should be a substantial increase in the funds allocated .
We regret the failure to adopt the proposal by our parliamentary group calling upon all countries to immediately halt the production of landmines and urging that under no circumstances or conditions should EU troops make use of mines .
in writing . - ( FR ) I abstained on the resolution on EU-China relations because I am not keen to associate myself with these paternalistic reprimands or with the moralising discourse that resolutions of this kind convey .
A European Union that cannot adopt a Charter of Fundamental Rights that applies throughout its territory is ill placed to try and give lessons to the rest of the world .
in writing . - As a representative from a region , Northern Ireland , where Sinn Fein , affiliates of a terrorist organisation which recently murdered a young man , Paul Quinn , has been admitted to government in a coalition with exclusively democratic parties , I was encouraged to note and vote for Amendment 14 which was in the following terms :
' Deplores the fact that some mainstream parties have seen fit to give credibility and acceptance to extremist parties by entering into coalition agreements , thereby sacrificing their moral integrity for the sake of short-term political gain and expediency . '
in writing . - Whilst opposed to extremism in any form , UKIP does not believe that we , the British people , need to take any advice on this issue from the EU , and nor would UKIP call for the EU to take any action .
This , like all other matters , should be the prerogative of independent , democratic nation states .
in writing . - Whilst opposed to extremism in ny form UKIP does not believe that we , the British people , need to take advice on this issue from the EU , and nor would UKIP call for the EU to take any action .
This , like all other matters , should be the prerogative of independent , democratic , nation states .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , we are against racism , xenophobia and political extremism .
Recent practice in the European Parliament , where these concepts are abused in the ongoing political struggle , giving rise to a threat to free speech , a flagrant example of which was the incidents in the Hemicycle on 12 December this year , however , leads us to believe that supporters of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , in which , it must be said , there is a senseless prohibition on discrimination based on ' any political opinion ' , at that time violated the principles they themselves propound .
The lack of any precise definition of political extremism and xenophobia in the resolution , which is intended to combat extremism , leads us to abstain from the vote on this matter .
in writing . - ( FR ) Front National , Vlaams Belang and FPOE are not extremist , racist or xenophobic parties .
Lumping them together in a way that is unhealthy and wrong , all the so-called ' conservative ' parties are still trying to accuse them of being extremists solely because they want to promote the maintenance of national identity .
Democracy is certainly in danger , but those who are pre-appointed by the system as guilty are not the ones threatening it .
It is not in danger from the people who criticise and challenge policies , particularly on immigration , and who are therefore accused of being extremist .
It is in danger from those who systematically gag freedom of expression in the name of human rights and political correctness , and who are really only masking their own failure to solve the problems they are facing of immigration , lack of security and identity .
By massively increasing the amount of legislation to combat extremism in Europe , Parliament could have been proud of helping to maintain democratic principles and values .
Unfortunately , the opposite is true .
Far from targeting radical Islamism or totalitarian communist regimes , Parliament is just feeding its anti-national and globalist obsession once again .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I categorically oppose racism , xenophobia and political extremism .
I do think , though , that in documents adopted under the aegis of the European Parliament a clear definition should be provided of such terms as , specifically , political extremism and xenophobia .
If this is not done , this may , under a noble banner , actually serve the opposite aims and become a field for abuses in politicians ' public activities , drowning out free expression and the freedom to voice one 's views .
One example of such selective interpretation of these concepts was provided by the situation that arose at the European Parliament 's plenary session in Strasbourg on 12 December this year .
How , for example , does the provision of an article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights that says that ' Any discrimination based on ... political or any other opinion ... shall be prohibited ' square with the forcible snatching of pieces of paper with the legend ' REFERENDUM ' from the hands of Members ?
This was a peaceful expression of opinion by a few elected Members .
In view of this situation , I abstained from the vote on the resolution on combating rising extremism in Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) It is astounding to see how hemiplegic the European Parliament can be : it can only look right !
The various resolutions proposed by the PSE , Liberals , Verts or even Communists only consider extremism on the part of the ' extreme right ' .
What about radical Islamism and all those Trotskyites and communists ?
Not once are these types of extremism mentioned .
This is an insult for all the victims of totalitarian communist regimes and for all those who suffer on a daily basis because of the dogma and practices of radical Islamism .
The European Parliament does not believe these types of extremism are objectionable .
They just do not exist , because they do not form part of the current standard vocabulary of political correctness within these walls .
Out of respect for the principles and values of democracy , equality and tolerance , the PSE Group is quick to welcome the dissolution of the extreme right-wing political group Independence , Tradition and Sovereignty ( ITS ) before calling for the conditions governing the formation of political groups within Parliament to be strengthened .
The leitmotiv of these elected members is to systematically demonise their political opponents in order to impose their conservatism on everyone .
These resolutions are a hypocritical , blind and obscurantist chore .
We will be voting against them .
in writing . - While I fully subscribe to genuine measures to overcome racism and extremism , this sort of resolution , generated by the Left , is not helpful and is merely intended to take forward their own distorted agenda .
In fact , there is little to distinguish the extreme Left and the extreme Right and they feed off one another .
However , the Left has been successful in taking the spotlight off its own extremes and promoting institutions and policies which assist its own objectives .
The EU , in its continuous efforts to extend its own reach , is often complicit in this .
I do not approve of EU quangos such as the so-called ' EU Agency for Fundamental Rights ' or indeed funding from public money of the constellation of NGOs pushing the Left 's agenda .
I therefore abstained on the resolution .
in writing . - I am opposed to extremism in any form , but I do not accept that the British people must take advice from the EU on this - or indeed on any other matter .
I was not elected to have the EU extend or expand its control over the UK .
This matter should remain in the control and prerogative of independent , democratic nation states .
In 1918 , independent Montenegro voluntarily chose unification with the neighbouring countries of Serbia , Croatia , Bosnia-Herzegovina and Slovenia .
In 2006 , after the break-up of Yugoslavia , the electorate of Montenegro , the last state to remain united with Serbia , decided democratically to end this union .
This made Montenegro the 49th independent state in Europe .
Now it is important that Montenegro become a normal state , rather than a larger version of Monaco : a paradise for rich foreigners wishing to pay low taxes , launder money and build palaces .
Montenegro must do more to combat environmental pollution and cigarette smuggling .
I am pleased that the Committee on Foreign Affairs has accepted my amendments concerning housing and jobs for Serbian and Kosovar refugees .
Stateless persons cannot remain stateless for ever , and Montenegro must respect the agreements of the Council of Europe in this regard .
Even my proposal regarding the restoration of the north-south railway connections to Nikšić on the Bosnian border and Shkoder in Albania has been accepted .
Increasing road transport is not a valid solution .
Fortunately , the rapporteur , Mr Vernola - unlike in his previous annual report - is not calling for swift accession to NATO , nor an economic policy that is even more neoliberal than is usual in the rest of Europe .
Accession to NATO cannot be a prerequisite for admission to the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) The resolution adopted today in the European Parliament expresses solidarity with the victims of the shipwrecks that occurred in the Kerch Strait - that is , the Strait linking the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov - causing an environmental disaster .
The environmental impact of the spillage of oil derivatives into the strait was exacerbated by the rapid dispersion of the pollutants due to the strong winds and high waves at the time .
In general , we agree with the positions contained in the resolution , stressing the important role of Member States in ensuring that ships on their national registers conform to international standards and in preventing maritime accidents and combating the consequences of such accidents .
Agreeing with the need to implement measures to reduce the environmental risk and to make progress in maritime safety , we think that any initiative taken at EU level in this framework should be based on enhanced cooperation between Member States , without compromising their responsibilities in this area .
in writing . - ( FR ) The enlargement of the European Union calls for our solidarity with the population of the 431 000 km2 around the Black Sea .
This solidarity is expressed by the agreement to open negotiations with Turkey , the implementation of the Neighbourhood Policy with Georgia and Ukraine , and the strategic partnership established with Russia .
The violence of the storm makes us think about the effects of climate change , in our own neighbourhood too .
A risk management policy is required that combines both prevention and the protection of biodiversity .
We remember that the storm trapped four vessels and caused the death of eight sailors .
A Russian cargo vessel also broke in two , releasing 4 000 tonnes of fuel oil on a migration route for diving birds coming from Siberia .
The European Union sent a team within the framework of the Monitoring and Information Centre .
More should be done as part of this initiative .
To prevent future disasters , the EU must make sure that high safety standards are systematically applied to the fleet of Russian vessels .
The EU must impose the use of double-hull cargo vessels on its Russian partner , for transporting oil .
As the parliamentary assembly of the BSEC meets , we should be demanding the application of the standards in the European maritime safety package .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of Mr Ehler 's report on deposit-guarantee schemes .
The rapporteur has presented a very good report , in which attention is drawn to the new challenges facing guarantee schemes because of the increasing integration of markets .
These challenges must be responded to if the stability of financial markets is to be ensured .
Deposit-guarantee schemes are a very important part in the EU financial market system and their operation should continuously be improved .
The rapporteur rightly draws attention to the problem of crisis management and the safety net for cross-border deposits in crisis management .
I agree that crisis management should rest on the foundations of improved early risk detection , better defined and planned procedures of interaction between all parties involved , and clarification of the point at which burdens are to be shared .
Differences between systems and the variety of parties involved in the public and private sectors must be taken into consideration .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mass imports , the perverse role played by a strong euro against a deliberately undervalued foreign currency , social and environmental dumping , counterfeits , piracy , dangerous products , and the existence of non-tariff barriers that hit European manufacturing : in the textiles sector as in others , every report and resolution by this Parliament on trade relations with China looks the same .
Why was China 's membership of the WTO accepted under these circumstances ?
We voted against it .
Why refuse to see that liberalising trade with countries that have decided not to obey the rules - and you never challenge this liberalisation - only leads to economic disaster and social disintegration for whole regions and sectors ?
Why accept the end of textile quotas and the laying off of tens of thousands of European workers ?
You are worried about it now , but you only talk timidly of possible means of commercial defence , safeguard measures and joint surveillance of exports .
It is not much , and it is not enough , but it is better than nothing .
Therefore , though this resolution is about as useful as a chocolate teapot , we will vote in favour .
in writing . - ( PT ) We are pleased at the adoption of our proposals that :
maintain that the double-checking surveillance system will serve no purpose unless it prevents any repetition of the situation that occurred in 2005 and that new safeguard measures are required ;
repeat the proposal that a Community programme should be drawn up for the textiles and clothing sector , especially for the more disadvantaged regions that depend on it , and help for SMEs ;
We regret the rejection by the majority of the European Parliament of our proposals that , for example :
referred to the serious consequences of liberalisation in the textiles and clothing sector at global level with firms closing down or relocating , unemployment and serious socio-economic crises ;
pointed out that some countries have adopted safeguard measures applying until the end of 2008 , and therefore failed to understand why the EU had not followed suit ;
maintain that a regulatory framework needed to be laid down to penalise company relocations , making public aid to businesses subject to long-term commitments regarding regional development and employment , including the requirement to pay back aid if such conditions were not met ;
called for a stronger role for workers ' representatives in company boards and in fundamental organisational decision-making .
in writing . - ( FR ) The textile sector in France and in Europe since the end of the Multi Fibre Arrangement has turned some of our regions into economic and social deserts .
Poverty and deprivation reign there for the thousands of men and women who have lost their jobs .
The destruction of these companies , of this social fabric , in the name of globalisation and pro-European ultraliberalism , is the symbol of one of the greatest economic failures of the European Union .
For years , this approach has led to our manufacturing in all economic sectors , even where it was of a very high standard , being relocated to other countries throughout the world : to North Africa and especially to Asia .
This global rebalancing will not actually have given these third countries anything , except to worsen economic slavery for the benefit of a small elite in Chinese factories and to establish long-term unemployment in Europe against a background of persistent economic crisis .
Clearly , global competition , as encouraged by the WTO , is the main reason for the widespread impoverishment and lack of dynamism of Europe .
The European Union urgently needs to put an end to this madness , and finally to set up Community protection and preference .
in writing . - ( PT ) Amongst other things , this report contains a veritable misconception .
It acknowledges that ' poverty remains an unresolved and deepening problem in Korea which , according to OECD statistics , ranks among the three OECD members with both the biggest income gap and the greatest widening of the income gap ' ( we might add that it is not the only case , since within the EU the income gap between rich and poor has also widened , particularly in Portugal , where the difference between the richest and the poorest continues to grow , with approximately two million Portuguese living on the breadline ) .
The report nevertheless calls for a ' free trade ' agreement between the EU and Korea and for trade liberalisation , when it is known that such policies have favoured and will continue to favour the concentration of wealth on the large economic and financial groups both in the EU and in Korea .
It is an agreement which will serve to place workers under even greater pressure to accept low salaries and lose rights and social advances gained in the name of ' competitiveness ' , and to increase the fabulous profits of the few .
In the meantime there is no mention of the shipbuilding industry ...
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of accepting Mr Martin 's report on the trade and economic relations with Korea .
The rapporteur has drafted a very good report , in which he points out the importance of Korea as a trading partner for the European Union in economic terms .
Conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement with Korea is part of the strategy to provide Europe with a global dimension .
A Free Trade Agreement between Korea and the European Union could constitute a basis for the promotion of high social and environmental standards and could serve as an example for other agreements that are currently at the negotiation stage .
I agree that every effort must be made to ensure that the European Union and Korea - under the aegis of the trade agreement currently being negotiated or through a separate agreement - themselves take on human rights obligations .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes : see Minutes
1 .
Eastern Chad
The next item on the agenda are the six motions for a resolution on eastern Chad .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to say that I am very disturbed by the intensification of fighting in Chad , but also by the lack of progress in finding a political solution to the conflict .
I would therefore like to draw particular attention to the role of the EUFOR TCHAD / RCA operation .
The main aim of the European initiative , which is also supported by the UN , is to ensure security in the humanitarian zone .
Bearing in mind the ongoing Darfur crisis and the way in which it is destabilising the situation in the region , it is worth remembering here that the conflict has already crossed the borders of Chad and the Central African Republic .
I believe it is vital to put neutral forces from the Member States in place as soon as possible .
I would like to stress , though , that the success of such a peace mission is heavily dependent on the political efforts that must be made if a successful peace process is to be conducted .
author . - Madam President , I want to make a couple of important and essential points .
There is absolutely no doubt that intervention is required in Chad .
There is no doubt that the teeming human misery of refugees in that part of our world is unbearable to see , but I want to state very clearly that there are a number of core difficulties with this proposed mission .
The first of these is the lack of clarity in terms of the operation 's mandate .
We are saying that this is a peace-keeping and humanitarian effort .
If that is indeed so , then this must be made doubly clear in the terms of reference for the troops we send .
I believe that clarity is lacking .
I do not believe - and I have to disagree with my colleague - that an intervention shaped in this way will actually increase security .
We have recently witnessed a growing intensity and barbarity of the conflict .
We have also heard from leaders of many of the rebel groups that any intervention , and this intervention in particular , will be considered hostile .
That poses a huge difficulty .
I must also say - and , again , I disagree with my colleague - that the troops as currently configured will not act as the neutral force that is required .
I have to say , with the greatest of respect for France and her people , that to load the mission so much towards France verges on the provocative , and I think it deeply unwise .
I do not believe that it is possible for us to formulate a common European defence or security policy .
The difficulties that have arisen - in this instance in relation to Chad - reflect very clearly why .
I think it is undoable , because we have very different traditions and histories and very different foreign policy goals and outlooks .
For this reason in particular it is a great shame - if I may say so , coming from a country that is still at least nominally militarily neutral - that the obligations , responsibilities and capacities of militarily neutral states are not recognised sufficiently in the European Union , and particularly not in the Lisbon Treaty .
I believe that countries with that tradition could make the kind of valued intervention based on neutrality that my colleague has mentioned .
To conclude , intervention in Chad is necessary .
However , the essential thing is how we go about this .
Any operation has to be focused .
It certainly has to be neutral and , above all , it must have prospects of success .
Madam President , I notice that there is no time displayed on the board .
Does that mean we will have the privilege of unlimited use of time this afternoon , or is there a technical error ?
Mr Matsakis , we shall all abide by the time we know has been given us .
author . - Mr President , I initiated this urgency resolution in order to exert political and public pressure on getting the EU peacekeeping mission to the eastern Chad border region deployed as soon as possible .
The recent unrest in eastern Chad , including heavy clashes between rebel fighters and the Chadian army , underscores the urgent need for our presence in this region to protect innocent refugees and internally displaced persons ( IDPs ) from getting caught in the crossfire .
These military offences are exacerbating criminality and leading to increased insecurity around the IDP camps .
Not only is access to the camps being impeded for humanitarian personnel , but they are wrestling with the problem of banditry , restricting their ability to provide much needed humanitarian assistance .
I call on the EU and its Member States to honour the political decision made and to provide this mission with more troops and appropriate financial , logistic and air support , including the necessary number of helicopters , as soon as possible .
The EU 's credibility in its foreign policy on the world stage is at stake if it cannot mobilise sufficient troops and equipment to make this mission operational .
This is an EU peacekeeping mission and therefore concerns all EU Member States , whether they are participant countries or not .
I would like here and now to dispel the myth that this mission will be French dominated .
This mission has troops coming from Sweden , the Netherlands , Poland , Austria and Ireland .
Furthermore , it will not be French led but Irish led .
Irish Lieutenant General Pat Nash has been appointed to front this mission , and he will therefore be calling the shots - excuse the pun - concerning troop activities on the ground .
This operation is going to go ahead , and such remarks are simply not helpful when it comes to aiding this mission 's perception and eventual reception among the local population in Chad and among the rebel groups .
There have been some hopeful signs of movement this week from other EU Member States , following Ireland 's appeal for this mission to be adequately resourced .
It appears that one country has offered medical supplies , while other Member States are discussing providing funding to assist other countries to supply necessary logistical support , including aircraft .
Another fourth-generation conference must be called immediately to come up with the necessities to protect our troops in the field so that they can go about their important job of protecting refugees . The time to act is now .
Our inaction will cost lives .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , the resumption of fighting between rebel and government forces in Chad has left hundreds dead and wounded and caused renewed tensions in the border region of Sudan and the Central African Republic .
This situation has , de facto , restricted access to refugee camps for thousands of people and made the task of humanitarian aid workers considerably more complicated .
I should also remind you that at present in this region of the world , women and children are still the victims of particularly odious violence and that there are already more than 450 000 displaced people living in terrible conditions precisely where the conflict has restarted .
Against this background , we can obviously demand that the warring factions cease all combat , particularly where civilian populations are affected .
We also demand that they respect the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law , which means respecting humanitarian areas and allowing the transportation of aid , as well as not attacking humanitarian personnel .
More generally , we are also particularly concerned about the fact that humanitarian law is more and more often flouted , if not totally ignored , by the parties involved in the conflicts .
The European Union needs to act specifically against this worrying development .
We also urge the authorities in Chad to systematically do all they can to prosecute those responsible for rape , war crimes and all forms of serious human rights violation .
However , I would say that our message is mostly aimed at the European Union , particularly the Council of Ministers , by which we undoubtedly have more chance of being heard and which we ask to assume its responsibilities .
On 15 October , the Council adopted a joint action on the EUFOR Chad / RCA operation to provide protection for civilians , humanitarian aid , and security for local and expatriate humanitarian personnel .
Just two months later , the deployment of EUFOR troops has still not materialised , due to a lack of resources and sufficient equipment .
This is unacceptable and the Council and Commission therefore urgently need to speed up the decision-making process to enable this operation to be conducted as rapidly as possible .
I would also like to point out that no peacekeeping mission in eastern Chad or the northern part of the Central African Republic will be effective without a general reconciliation process involving the whole region .
We already know that EUFOR 's presence on Sudan 's doorstep will make it more difficult for the rebels to circulate freely across borders and will therefore cause the displacement of some attacks .
The urgent and essential support that the European Union is committed to providing could therefore very quickly prove inadequate .
It is now also essential for the EU to do everything it can to encourage the resumption of peace talks at regional level , in partnership with all those involved in the conflict and the various representatives of the international community .
Finally , I would like to point out that we believe that the European force 's neutrality is particularly important and very strategic here .
Since the rebels have already threatened to target it if it is simply a French mission in disguise , we are asking the other Member States to participate en masse in the composition of this force , so it is clear to everyone that it is indeed a European force .
author . - Madam President , eastern Chad has become a second Darfur , and the déjà vu scenes of killings and destruction committed against innocent civilians are coming back to haunt us .
Meanwhile , we in the EU , being part of the privileged elite of this world , debate endlessly amongst ourselves on how to deal with the situation .
While we - most wisely , but very slowly - consider and reconsider our decision to send an effective peacekeeping military force to the region , those criminals who carry out ethnic cleansing continue their despicable acts unhindered .
One important - perhaps the most important - message that must come out of this debate today is our strong demand to the Commission and Council that EUFOR must be properly set up and deployed to the affected region most urgently .
Those in the Council or Commission , or elsewhere for that matter , who delay this action would be responsible for the further escalation of violence and tragedy that will inevitably follow soon .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I think that it is particularly significant that the three urgent resolutions that we are debating today have something in common in that they concern different types of violence against women .
This demonstrates that this type of violence is something that affects the whole world , although it has particular manifestations and forms in each case .
The first of the three cases that we are dealing with today , the situation in Chad , is a sad example of how , in a context of war , women frequently tend to be used as sexual objects , where rape becomes a weapon of war . This situation occurs especially in refugee camps , but not only there .
The aim of this resolution is , at least for some of us , to point out that the international community , and in particular the European Union , needs to respond to this situation and take on our responsibility to protect the victims .
With this in mind , the deployment of a specific mission , EUFOR Chad / CAR , is a task that certainly needs to be done urgently , but also responsibly .
I would like to join with those pointing out that there is definitely a risk that the mission will be perceived as being excessively linked to one country , namely France .
I think that this would be damaging , and certainly counterproductive for the objectives of the mission .
I would therefore also like to stress that the composition of the mission should reflect the diversity of the European Union Member States , in order to avoid any confusion between that mission and the French deployment known as Operation Sparrowhawk .
We also need to condemn before all possible bodies , and I therefore urge the Council and the Commission to do this , the brutality of the attacks perpetrated on the civilian population by the Janjawid militias and other Chadian groups .
What is especially deplorable is the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war , and it is unacceptable for such crimes to go unpunished .
I therefore urge the Chadian authorities to take responsibility for investigating these rapes and abuses and to bring those responsible to justice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , it has been said of the last Bourbon kings that they always took action too late on an idea , a government or an army .
This unfortunately seems to be the case today for the West and for Europe , because we have already allowed the catastrophe in Darfur and in eastern Chad to go on far too long .
The later we intervene , the more costly it becomes , not just financially , but militarily and politically as well .
I am therefore very grateful to Mr von Wogau for moving matters ahead decisively on military and security policy and I am very grateful to Mr Dess for doing the same in the humanitarian sector .
We ultimately have to take action .
However , the nations are procrastinating , not only on the equipment required , but also on the troops required .
We need troops and forces on the ground with local knowledge and experience .
I am very much of the opinion that there should be no disguised French operation , which nobody is talking about either , but we do need the local knowledge and experience of the French .
We also , however , need the cooperation of the African Union and the Arab League , which are unfortunately still keeping completely aloof .
This should not , however , absolve us Europeans of our responsibilities .
I say very clearly : we want to get involved but we must not make the mistakes we made in Afghanistan , namely intervening without having a political strategy .
Anyone who intervenes there must also know that they must have a strategy for peace talks , for interethnic discussions and for a solution to the massive tribalism and other conflicts that exist both in eastern Chad and in Darfur along the artificial borders .
As the European Parliament , we should therefore be campaigning for the deployment of troops and for humanitarian aid , but we should also be making our contribution as quickly as possible to a sustainable political peace strategy for the region .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I will be very brief .
The second EU-Africa Summit was a complete failure : the two parties did not reach an Economic Partnership Agreement , and relations between those two parts of the world have been frozen .
The tense situation in eastern Chad has not helped much either .
One of the prerequisites for fruitful cooperation would be an end to the decades-long military conflicts in Africa .
When resolving the conflict in eastern Chad , the European Union must demonstrate that we are determined to reach a peaceful solution and send our peacekeeping military mission to eastern Chad as soon as possible .
( NL ) Madam President , last weekend an EU-Africa Summit was held in Lisbon .
This intended to develop the basis for a new partnership between Europe and Africa : a partnership that , according to the joint declaration of the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament , was to be based on shared values and principles , such as democracy , human rights and good governance .
Unfortunately , however , Europe 's attitude to individuals such as Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and Muammar Gaddafi of Libya - to name but two ; they were both welcomed with a red carpet - proves that there is still a yawning chasm between declarations of principle and reality .
The situation in Chad today also shows , if proof were needed , that a large proportion of Africa is far from ready to form part of this ' community of shared values ' .
Therefore , if we Europeans want to remain credible with our discourse on human rights and not simply practise realpolitik , an intervention should indeed send out a clear signal that lawlessness and arbitrariness must make way as quickly as possible for the most basic democratic principles .
Unfortunately , the assessment of Chad also applies to a great many other regimes in Africa .
Chad is not the only sick man of Africa .
Thank you for the clarification .
I am required to announce the speakers who have registered to speak on behalf of their political groups .
Your political group , like everyone 's here , is not in doubt , and everyone here knows which group you represent .
( FR ) Madam President , to correct what you have just said about the last intervention : the PSE Group spoke through me ; I was speaking as the author and on behalf of the PSE Group .
I would not like anyone to think that we were not concerned about this issue .
Madam President , we are all very aware of the appalling humanitarian and security situation in eastern Chad .
This cannot be separated from the wider regional catastrophe in Darfur : 300 000 people massacred , two million displaced persons , four million people living on Western food aid .
For three years now , the international community has been wringing its hands .
I recognise that the European Union has sponsored large-scale humanitarian aid to the region .
That is the good side .
Politically , the EU 's contribution is less commendable .
It fêtes the Sudanese dictator Omar El Bashir in Lisbon , along with Mugabe the oppressor of Zimbabwe , where in the ultimate sickening act of hypocrisy they sign up to a declaration on human rights and good governance .
The EU 's other contribution is to try and engage in some half-baked military mission in order to stick the ESDP badge on another military operation .

The fact is this proposed mission is poorly conceived ; the size of the force is inadequate ; it lacks vital medical , logistic and transport support elements ; it is already three months behind schedule and there is no contingency reserve if the situation should deteriorate even further .
We need only look at the random involvement in this mission - what is after all a largely French-driven operation - to understand why many in Chad , Sudan and the Central African Republic , let alone our own military officers , have a seriously sceptical attitude towards this project .
Soldiering should be left to others .
As a matter of urgency it is the UN-AU effort that should be reinforced as part of a coherent strategy for the whole region .
This should be politically driven by the UN Security Council .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is looking very carefully at the worsening security situation in eastern Chad and is emphatic in its support for the deployment of EUFOR troops in full strength to protect refugees and displaced persons in the region .
The European Union will use every instrument at its disposal in eastern Chad to do this .
The Commission will provide not only EUFOR troops , but also more than EUR 50 million as part of a comprehensive plan .
With these funds , measures will be financed in the following three key areas , which extend from emergency aid to long-term development aid .
The first sector concerns humanitarian aid , for which ECHO has already provided EUR 30.5 million in 2007 in the form of emergency aid measures for supporting refugees and displaced persons in different sectors in Chad .
A similar level of funding has also been set aside to continue these measures in 2008 .
The second sector comprises the organisation of a Chadian police force , which will be responsible for carrying out humanitarian protection measures .
In the context of the EU and UN missions in Chad , the United Nations are setting up , training and equipping up to 850 Chadian police forces and constabularies , which are to be deployed in refugee camps in eastern Chad .
The European Union is supporting this UN programme with EUR 10 million from the Instrument for Stability .
The third sector concerns reintegration and rehabilitation .
In 2008 the Commission will be providing EUR 10.1 million from the ninth European Development Fund for development measures promoting reconstruction , conflict resolution and the organisation of administrative capacities .
These are measures that are necessary for improving the security situation in the areas of the UN-EU mission .
Further measures are planned as part of the 10th European Development Fund , for which EUR 311 million are estimated from 2008 to 2013 .
Returning displaced persons to their home country should be supported in the short term with these measures .
Their aim in the long-term is to stabilise the situation permanently in Chad and throughout the region .
The previous speakers have rightly referred to the flare-up in the battles between government-friendly rebels and President Idriss Déby 's troops in eastern Chad , which has clearly made humanitarian aid more difficult .
Even in the areas around the refugee camps , safety can no longer be guaranteed .
In addition , the precarious humanitarian situation is coming increasingly to a head owing to the rapid increase in the number of refugees from the combat zones .
In this deeply worrying situation , the restoration of security in the region is a task of the utmost urgency .
In order to cope with this task , a military presence is vital .
EUFOR troops should therefore be deployed specifically in these crisis areas .
They will , however , be successful only if the causes of the conflict are eliminated and if a political process is introduced at the same time , with the aim of calming the underlying tensions and reducing poverty by facilitating economic development .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at the end of the debates .
2 .
Women 's rights in Saudi Arabia
The next item is the six motions for a resolution on the rights of women in Saudi Arabia .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , referring again to the October 2006 incident , while at the same time bearing in mind the lack of legal protection for women in Saudi Arabia , but above all on the basis of facts that have again been demonstrated by expressions of social condemnation of the voice of rape victims attempting to bring about a public debate on this subject , I call on the Saudi Arabian authorities to cease this type of practice forthwith .
Madam President , I would like to stress that the European Union should not remain silent in the face of the scandalous violation of the rights and personal liberties of women in third countries .
A state responsible for protecting its citizens may not resort to breaches of principles of the rule of law under the pretext of standing guard over maintenance of the principle of independence of the courts , as happened in the case of the sentence passed on the woman from Qatif .
I am therefore calling for a redoubling of efforts on the part of the government of Saudi Arabia in the matter of observing women 's basic rights .
author . - ( SV ) Madam President , I have to say that it is immensely sad that abuse of and violence against women never seem to cease .
This applies to both this Resolution and the next one .
I want to thank all who have helped to bring this Resolution into being .
It is almost inconceivable that women in Saudi Arabia are , in 2007 , still deprived of all human rights .
It is apparently not enough that women have to be subjected to degrading and scandalous gang rapes .
They also have to be punished by the authorities , while the perpetrators go free .
I think that all of us , both women and men , must do all we can in the name of solidarity to ensure that human rights apply to women in Saudi Arabia too .
We call on the Commission and the Council and of course all the Member States to raise these matters in contacts of all kinds with Saudi Arabia .
We have a multitude of international conventions and we have had pronouncements from the EU in many contexts .
Sometimes it is frustrating that we talk and talk and this violence just goes on and on .
Thanks to everyone who took the initiative and helped in the work on this Resolution .
author . - Madam President , recently King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia was afforded a controversial state visit to the United Kingdom .
Our Deputy Foreign Minister praised the shared values of the UK and Saudi Arabia .
I found this sycophancy absurd , as my values of democracy , human rights and gender equality are alien to Saudi tradition .
Of course , the EU 's relationship with the House of Saud is based on regional stability and on important commercial ties , in particular oil and arms trading .
In fact , the relationship is so important that a three-year UK inquiry into alleged bribes paid to Saudi ministers by an arms contractor was killed by orders of Prime Minister Tony Blair on the grounds of national security .
Worryingly , Saudi Arabia 's brand of fundamentalism , Wahabi Islam , is being exported globally .
In London - my constituency - textbooks at a Saudi-funded school were found to contain hate-filled passages about Christians and Jews .
This case of the Qatif gang-raped woman sentenced to 200 lashings has horrified the world .
Parliament 's joint motion for a resolution expresses revulsion and repudiation of the Kingdom 's values .
Twenty years ago a British TV documentary similarly recounted a story of a Saudi princess who was publicly executed for adultery .
The EU and Saudi Arabia have shared vital foreign policy interests , such as supporting the Middle Eastern peace process , encouraging the Saudis as Sunni Muslims to contain expansionist Shia Iran and supporting the Saudi fight against al-Qa 'ida , many of whose adherents , unfortunately , come from Saudi Arabia originally .
But we also need to hold the Saudis to their UN Convention obligations to remove discrimination against women , who cannot even drive a car or vote in their limited local elections .
But let us not kid ourselves that we share values with this fundamentalist and medieval regime .
author . - Madam President , I will speak in a personal capacity on this matter .
Saudi Arabia is governed by a ruthless dictatorship which is , to a large extent , shamefully legitimised in most of the Western world , including many EU countries , because Saudi Arabia is immensely rich in petrol dollars , some of which it uses in Western states in order to bribe them into pretending not to see , not to hear and not to understand what is going on in that country .
But even schoolchildren know that the comical rulers of Saudi Arabia , consisting mostly of the family of one man , His Most Royal Excellency godlike King Abdullah , are imposing on their people a brutal repression .
One obvious example is that they treat women as slaves or as pieces of domestic furniture yet , as mentioned just now by Mr Tannock , Mr Abdullah and his six plane-loads of entourage were given a lavishly glorious state welcome in the UK and the Vatican only a few weeks ago .
And not a single word about human rights managed to escape through the honourable lips of the Queen of England , or the UK Prime Minister , or the Pope .
So much for hypocrisy and double standards , one might be tempted to say .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , back in 2005 we had the opportunity to talk about the situation of women in Saudi Arabia , and in that context we did so in relation to the municipal elections and the fact that women were unable to vote .
As well as this discrimination in terms of political rights , however , there are many other types of discrimination that have been reported in various media , recently and continuously , which motivated this second resolution that we are debating today .
The trigger was certainly the incomprehensible sentence passed against a women , known as ' the Qatif woman ' , who was sentenced to 200 lashes for having been found in a car talking to a man who was not part of her family .
Not only are the alleged crime , and hence the sentence , unacceptable , but they are also aggravated by the fact that the convicted woman was unable to receive adequate legal advice .
Unfortunately this is not the only case in which one can deplore clearly discriminatory sentences for crimes and the failure to defend women in the legal system .
This is , unfortunately , more the norm than the exception .
How can a system be considered fair , for example , when it finds the victim of a rape guilty of that atrocity ?
Structural change is needed in Saudi Arabia , and the European Union needs to help those who are working both outside and within the country to achieve this .
There are no relativisms here that carry weight .
Human rights , which include women 's rights , are and need to be universal and defended in any context .
I therefore join in the request made by Mrs Svensson , and I ask the Commission and the Council once again to take any opportunity they can to ask the Saudi authorities to make the appropriate structural and institutional changes , in order to eliminate any form of discrimination against women , including recognising all their rights , in both private and public life , and more specifically , in the political , legal and judicial spheres .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Saudi Arabia is a country in which the law is put into effect according to Wahabi principles , this being the most radical Sunni trend in Islam .
Political , social and religious freedom is significantly restricted , and punishments by flogging , the amputation of hands or feet or the death penalty are meted out on a daily basis .
In a country that has been called ' a human rights desert ' by Human Rights Watch , it is mainly women who fall victim to numerous forms of discrimination in private and public life .
The identity of women was only formally recognised in 2001 , by issuing them with identity documents containing a photograph .
Before that they would prove their identity using a family identity document bearing a photograph of their husband or father .
Even if they can afford a car , they are not allowed to drive it .
They may study , but lectures given by men are watched by female students on video .
They are deprived of the right to vote , and decisions on divorce and child care are the exclusive prerogative of men .
Women are repeatedly the victims of unjust and offensive court verdicts .
The instance of the girl from Qatif concerns a 19-year-old gang-rape victim who was condemned to 200 lashes and six months in prison for being alone with a strange man at the time of her abduction .
Despite having signed it , Saudi Arabia does not observe the obligations arising from the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women .
The authorities must start by lifting all restrictions on women where freedom of movement is concerned and take steps towards gradually increasing the involvement of women in political decision-making on an equal footing with men .
Women must have general access to employment at all levels of administration and the opportunity to carry out all public functions .
The introduction of a total ban on the use of flogging and other degrading corporal punishment must also be demanded , as this is a violation of international law and the UN Convention against Torture , to which Saudi Arabia is a signatory .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , I should like to add my voice to those of all the other members who have spoken and in particular to point out that we are celebrating the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , and equal opportunities , by definition , can have no borders , and we simply cannot remain indifferent to what is happening to women in Saudi Arabia and also in the rest of the Middle East as a whole .
I should like in particular to take up a question raised by Mr Tannock concerning specifically the right to drive a car .
The Committee of Demanders of Women 's Right to Drive Cars was set up in Riyadh on 27 September .
On 6 November the committee commemorated the 17th anniversary of the demonstration against this ban , it has already collected a thousand signatures , and it has enormous strength .
It is led by four Saudi women .
I should like to call on the whole House , in particular the Presidency , to lend full support to this Saudi Arabian initiative and I should also like to remind you that , in addition to Saudi Arabia , there are at the moment even more serious situations in Iraq .
I would remind you of the execution this year in Basra of 40 women for failing to respect the dress code currently being imposed in Iraq , a country where women had the vote before the women of Portugal did , and where today the most barbarous fanaticism is being introduced .
We cannot remain indifferent to that situation either .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , when addressing the issue of women 's rights in Saudi Arabia , there is something that we need to keep in mind .
This is that in Islamic societies there is no separation of religion and state .
The state is the religion and vice versa . The lack of regard for women 's rights derives from Islamic law , and by comprehending and taking into account this simple fact we might move a step closer to improving the situation .
We cannot impose our values , which have gone beyond our Judaeo-Christian traditions , but we can open a dialogue calling for mutual understanding and preparing the ground for a reform , as several conceptions that do not correspond to our worldwide view are now being disproved .
Having said that , the situation of women in Saudi Arabia is dreadful , and something needs to be done urgently .
I therefore urge my colleagues to support this report unanimously .
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the discussion we are holding here today on Saudi Arabia , particularly the dreadful situation regarding women 's rights , should actually be extended to cover a large part of the Islamic world .
Only a few , such as the Dutch citizen Ayaan Hirsi Ali , dare come out with it .
The discrimination and subjugation of women is rooted in the holy texts of Islam itself .
Discrimination against women in Saudi Arabia and almost throughout the Islamic world has its basis and justification in the Koran .
This is a fundamental truth that we must dare to acknowledge in this debate .
It was demonstrated just recently in Sudan , where a 54-year-old teacher was sentenced to 15 days ' imprisonment for calling a teddy bear Mohammed , until being pardoned thanks to pressure from international diplomacy .
In Saudi Arabia , a 20-year-old woman fell victim to gang rape but was herself convicted .
It does not get any more symbolic than that .
However , Saudi Arabia is an ally of the US , of course , and can get away with that bit more .
After all , like China , Saudi Arabia is a rich country and we can venture to be rather more flexible when the noble principles we have been discussing so often this week are at stake .
Europe should thus also call on Washington to throw all its weight behind improving the situation in Saudi Arabia .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is extremely grateful for the opportunity to be able to say something today about the situation regarding women 's rights in Saudi Arabia .
The case underlying your resolution gives us cause for the greatest concern . A young woman was sentenced to 200 lashes and six months ' imprisonment after being gang-raped by seven men .
The EU dealt with this matter immediately .
The EU Troika made representation to the Saudi Arabian Government in Riadh and expressed the EU 's dismay at the verdict of the court in El Katif .
The verdict is not only clearly in breach of Saudi Arabia 's international obligations , particularly against the UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment , but also turns the principle of guilt upside down by declaring the victim to be guilty .
This case brings under the spotlight a country in which discrimination against women is unfortunately part of everyday life .
The European Parliament has justifiably asked the Saudi Arabian Government on several occasions to remove the limitations on women 's free movement , including the driving prohibition .
This request also applies to the restrictions on women 's access to employment , on their legal personality and on their representation in judicial processes .
I unreservedly share Parliament 's concerns about the situation of women in Saudi Arabia .
At the same time Saudi Arabia is bound as a member of the UN Human Rights Council to protect and promote human rights .
Saudi Arabia is a contracting party to the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women .
Admittedly it has ratified the Convention with one reservation : in the event of a conflict between the clauses of the Convention and the standards of Islamic law , the Kingdom is not obliged thereafter to comply with any clauses of the Convention conflicting with this law .
The European Union has repeatedly called on Saudi Arabia to lift its reservations on this UN Convention - particularly with regard to granting equal rights for women and men in relation to the nationality of their children - and will continue to do so .
Human rights issues such as the situation of women are regularly the subject of representations by the European Union to Saudi Arabia .
The European Union is reminding Saudi Arabia of its obligations according to international human rights standards , is broaching the issue of the need to treat women and men equally and to combat violence against women and is asking Saudi Arabia to protect and promote women 's rights .
Two recent changes that we have observed could - I say this very cautiously - could perhaps be a sign that Saudi Arabia is , making some progress .
The Saudi Arabian National Society for Human Rights produced its first report on the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia in May of this year .
Violations of the rights of women , prisoners and workers are published in this report , as are court judgments .
The results and recommendations of this report should be acted on and followed up without fail by the Saudi Arabian Government
Furthermore , in October King Abdullah announced a fundamental judicial reform , reinforcing the independence of judges and simplifying fact-finding according to Sharia law supervised by the Supreme Court .
For a country like Saudi Arabia , these are encouraging steps .
We should therefore not only be drawing attention to human rights violations in Saudi Arabia where necessary , but also be welcoming and supporting the reforms that have recently been discreetly emerging .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at the end of the debates .
3 .
Justice for the " Comfort Women "
The next item is the five motions for a resolution on justice for comfort women .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I have to say that , as the driving force behind this resolution , I am particularly satisfied that finally we have found the space and sufficient consensus to table it , because I sincerely believe that the subject deserved this , and much more .
We are talking about almost 200 000 women , euphemistically known as ' comfort women ' , who were forced to be sexual slaves during and before the Second World War by the Japanese Imperial Army .
After 62 years , the survivors are still seeking justice .
During their lives they have suffered from poor physical and mental health , isolation and shame , and often extreme poverty .
So far the Japanese Government has not complied with international rules on reparation , which include restitution , compensation , rehabilitation and satisfaction , including full disclosure , apology and guaranteeing that the action will not be repeated .
This is particularly significant given that Japan is one of the main donors of aid in post-war times .
There was , therefore , an urgent need to react and to point out , as the survivors do , that truth must be linked to justice , and that an apology is empty if it is not accompanied by an acceptance of responsibility .
I would like to stress that this is not only about the rights of an individual victim , but about collective rights , which bring with them the responsibility to remember , so that this type of violation does not happen again .
This means that we must ask the Japanese to conduct an exercise in historical honesty and not only acknowledge the facts but apologise on behalf of their predecessors , and to compensate the victims .
Finally , I would like to express my great respect and recognition for the women who had and continue to have the courage to speak out and demand justice , and for the organisations like Amnesty International that are supporting them on this journey .
author . - ( SV ) Madam President , the Resolution calls for justice and redress for the hundreds of thousands of women , so-called ' comfort women ' , who were forced into providing sexual services before and during the Second World War .
All these degraded women who were held in sexual slavery are still waiting for justice and redress .
The Japanese authorities have indeed done a certain amount but , as the Resolution shows , a great deal remains for the Japanese Government and authorities to do in order to give those women justice and redress .
The majority of the women who were forced into this dreadful situation were very young at the time .
That means that their whole lives have been destroyed by these terrible experiences .
They have been forced to live out their lives in poor physical and psychological health , isolation , shame , and often extreme poverty .
The fact that these women have not had full justice and redress also means that those who committed these crimes have effectively enjoyed immunity for their acts .
Again the victims , women , are punished while the perpetrators go free .
This Resolution is also important for the reason that it highlights what always happens in war and conflict zones , that it is always women who are the main victims .
It is therefore important that we draw attention to this matter .
We must try to put a stop to this .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , when we talk about crimes and when we think about crimes of the 20th century , we think above all of the crimes committed by the Germans and the Bolsheviks , or rather , to put it more broadly , the Communists .
In Europe we are less aware of the fact that in the Far East Japan committed immense crimes from the 1930s until the end of the war .
One of the greatest of these crimes was the sexual exploitation of women at this time .
Some 100 000 women from conquered countries in the Far East were forced into sexual slavery by the Imperial Armed Forces of Japan .
This sexual slavery , which was in itself totally criminal , had further consequences too .
These consequences were enforced abortions , mutilations and murders on a large scale , and large-scale instances of suicide among these women .
Obviously any of these women who are still alive today are very old .
It must be conceded that during the post-war period the Japanese Government did much to compensate for these dreadful offences against the women who experienced them .
Today this resolution calls on the Japanese Government to make a final political , moral and financial settlement upon those women who are still alive and with the families of those who have died .
This is most certainly their due .
author . - ( NL ) Madam President , I should like to start by expressing my solidarity with these women - I believe on behalf of all of us .
I am pleased that this is on the agenda , as it has taken a very long time .
The European Parliament has been wavering for five months over whether human rights for women should actually be a priority or not .
Mr Dillen , who has now left , has just said that oppression of women is typical of the Koran - which is complete nonsense , as the matter of ' comfort women ' shows that men do not need the Koran to repress and abuse women .
I am actually also rather disappointed with the attitude in the European Parliament .
As I have just said , this House wavered over this for a very long time , and I have heard even Members of this Parliament coming up with arguments such as ' Well , yes , but 90 % of these women did it of their own free will ' and ' Oh well , it is their culture , you have to understand that ' .
To be frank , I find this sickening .
It is rape , and rape is without exception a crime in all ages and all cultures .
I now gather that Japanese school textbooks have been adapted ; but I then hear from the Japanese embassy that the tale has to be told very cautiously , as pupils do not yet know much about sexuality and could incur psychological damage .
No-one talks about the psychological damage to the ' comfort women ' themselves .
To be frank , I find that quite shocking .
Anyway , I am pleased that this is now on our agenda and that we are just about to adopt it .
I think that it is important that apologies be sincere and unequivocal .
It is not a matter of a formality .
With the previous Prime Minister , Shinzo Abe , once more casting doubt on the whole issue , it is not sufficient for the current government to then say ' Oh , but we shall continue with the previous policy ' .
Sincere and unequivocal is what is needed .
Also , when I hear the arguments that have been forthcoming from the Japanese embassy in recent days - incidentally complete with a recognition of everything that has already been done - I think that much progress remains to be made on sincerity .
I hope , therefore , that this resolution expresses the solidarity of all of us with the victims .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am very grateful to the previous speaker for having drawn attention to the fact that no religion on this earth is immune to massive human rights violations against women , but this is more to do with dictatorship and authoritarian systems than with a specific religion .
Hundreds of thousands of women before and during the Second World War were forced into prostitution by the Japanese Imperial Armed Forces .
Historians ' estimates assume that around 200 000 of these ' comfort women ' from Korea , China , Taiwan and the Philippines were handed over to Japanese soldiers as sex slaves .
The ' comfort women ' system is one of the largest cases of human trafficking in the 20th century and led to gang rapes on a massive scale and to forced abortions .
After the end of the war , many women were murdered by the armed forces or prevented from returning home .
Many of the survivors remained silent out of shame about their past and were stigmatised and relegated to the fringes of society .
The issue of forced prostitution was not broached at the war crime trials and there was no talk of reparation .
Not until the end of the 1980s did the fate of the comfort women come to light again .
The reason for this was not an automatic change in awareness , but the rapidly growing women 's movement in South Korea .
Little by little , women who had been forced into prostitution spoke out publicly .
In 1992 weekly demonstrations began in front of the Japanese Embassy in Seoul with the words : the Japanese Government should be ashamed , not us .
In 1997 the Japanese Government was asked for the first time to take legal and moral responsibility internationally for the most severe human rights violations committed against women .
In her report the UN Special Rapporteur on violence against women demanded financial compensation for the victims and court sentences for the perpetrators .
The reaction of the Japanese Government at the time was an out and out rejection of these demands .
It has already been said several times today that the truth must be taken into account .
We are therefore asking the Japanese Government publicly to reject any assertions that deny or question the subjugation and enslavement of the comfort women and we are likewise demanding that they accept moral and legal responsibility for the enslavement of 200 000 people .
We are calling on the Japanese Government to implement mechanisms to provide reparations to all surviving victims and their families as quickly as possible .
Many victims of the comfort women system have passed away or are at least 80 years old , which means speed is of the essence .
We are also calling on our colleagues in the Japanese National Assembly , however , to make their contribution in parliament to help get these mechanisms accepted .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , there are pages in the world 's history we would wish not to be repeated anywhere , ever .
One of these pages is the story of ' comfort women ' .
I refer to the officially commissioned acquisition of young women by the Government of Japan , from the 1930s and during the Second World War , for the sole purpose of sexual servitude to the Japanese Imperial Armed Forces .
We do not know exactly the numbers of women who were enslaved but we know that the ' comfort women system ' included gang rape , forced abortions , humiliation and sexual violence , resulting in mutilation , death or eventual suicide , and that it was one of the largest cases of human trafficking in the 20th century , involving not hundreds but thousands of women .
Today , the remaining survivors are 80 and more years of age and one could argue that the problem is no longer an important issue .
But I fully understand the wish of these women and their families to clear their names .
Today we express our solidarity with the women who were victims of this system .
We call on the Japanese Government to formally acknowledge and accept historical and legal responsibility and to implement effective administrative mechanisms to provide reparations to all surviving victims of the ' comfort women system ' and to the families of deceased victims .
Taking into account the excellent relationship between the European Union and Japan , based on the mutually shared values of the rule of law and respect for human rights , I hope that the Government and the Parliament of Japan will take all necessary measures to recognise the sufferings of sex slaves and to remove existing obstacles to obtaining reparations before Japanese courts and that current and future generations will be educated about these events .
I am sure that official recognition of the existence of the ' comfort women system ' and an apology on behalf of the Japanese Government also would do much to help heal the wounds of our painful common history .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , people can be forgiven for their sins , but people 's crimes cannot be forgotten .
This applies as much to Japan as it did , for example , to Nazi Germany or Stalinist Russia .
The Japanese committed immensely barbaric war atrocities in the 1930s and 1940s .
To some extent , they paid dearly by having two of their cities , Hiroshima and Nagasaki , annihilated by the mighty nuclear holocaust brought upon them by the US .
However , Japan inflicted many dreadful evils on the world in the past , and one of these - the sexual slavery of ' comfort women ' - only came to prominence relatively recently .
Some of these poor and now frail elderly ladies are still with us , as the remnants of a past that is inconvenient for Japan but torturous for them .
These women are asking for two very simple things from today 's rich and powerful Japan : an official apology and very modest humanitarian aid .
Certainly , the European Parliament , with this joint motion for a resolution , expects and demands that the Japanese Government must do both and fast .
Otherwise , aside from the stigma of shame , the EU must consider taking particularly effective action against ex-imperial Japan .
Madam President , the subject of today 's debate is a violation of human rights that took place during the 1930s , during the Japanese occupation , when young women in the Imperial Armed Forces were sexually exploited and forced into prostitution , despite the fact that the Japanese Government had signed international conventions on combating traffic in women and children and supported the UN Resolution on Women , Peace and Security .
The sincere sympathy of the Japanese premier is currently being undermined by Japanese officials in connection with the closure of the Asian Women 's Fund programme and mandate in March 2007 , out of which only monetary compensation was paid to women .
In supporting the resolution and the demand for compensation , we would , however , point out that in modern times , too , the boundary between the normal and the pathological is being eroded , and this flies in the face of moral norms , so there is a need for radical moves to combat prostitution as a form of modern-day slavery .
Prostitutes are not just victims of wars that took place 50 years ago ; it could also be women of today who are being exploited , in the Belgian Congo , for example , as reported in the press , and indeed in many other countries , even rich ones .
In the name of respect for the human being we should also unmask the spread of a hedonistic and commercial culture that is pointing towards abuse in the area of se