Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 15 November 2007 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation in Georgia ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , on our agenda today we have the Commission statement on the partnership agreements with the ACP countries and a resolution is planned for this debate .
Our Group , this morning and in recent days , has held very intensive debates on this resolution .
We have also tried very hard to work out a compromise resolution with other groups , with a view to reaching such a compromise .
Unfortunately , that has proved impossible .
Nonetheless , we do not want to give up on this task and we are still attempting to reach a compromise before we have to resort to contested votes .
On behalf of my Group , I therefore propose that the resolution on this Commission statement and the vote on that resolution be postponed until the December part-session .
I would be grateful to the Members of this House if they could support this course of action , which would offer some scope for negotiations on a compromise .
Mr Schulz , we shall refer to this topic in due course , according to the order of business .
Wednesday :
The joint debate on Community railways will be held before Mrs Hieronymi 's report on television broadcasting .
The Ortuondo Larrea report on the interoperability of the Community rail system will be put to the vote during the next part-session in Strasbourg .
Thursday :
I would like to inform you that at voting time :
The report by Mr Leinen on the amendment of the regulation on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities is approved pursuant to Rule 43 ( 1 ) and is registered for voting .
The Blokland report on hazardous chemicals is deferred to the January part-session , so that conciliation can be achieved at first reading .
Now , about the topic you raised , Mr Schulz :
I have received from the Socialist Group a request that voting on the motions for a resolution on economic partnership agreements should be postponed until the December session , with new deadlines for submitting the texts as a result .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , I note the spirit of compromise shown by the Socialist benches and , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I must say that we are also open to compromise and will not therefore oppose this suggestion .
However , following the referendum in Venezuela , we should also like to have a resolution , during the December part-session , on the situation in that country .
In this spirit of compromise and also in the Christmas spirit , I feel that we can accommodate these proposals .
Mr Pinheiro , this topic does not concern Venezuela , but the proposal by the Socialist Group concerning postponement of the motions for a resolution on economic partnership agreements to the December session .
Does any Member wish to speak in favour of this proposal ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , you probably did not hear what I said .
I started by saying that , in a spirit of compromise , we would be prepared to accept this suggestion .
However , in that spirit of Christmas compromise , we should like our Socialist friends in turn to accept our proposal for a resolution on the issue of Venezuela following the referendum there .
Does any Member wish to speak against this proposal ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I am rather surprised at this proposal from the Socialist Group .
The joint motion for a resolution by the Socialists , the Greens and my Group incorporated the resolution adopted in Kigali .
In Kigali , the members of the PPE-DE Group also agreed to this compromise , so I simply cannot understand why everything should now be postponed for further debate when , together , Members of this House had already reached an agreement .
The fact is that everyone agreed to this compromise in Kigali !
I am therefore opposed to this postponement because the document in question has been endorsed by a large number of Members already and could be voted on today .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , just so that there are no misunderstandings : the problem is not the substance ; the problem is that they want to ensure that they get a majority .
I think that is legitimate .
You are absolutely right , Mr Markov ; the proposal implies that the debate should start again , which is hard to understand , but the Socialists ' idea - let 's see - is about securing a majority to endorse what everyone wants to achieve anyway .
That is the issue and that is the reason why they want a postponement .
That is all .
( Parliament approved the request )
The vote on the motions on economic partnership agreements is postponed until December and the deadlines proposed are as follows :
for tabling motions for a resolution , Wednesday , 5 December at 12 noon ;
for amendments and joint motions for a resolution , Monday , 10 December at 7 p.m.
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 12 December .
I have received a request from the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats for the debate on the statement by the Commission concerning the referendum in Venezuela to be concluded , with the submission of motions for a resolution .
Does any Member wish to speak against this request ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Mr de Deus Pinheiro has just mentioned the Christmas spirit .
I am also in favour of the Christmas spirit , but we should not overdo it .
After all , in that spirit , we were quite willing to have a compromise coming from Kigali .
As to Venezuela , there are always going to be differences of opinion , indeed controversy , in any debate about Mr Chávez .
We believe the debate is useful - indeed , it is now being held - but we are not convinced that we can get a sensible resolution in the short time available today or tomorrow .
If we take this resolution forward to the December part-session , it will be three weeks old by then .
It is very useful to have the debate now , but we do not want a resolution because it will either be cobbled together or will come far too late .
I think we should have the debate today , and that will be enough .
Does any Member wish to speak in support of this request ?
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , thank you for this opportunity .
There will be a new situation following the referendum which is about to take place in Venezuela .
This is a very important referendum and I felt that it was also important that this House should be able to have a rational debate on this issue now , bearing in mind the possible results of the referendum . We can then try to adopt a resolution in December .
I believe that this is possible and that we should make this effort .
It is in the spirit of Christmas and cooperation that I making this suggestion .
( Parliament rejected the request )
( The order of business was adopted thus amended )
Welcome
Today we have great pleasure in welcoming to our Parliament a delegation from the parliament of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan .
This delegation visited our Parliament last December in Strasbourg , and we are delighted to welcome them in Brussels too .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express our deep and sincere condolences to your Assembly and to the Afghan people for the terrorist attack of 6 November 2007 in which six members of your parliament and about 100 Afghan citizens lost their lives .
Among the victims was Sayed Mustafa Kazemi , who had been a member of the Afghan delegation on its visit to Strasbourg last year .
The purpose of your visit is to start a regular dialogue which will enable us to arrive more quickly at a better understanding of the political and social situation in Afghanistan , and which will give us the opportunity to discuss the assistance your country needs .
I am confident that you all regard this visit as a symbol of our joint efforts to promote democratic values and full respect for human rights throughout the world .
I would like to express our satisfaction at your visit , and our commitment to strengthening the cooperation between our governments .
From what I know , you already have fruitful contacts with the European Parliament , and I wish you a constructive continuation of your mission , an enjoyable stay , and a good journey back to your country .

Madam President , my point of order is under Rule 9 ( 2 ) , concerning the smooth conduct of parliamentary business .
We have been informed about the presence of asbestos in the Winston Churchill and SDM buildings in Strasbourg .
The latest report ' has confirmed a more widespread presence of asbestos ' than was initially believed in our places of work there .
Asbestos is one of the most dangerous carcinogens , and can endanger human life .
We should therefore request proper information on the risk assessment and detailed information on the removal of asbestos from Parliament 's buildings , including the schedule and safety measures for this .
The health and safety of MEPs , employees and visitors to Parliament should be an absolute priority .
Mr Hegyi , this is essentially not a procedural matter , but since you have raised such a vital issue , I would like to say that an announcement has already been made by the Secretary-General regarding the possible presence of asbestos in our buildings .
Approval by the European Parliament of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jo Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the approval by the European Parliament of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union ( 2007 / 2218 ( ΑCI ) ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the solemn proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights on 12 December in Strasbourg by the Presidents of the Council , Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates , the European Parliament and the European Commission will undoubtedly be one of the most significant moments in the recent history of the Union and the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union .
We will be taking a step forward that will have important and concrete implications for the consolidation of the universal values of human dignity , freedom , equality and solidarity .
Thanks to the new Lisbon Treaty , the Charter will have the same value as the Treaties ; in other words it will be legally binding .
This fact , given its importance , must be duly underlined and is something of which this Parliament , the national governments and the Commission should all be proud .
It marks the end of a long road .
The impact of the decision to give the Charter of Fundamental Rights legal value goes beyond the usual political and diplomatic circles as it directly affects the legal affairs of our citizens .
It is a concrete result of Europe .
Clearly , the institutional reforms of the Lisbon Treaty are important and it is also true that the changes made to EU policies , to the common foreign and security policy , to the justice and home affairs policy and in other areas are vital so that the Union can tackle the future and meet the challenges facing us .
However , the existence of a catalogue of rights , which is binding on the European institutions and on the Member States when they apply European law , has a meaning far beyond all this .
From now on we are putting our citizens at the centre of the European project .
As we are talking about fundamental rights , I also want , on behalf of the Presidency and also on behalf of my own country , to express my delight at the Protocol of the Lisbon Treaty which provides for the accession of the Union to the European Convention on Human Rights .
That is because this Protocol represents the achievement of a long-held ambition .
With regard to all of this , I must congratulate this Parliament and Mr Leinen on the adoption of this draft report on 12 November by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
This has once again shown the commitment of this House to the Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
It only remains for me to express my sincere desire that the House will also find itself able to vote in favour of this report , thus allowing the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be solemnly proclaimed by the three institutions on 12 December .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Charter of Fundamental Rights will be a key instrument in our Union based on the rule of law .
It contains a real catalogue of rights that all citizens of the Union should enjoy , from the individual rights related to dignity , freedoms , equality and solidarity to the rights linked to citizenship status and justice .
The Charter will not alter the Union 's competences , but it will offer strengthened rights and greater freedom for citizens .
The institutions , bodies , offices and agencies of the Union will be bound by the rights written into the Charter , and the same obligations will be incumbent upon the Member States when they implement the Union 's legislation .
Citizens will be able to claim before the courts the rights enshrined in the Charter , and the legal scrutiny of the Court of Justice will ensure that the Charter is applied correctly .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the legally binding force of the Charter has been preserved through the negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Like Parliament , we would have preferred to see the Charter apply to all 27 Member States , with no exceptions to its full justiciability , but we should not underestimate the results achieved .
Legal force is a major step forward in building a legitimate and accountable Union , where citizens ' interests are the focus of attention .
This was not obvious at the outset and it has been a long road to achieving this goal fully .
The Charter proclaimed in 2000 was not legally binding .
During the European Convention in 2002-2003 and in the IGC that followed in 2003-2004 , the Charter was adapted in order to make it legally binding , but that process was stopped due to the failure to ratify the Constitutional Treaty .
At the European Council in June 2007 , it was agreed that the future new Treaty would contain a cross-reference to the Charter , as adapted and finally approved in 2004 , and that it would have the same legal value as the Treaties , and this is now reflected in the new Treaty .
The rapporteur is proposing that Parliament should approve the Charter , which is a necessary step before its solemn proclamation , and , of course , the Commission fully supports this recommendation .
The Commission will also approve the Charter next week and authorise the President to proclaim it on 12 December , together with the Presidents of Parliament and the Council .
The proclamation of the revised Charter will provide the basis for a cross-reference in the new Treaty that will be signed the following day in Lisbon , extending the legal value and justiciability to the rights enshrined in it .
With the new Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Union will undeniably enhance its protection of human rights .
The European Union is not only a marketplace but also a common space based on values and common rights .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is a core element of the Lisbon Treaty ; indeed , we could even call it the soul of the new Reform Treaty .
I am pleased that all three institutions agree that the Lisbon Treaty is not just about institutions or about policies ; it is about people , namely the 500 million people in the European Union .
This Charter is a visible expression of the fact that the European Union is concerned about protecting our citizens in respect of all acts emanating from the European Union .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is thus a milestone . We are moving from a Europe of the states to a Europe of the citizens , and we in the European Parliament have always welcomed this development .
With this Charter and the 50 rights and freedoms contained within it , the European Union will have the most modern and comprehensive catalogue of fundamental rights in the world .
Nothing of the sort exists anywhere else in the world , so we should be proud of this achievement .
Starting with Article 1 , which talks about protecting human dignity , all the way through the Charter to the final Article , which deals with the right not to be punished twice for the same criminal offence , the Charter provides enhanced protection of rights and also mentions rights which are not necessarily found in all the constitutions of the 27 Member States .
I would simply draw your attention to the prohibition of the reproductive cloning of human beings through modern genetic technology , the right to protection of personal data , the right to freedom of information and the right of access to documents , but also the right to good administration , ' good governance ' , which is what we preach to the rest of the world , but which must naturally apply to ourselves as well .
For the first time , a catalogue of fundamental rights puts economic and social rights on an equal footing with political rights and civil liberties .
In an age of globalisation , I am confident that this provides people with adequate protection .
As Parliament has repeatedly pointed out , it is regrettable that the new Treaty does not reproduce the text of the Charter in full , so it will not be as visible as it might have been .
However , I think we should note , with satisfaction , Article 6 of the Lisbon Treaty which states : ' The Union recognises the rights , freedoms and principles set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , which shall have the same legal value as the Treaties . '
That removes any doubts for citizens of the European Union by confirming that , with this Treaty , they do have the opportunity to assert their rights before the national courts and , ultimately , the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
We still have to adopt this Charter again in plenary because it has been amended , and it could be said that it is not as good as the Charter from 2000 , unfortunately .
I am referring especially to the watering down of Article 52 , and there may be problems interpreting the very vague clauses you will find in that Article .
Nonetheless , the Charter has been rescued and is going to be part of the Treaties .
I believe that the Charter is a symbol .
As has been said in this House , the EU is not just a large market with an associated currency union ; the EU is a community of values , and its task is to defend these values in its internal policies and in Europe 's external policies as well .
It is all the more regrettable that there is an opt-out for two Member States , namely the United Kingdom and Poland .
We find this regrettable and I would like to appeal to the governments and parliaments of those two countries to spare no effort to revoke this opt-out as quickly as possible so that all 27 Member States are operating on the same basis when it comes to defending the fundamental rights and values of the European Union .
I therefore support the adoption of the Greens ' amendment here , which will be voted on tomorrow as an addendum to our report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of this important report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , this morning my Group celebrated and commemorated the approval of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Today the members of my Group are wearing a badge which says ' Yes to the Europe of values ' .
In this respect I agree with what previous speakers have said , particularly Madam Wallström , about the European Union not being just a market .
The European Union is a political project , but one based on principles and values which unite all European people .
As a result , Madam President , today is a good day , with a resolution that will allow us to celebrate and solemnly proclaim this Charter of Fundamental Rights during the next Strasbourg part-session .
In fact , I will not be revealing any secrets by saying that those of us who had the good fortune to participate in the drafting of this Charter in the first Convention were left with a bitter aftertaste .
This was for two reasons , the first being that , although we drafted the Charter as if it were to be legally binding , in the end this was not possible in Nice because six governments rejected this .
However , time has proven us right and now the Charter , thanks to the Lisbon Treaty , will be legally binding .
That bitter aftertaste has now been converted into satisfaction .
The second reason , Madam President , is that I remember how in Nice there was no solemn proclamation of the Charter .
A great opportunity was lost to explain to the European people that the rights and freedoms proclaimed in the Charter are our identifying marks , for it was signed in secret .
However , thanks to the determination of the President of the European Parliament and our three representatives in this Intergovernmental Conference , on 12 December during the Strasbourg part-session we will achieve what they failed to achieve in Nice .
We will solemnly proclaim this Charter and will reaffirm , as the members of the PPE-DE Group have done , our commitment to these rights and freedoms set out in this Charter .
We will vote , Madam President , in favour of Mr Leinen 's report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the PSE Group supports the readoption of the Charter in its new form so that it can , through the Reform Treaty , be made binding on the European institutions .
In so doing , we will be plugging a major gap .
The European institutions as such are not bound as yet in a watertight way to respect the same rights that all our Member States respect by virtue of their own constitutions or by virtue of their membership of the European Convention on Human Rights and other international human rights instruments . This Charter will be binding on the European institutions , and the whole field of Community law must respect those rights , failing which European legislation can be struck down in the courts .
It is surprising that some Euro-sceptics who , one would think , would be pleased that the European institutions are obliged - are constrained - to act in this way , are opposing this Charter - yet some of them are !
It is perhaps unfortunate that , as a result of that , some Member States have felt it necessary to clarify , in a protocol , how the Charter interacts with their domestic law .
That has , in turn , given rise to confusion .
A colleague just now referred to that as an ' opt-out ' ; it is , of course , not an opt-out .
The Charter remains binding on the European institutions and on the full field of Community law , irrespective of how it affects domestic law in certain countries .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the solemn proclamation of the Charter is the climax of our work , stretching back to 1999 , aimed at creating a superior form of rights regime for the Union .
Since the principal purpose of the Charter is to protect citizens from abuse of the large powers now vested in the Union , it is bizarre and regrettable that a Member State should seek to escape its binding effect .
It is my belief that the British protocol will be found to be juridically flawed , as well as a serious political mistake .
The courts are bound to develop jurisprudence for the entire Union system that is blind to nationality and faithful to the key principle of Union law , which is that we draw our fundamental rights from the traditions that are common to all our Member States , as opposed to being exclusive to one .
In my view , and that of my Group , the British opt-out is shameful and should fade to oblivion as quickly as possible .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , in 2000 the Charter of Fundamental Rights was drawn up as a declaration of the values that were to guide the Union 's policy .
The Union itself was to become a party to the European Convention on Human Rights .
At that juncture , the European Court of Justice was to cease ruling on the basis of general legal principles derived from the constitutions of Member States .
It is now 2007 and the Union is to accede to the European Convention , but not , however , so that it becomes the only European system for protecting human rights .
We are creating an alternative system based on a legally binding charter of rights .
In many respects this is a first .
General legal principles will remain the third set of grounds for rulings in matters concerning fundamental rights .
All this is complicating the system for protecting fundamental rights in Europe , and making it even less comprehensible to the citizens .
Many Europeans are concerned about the situation .
Essentially , these are the reasons why two Member States opted for protocols protecting against the unexpected consequences of the effects of the Charter .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , today , I am proud to be a Member of this House which from the very first day has been a stalwart champion of fundamental and civil rights in general and this Charter of Fundamental Rights in particular .
It is now nine years since the Cologne Summit took the initiative to start working towards a legally binding Charter , and this process is not yet complete .
As somebody who has been privileged to follow this constitutional process all the way through , I would like to share two experiences with you .
One is very ironic : it is odd that , over these nine years , nothing has proved to be so laborious and controversial , or as difficult to achieve , as those documents which embody the principles which form the very basis of the European Union and which we should be able to take for granted : democracy , parliamentary rights , social rights , the market economy , transparency of legislation and fundamental freedoms and rights .
It is a very odd situation and must surely have to do with the root causes of the crisis of confidence besetting the European Union .
The second experience which I would like to share with you is this : it is important not to become exhausted or disenchanted , and it is important not to lose heart .
I have long believed that Sisyphus is the patron saint of Europe , and this whole experience bears this out .
That is why I think that , today of all days , we should try again and appeal to the United Kingdom and Poland , in the name of the indivisibility of fundamental rights , in the name of the indivisibility of human rights and fundamental rights and liberties , to join in this great European consensus !
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , during our next sitting we will again approve the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Before we do this , let me ask a question which is perhaps not as simple as it appears .
Will this be the initial Charter proclaimed in the year 2000 or , as the Leinen report suggests , will it be the adapted rehash integrated within the former draft Constitutional Treaty ?
The two texts are not , of course , identical and I feel it is unfortunate that their differences are not clearly set out , although that would have raised some legitimate controversy .
For example , the French human rights commission expressed , and I quote , its grave concern about the amendments made to the articles on social rights - I am still quoting - that threaten to remove the social content of the Charter .
One of the main authors of the original Charter , the lawyer Guy Braibant , explained in the press - and I quote - that the conditions for applying the text have changed .
First of all , the word ' may ' is occasionally replaced by ' must ' .
Moreover - and I am still quoting - there is an official reference to ' explanations ' by the Presidium .
Although they ought to be pedagogical and completely neutral , the explanations interpret laws in a rather minimal sense .
Fundamental rights have been undermined , unquote .
Which text will we be approving in the next sitting ?
I also have a subsidiary question : will this approval be valid in all EU countries ?
This kind of action cannot entertain any ambiguity .
Thus I would appreciate a precise reply to these two questions .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I have been involved in the preparation of the Charter , and in both conventions I have proposed a very simple solution : allow the EU to become a member of the European Convention on Human Rights .
In this way , the institutions would be bound in the same way as the countries .
We would close a gap .
When we make the Charter legally binding , we are not closing any gaps .
On the contrary , we are creating a number of gaps in the protection that we enjoy as citizens under our national constitutions and as part of our common European human rights .
The Luxembourg Court 's activist interpretation will always take precedence over both Strasbourg and our own Supreme Court .
The Charter is unsuitable as an independent source of law .
It is much too imprecise .
Does the right to life begin at birth ? If not , then how many months before ?
Does the right to take industrial action also apply to public sector employees ?
Freedom of speech for public servants is much better under the Strasbourg Court than under the Luxembourg Court .
In addition , yesterday we saw a textbook example of possible conflicts .
The German journalist Hans-Martin Tillack obtained the support of the Strasbourg Court , which stated that OLAF had acted unlawfully when it arrested him and confiscated 16 boxes of documents , computers and telephones .
Luxembourg supported the theft of the journalist 's sources .
Strasbourg condemned the theft and arrest because it prioritised freedom of the press .
The Charter will be presented as a victory for human rights .
Possibly .
It is more reminiscent of a fake lottery ticket .
In a sense we are taking a great risk with regard to hard-earned human rights such as freedom of speech and freedom of the press .
The drawing of the lottery numbers is decided by judges in Luxembourg outside parliamentary control , and only when they are condemned will there be a unanimous amendment of the treaties to correct any backlash .
It is very impractical , and it is more like an imprisonment of our rights than a charter .
Madam President , we all support human rights , and I am growing a little tired of some people - particularly those from states where , historically speaking , human rights are something of a novelty - attacking the UK as some sort of pariah because of its ' gesture ' opt-out under Protocol 7 .
Let me remind them that , as long ago as 1688 , a bill of rights lay at the heart of the Glorious Revolution in the United Kingdom .
Since then , the UK has been a beacon of liberty .
So we need no finger-pointing lessons in human rights .
People might be irked that we have spoilt the party by withholding , for now , from some of the trappings of EU super-statehood , but I would point out that it is our national and political right to do so .
Sadly , though , the opt-out will fade out as the European Court of Justice sets about its centralising agenda .
Ultimately , though , those people will get their way - should the UK be so foolish as to ratify this Treaty despite the opposition of its people .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President , it is also one of the fundamental rights of citizens not to be overlooked .
This Charter of Fundamental Rights does indeed provide protection for citizens akin to that afforded by the classic constitutional state .
However , the European Union is not a state .
It is not a state , but it does have legislative competence , and it is only this legislative competence of the European Union 's institutions which falls under the protection and control of the Charter of Fundamental Rights on a binding basis .
Associated with this is the fact that European legislation and the actions of the European institutions are bound by values and value-based decisions , along with the first sentence of this Charter , which is also the most noble : human dignity is inviolable .
I derive this principle from a Christian image of humanity .
However , it can be derived from other sources as well .
Our binding commitment to this principle , and the binding commitment of our three institutions to adhere to this principle , represents a massive step forward .
This applies to the European Union as a whole .
Poland and the United Kingdom are rule-of-law states ; there is no doubt about that .
The fact is , however , that by not signing and by opting out of the Charter , they are not protecting themselves ; they are shielding something that is already protected .
The fact is that this Charter is not applicable to national legislation and national institutions at all .
In other words , they are protecting something that can already be taken as a given .
In Poland in particular - where a majority in Parliament and a majority of the people take a different view , but where the President is making use of his prerogatives - I hope that change will come about in time .
The legally binding nature of the Charter can be further reinforced if we pursue a harmonised strategy .
Mr President-in-Office , I am grateful to you for the fact that we are utilising the opportunity afforded by single legal personality and are acceding to the Strasbourg Convention .
If this is successful , the European area of justice will achieve coherence , bringing together the protection of fundamental rights at both national and European level .
I hope the outcome will be a value-oriented Europe of citizens of which we can be proud !
( PL ) Madam President , the Charter of Fundamental Rights is the early 21st century counterpart to the great statements on human rights and citizens ' rights made in the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries .
Those were famous declarations on freedom and the rule of law that forged contemporary democracy .
Our Charter has its roots in events that contributed to the development of democracy and the contemporary system of liberal democracy during the last 200 years .
I see no reason why certain European countries should not adopt this Charter .
I put it to Mr Szymański , how can one seriously argue against the Charter in a country that was the birthplace of Solidarność , thanks to whose leadership the whole of Europe gained its current understanding of the right to freedom , the rule of law and democracy ?
I appeal to the Polish Government in Warsaw , and in particular to Mr Tusk , the Prime Minister .
Mr Tusk , your parliamentary group won the elections a month ago thanks to the votes of those Poles who wish the Charter to be included in the European Reform Treaty .
I trust you will not disappoint the voters who supported you just over a month ago .
I call on the Polish Government to include the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Reform Treaty , so that it will be binding in my homeland too .
The Poland of Solidarność , European Poland , the Poland of tolerance and openness believes that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a key element of the Reform Treaty .
We should not allow ourselves to be blackmailed by the conservative right wing , which would like us to agree not to implement this Charter in our homeland .
( PL ) Mr President , I believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a sine qua non for any community wishing to operate pursuant to the value system derived from respecting human dignity .
This gives rise to the principles of freedom , equality and solidarity .
I see no reason why countries such as the United Kingdom or Poland that wish to be part of the Community should refuse to be involved in something that constitutes the foundation of our common action .
This Charter advocates reference to social values , to the European social model .
It also states unambiguously that , where local customs and practices are concerned , internal national law applies .
This means that there are no grounds for any type of opt-out to apply in this area .
I trust that both Poland and the United Kingdom will choose to opt in instead .
( PL ) Mr President , the debate on this report touches on many issues , and indirectly on the basis for creating a new legal framework .
In August 2007 the President of this Parliament made a statement in that regard at a gathering of displaced persons .
He stated that the source of the right to a homeland should be sought in the right to dignity , and that the right to a homeland is therefore a fundamental human right .
The right to dignity is enshrined in the first article of the Charter .
The President 's opinion was criticised in the Polish Parliament .
The German association of displaced persons laments the fate of people resettled from Poland .
What would happen if the German lament and specific interpretation of human dignity were applied to Alsace and Lorraine ?
Might a centre for the resettled be set up in this case too , or will there be reconciliation ?
Attempting to derive the right to a homeland from the right to dignity is a misinterpretation of the axiology of human rights , as stated by Mr Karski , a Member of the Polish Parliament .
An interpretation clarifying primary legislation is acceptable , but not its extension .
The President of the European Parliament referred to Pope John Paul II .
I should like to remind this House and its President that in 1965 Archbishop Karol Wojtyła published a written declaration according to which German bishops had stated clearly that Germans resettled from the East wished , and indeed had , to understand that a whole new generation of Poles was growing up there , and that these Poles considered the land assigned to their parents to be their own homeland .
No legal or moral disquisition or sentimental spokespersons are called for on this subject .
I do believe that we can achieve unanimity on the Charter in this House , however , despite President Sarkozy 's recent suggestion that unanimity contradicts democracy .
Vain hopes , Mr Sarkozy , since you are unable to convince even the Paris metro workers .
( NL ) Mr President , no one can dispute that the citizens of Europe must be armed with fundamental rights and freedoms , vis-à-vis their own countries as well as the European Union .
A Europe without rights and freedoms would cease to be Europe .
However , that is not the problem nowadays because the citizens are already sufficiently protected against their national governments both by their own national constitutions and by the European Convention on Human Rights .
As regards the European institutions , European citizens can also assert their fundamental freedoms and rights in accordance with the fixed jurisdiction of the Court of Justice .
The real point here is that , with the proclamation of this Charter , another step is taken towards a federal Europe .
People want a European Bill of Rights just like in the federal United States .
The difference between them , though , is that this Charter goes much further than an enumeration of the traditional rights and freedoms .
Sometimes , however , it does seem like an enumeration of all kinds of socio-economic promises .
The manifest does not tally in the slightest with the cargo .
( SV ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , Mr President-in-Office , Members and - not least - citizens of Europe , today is a festive occasion , a great day , a day of joy , an immensely important day , much more important than many realise right now .
It is important both to those who believe in fundamental rights as a principle and to those who believe in the development and integration of Europe .
It should have been completely self-evident a very long time ago that the EU 's institutions had to be bound by the values we all endorse , but it was not so .
In fact British people also believe in the principles of law , irrespective of how they come into being .
Few parliamentarians would say that they are happy to assist in the suppression of human rights ; indeed the great majority take entirely the opposite view .
It has been a joy and an honour to be involved in the development of these values , which I am convinced mean so much to us .
Now we all know what this Union stands for , even if we could not manage to read the whole Treaty .
They are fine values , they are good values , they are values we must all contribute to , and we must ensure that the Union helps to apply them correctly .
Heartfelt thanks to Jo Leinen and to all who have assisted in the work , and - not least - heartfelt congratulations to the people of Europe !
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , on 12 December , the President of Parliament , together with the Presidents of the European Council and the European Commission , will solemnly proclaim the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
I am convinced that , in tomorrow 's vote , the overwhelming majority of Members will voice their agreement with this historic document and this historic step .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights reflects the moral and spiritual heritage of the peoples of Europe in the European Union .
It reflects values such as human dignity , freedom , equality , solidarity , the principles of democracy and the rule of law .
It places the focus of attention on the individual because , among other things , the Charter establishes citizenship of the Union .
I am glad that the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights is taking place after the enlargement of the European Union to include the new Member States .
This means that the Charter , in its own way , is a moral , legal and political reflection of the unity of the European Union : West and East , North and South .
I also believe that both the governments and the parliaments of Poland and the UK will come to understand this fact , and that in the near future they will enable their citizens to join in this historic moment .
( SK ) I welcome the approval of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union as it makes those rights that already exist for citizens of the European Union more visible .
However , I would also like to call for clarification of possible conflicts of interest between the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , a European Union document , and the European Convention on Human Rights , a Council of Europe document , which the European Union has also declared it will observe .
From this it also follows that there may be a conflict of interests between the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg and the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
Where will the Strasbourg Court stand in relation to the Luxembourg Court ?
As a supreme court , a constitutional court ?
Is this outcome actually acceptable for the European Court of Justice ?
Will the European Union , which possesses a legal personality , have a separate judge in the European Court of Human Rights ?
I want to stress the need to resolve this legal issue so that we can avoid a problem , because with the Charter of Fundamental Rights becoming legally binding , I expect an increase in legal disputes in the area of human rights .
( DE ) Mr President , like almost all the previous speakers - only almost all , unfortunately - I am pleased that today , or tomorrow , we will give a mandate to the President of this House to sign the Charter .
Human rights are our European trade mark both within and outside Europe .
Nonetheless , may I advise caution and that we do not get carried away by our emotions and bite off more than we can chew .
With the Charter and the necessary ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , we are establishing the important and classic basic rights and the important social rights on a legally binding basis , which means that they will be binding for the European institutions and the application of Community law .
We are also making it possible to have recourse to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg in respect of these basic rights , albeit under certain very narrowly defined conditions .
However , this does not mean that every citizen will be able to petition the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg immediately , or indeed at all , as some people - swept away by their emotions - have occasionally claimed .
That kind of claim does not serve our interests .
Let us stop making these assertions , which overshoot the mark , and let us feel a sense of gratification at the result that we have achieved .
In the European Union , we have now set an important course - not only in relation to the classic rights but for our social policy too - of which we can in all conscience be proud .
It includes the work / life balance , the prohibition of child labour , health protection for everyone and a high level of environmental and consumer protection .
We should be pleased about that ; it is the truth , and there is no need to embellish it .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe we are discussing an extraordinarily important subject for the people .
Clearly , trying to explain the reform of the European Union can be very complicated , but it is certainly easy to underline the importance of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Will it be legally binding ?
This will not be explicitly stated in the Treaty , but it is our duty to make this known .
I therefore feel that the decision we have taken to sign the Charter before the Lisbon Treaty is signed is very positive .
From now on we must also say that no further exceptions will be allowed in the future as these are bad for the citizens of the countries concerned and for the citizens of the European Union as a whole .
I therefore believe it is vital that we make an effort , as proposed by Mr Leinen in his report , to clearly support the Charter of Fundamental Rights and its legally binding nature .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) The citizens of European countries have fought both separately and together for each of the rights contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
For this very reason , it is a joyful thing that , with the Charter of Fundamental Rights being made legally binding , fundamental rights can finally be realised more effectively , not only at Member State level but also at the level of European legislation and application .
European citizens will enjoy its benefits if they can have recourse to legal remedy in the event of a breach of their fundamental rights at European level .
Such guarantees will make the European Union and its institutions more democratic , and more directly accessible and more verifiable for half a billion European citizens .
Making the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding will close a chapter in the history of the fight for fundamental rights .
At the same time , I think that , with regard to the future , the Charter of Fundamental Rights must become the ars poetica of Europe .
Alongside the common economic interest , Europe must show the way in fundamental rights , and forge those living there as one , and not only through the classic rights of freedom , but also in guaranteeing social and cultural rights , equal treatment and the rights of minorities .
Horace said in his ars poetica , ' Examine well , ye writers , weigh with care , what suits your genius ; what your strength can bear ' .
I hope that the institutions of the European Union will be strong and brave enough to be able to guarantee the same fundamental rights to all European citizens in every corner of Europe .
in writing . - ( FI ) On 19 October in Lisbon a Treaty was signed which was to make the European Union more viable and more democratic .
It would also strengthen civil rights .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union must be made legally binding , and the EU should accede to the European Convention on Human Rights .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights formed the second part of the unratified Constitution .
In an intergovernmental conference Members of this Parliament passed an initiative whereby the Presidents of the European Parliament and the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council would sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights in a ceremony in Parliament 's plenary on 12 December and it would be published in the Official Journal of the European Union .
This accords excellently with the values that the Charter of Fundamental Rights represents .
A ceremonial signing will also increase the document 's visibility .
It therefore goes without saying that we wish to give our President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , a mandate to sign .
Common principles on flexicurity ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Christensen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on common principles of flexicurity .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , I thought you were asking me to make a final speech on the Charter debate , a speech which I do not have prepared , hence the reason for my confusion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of flexicurity is now a key item on the European agenda and is essential for the future of Europe 's economic and social models .
It is a complex issue involving the capacity to manage change and promote employment and social security reform in a rapidly changing global context which requires responses to the challenges of global competition , technological innovation and population ageing .
We need more flexible markets , but this also means that we must ensure better conditions , better instruments and more security for our citizens so that they can handle this change positively .
That is the challenge facing us .
For our part , the Portuguese Presidency has tried to contribute actively to the search for integrated and balanced solutions in this area .
Following the Commission communication presented in June , we were responsible for conducting a process aimed at carrying out the European Council mandate and achieving consensus on the common principles of flexicurity .
The Commission communication naturally formed an excellent starting point for this work as it helped us to develop the concept and increase discussion of the solutions that could serve as a common platform for the various lines which each Member State will have to follow .
Bearing in mind that the starting points and situations are different , the solutions will also have to differ .
In order to create the conditions for progress in this area , we developed various initiatives with the main actors at European level , including a Conference on the challenges of flexicurity .
This was politically well-attended and discussed the developments in this respect and also future prospects .
We also sought to analyse the experience gained in countries where models have been applied with good results and to identify which elements of these models can be used in other contexts .
We also obtained the opinions of expert committees on employment and social welfare and also the Committee of the Regions .
In addition we tried to encourage the social partners in this area to become involved as we are aware that this new model requires firm commitment from all the stakeholders , yet it also requires that everyone 's interests be taken into account .
In this context , the understanding that we reached with the social partners at the Tripartite Social Summit held on 18 October in Lisbon gave important impetus to this debate .
Social dialogue at various levels and the involvement of the social partners are decisive in ensuring the success of any strategy to reform the labour markets .
The involvement of everyone in this process is key to finding successful solutions and we need a climate of trust between social partners and with the institutions .
We all have to be prepared to accept and take responsibility for the change .
I want to highlight the quality of the debate and interventions at all stages , both in technical and academic terms and also in terms of the discussion on the political content and on the process .
As a result of all this work that I have mentioned , during which we were always able to count on the assistance of the Commission , the Council is now able to endorse a set of common principles on flexicurity which we hope to formally adopt at the meeting on 5 and 6 December .
These common principles on which we are all agreed include , in particular , taking account of the diversity of national situations which will require different approaches and solutions , the need to overcome labour market segmentation , the various dimensions of flexicurity - labour legislation , education , training , social welfare - recognising the relevance of social dialogue in this context , promoting social inclusion , non-discrimination , equality and reconciliation of work and family life , and also defending the need to ensure the compatibility of policies with the solidity and sustainability of public finances .
I want to stress that , in essence , there is broad agreement with this House . I must underline the excellent work that we have done and that this House has done in this area .
Once adopted , the common principles shall form an essential instrument for implementing the next cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Member States will be invited to take account of these principles when defining and implementing their national policies , by developing their own mechanisms and approaches depending on their specific situations which will be monitored in the framework of national reform programmes .
Social partners at all levels will also be encouraged to help define and implement the flexicurity measures and also to use the common principles as a reference .
We feel it is essential to invest in the social mobilisation of our citizens within this strategy and , in this context , I must mention the vital importance of this House 's involvement .
Given who it represents politically and its proximity to the people , this House can make an excellent contribution to ensuring better understanding of the flexicurity concept .
The key principle is that flexibility and security must be seen as mutually supporting and reinforcing elements , rather than as opposing elements , and this must be fully understood by our citizens .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , the Commission 's communication on flexicurity has triggered an important and useful discussion throughout the Union .
I thank the rapporteur , Mr Christensen , and the other Members who have taken an active part in discussing flexicurity .
Thanks to your efforts and cooperation with the other parliamentary committees , the European Parliament will be able to adopt a resolution that will significantly support the approach that the Commission has proposed .
In our society , security depends on change .
Now we must coordinate ways to seek new forms of security : better skills , the ability to find new jobs , modern protective measures adapted to the new labour market .
In recent years , for every job that has been lost in Europe in the industrial sector , four new jobs have been created in other sectors .
The most important question is how to gain control over these shifts and how to manage this change successfully .
We must also pose the question of the reasons for labour market segregation in a number of Member States .
I very much welcome the report that you are considering today .
This report recognises that flexicurity can be a strategy for labour market reform .
The text also supports the four-part policy structure formulated for flexicurity by the Commission .
I can also fully support the proposal relating to common principles mentioned in paragraph 15 of this report .
Your proposals take approximately the same direction as the proposals made by the Commission in its own communication .
I understand your desire for some issues , such as measures to combat insecurity , to be explained more precisely .
However , I believe that the principles must be concise and that they must be viewed from the standpoint of the whole communication .
I would also like to welcome the European social partners ' agreement with the analysis of labour market problems ; their analysis was presented at the recent Tripartite Social Summit in Lisbon on 18 October 2007 and , among other things , also looked at flexicurity .
This agreement indicates that social dialogue can bring concrete results .
Indeed , you have referred to this joint analysis in your motion for a resolution .
Now I would like to reply to some of the critical views expressed in your report .
I know you go on to say that discussion about flexicurity should be more balanced .
First of all I would like to remind you that the Commission 's communication is the result of intensive dialogue between all the stakeholders and careful consultation with leading specialists in this field .
I am convinced that the Commission 's approach is balanced , since the objective is to support flexibility and security simultaneously and , as has already been said , as two elements that are synergetic and in no way inconsistent .
It is obvious that discussion of flexicurity must not be misused to move towards labour market deregulation .
On the contrary , flexibility and mobility must aim higher : that is , towards better jobs , towards a better balance between work and family and private life , a more efficient economy as a whole .
As you know , in the next few weeks the Council will make a decision on common principles of flexicurity .
After that , national discussions scheduled by all the stakeholders will continue , making it possible to pursue flexicurity strategies at the national level with regard to the specific features of individual states .
I am confident that the individual stakeholders will ensure that a balanced approach can be achieved in the area of flexicurity .
As far as costs are concerned , it should be appreciated that the costs connected with a flexicurity policy are much lower than the concrete benefits in terms of a more dynamic labour market and reduced unemployment .
Moreover , in a number of instances , it will mean no increase in financial costs , but more efficient use of available resources instead .
I would also like to react to the paragraph of the report in which it is stated that the open-ended contract should form the basis of a social security system .
The Commission 's intention is in no way to reduce the importance of the open-ended contract .
However , I believe that we should adopt more general systems of social security , which would apply both to open-ended contracts and to part-time employment : in short , the intention is that these forms of employment should also be provided with adequate social security cover , not that open-ended contracts should be weakened .
Mr President , I believe that , with the exception of these few reservations , the report is a useful , relevant contribution to the discussion about flexicurity , and once again I would like to thank the European Parliament for it .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure to stand here today as rapporteur .
The negotiations in Parliament have been completed , and we can present a balanced report that reflects attitudes across the entire political spectrum .
The whole concept behind these guidelines on flexicurity is to tackle the challenges faced by the labour markets of Europe .
Note that I use the plural , ' labour markets ' , because the report recognises that there is no ' one size fits all ' as far as flexicurity is concerned .
Although there is no common model for flexicurity , we must recognise that Europe faces many common challenges in its labour markets that require a joint response .
The demographic challenges mean that in 2050 there will be 1.5 employees for every pensioner .
Currently , the figure is 3 employees per pensioner .
Around 100 million Europeans are living in or on the threshold of poverty .
The effects of inequality can be seen all too easily when you compare countries where there are major differences , such as those in Eastern and Western Europe . However , they can also be seen internally in countries where we are witnessing increasing inequality .
Six percent of employees in Europe can be characterised as ' working poor ' and a growing number are experiencing poorer working conditions with uncertain employment circumstances and very poor working conditions .
Short-term contracts and temporary work are on the increase , and the ordinary open-ended employment contract is under threat .
Such precarious employment amounts to 12 % in Europe .
In addition , undeclared and unlawful employment is increasing .
In some countries , unlawful employment accounts for almost 15 % of all employment .
This development is something that we must turn around , partly because it is expensive for Europe and partly because these uncertain and unstable employment circumstances often affect the weaker groups in society .
Education is Europe 's most important raw material in the competitive global market , but it is not being given enough attention .
In fact , 15 % of our young people are leaving the education system too soon , at a time when the labour market is placing major demands upon knowledge .
Those who do not jump on the education bandwagon will experience difficulties in the long term , and we therefore have an obligation to help such people .
Thus , the challenges are clear to Europe .
Our responsibility is to deliver a message and a vision of how we will tackle these challenges .
In this connection I would like to thank the Commission for its excellent contribution .
We have enjoyed good cooperation in connection with the report , in which my role has naturally been to gather up the loose ends here in this House .
My perception as rapporteur is that there is a need for a stronger focus on the social Europe , to ensure that workers ' rights are respected throughout the EU and for us to have more and better jobs .
Greater flexibility within organisations must not come about at the expense of employees ' working conditions .
How can we ensure this ?
The report specifically emphasises the need for the open-ended employment contract to become the standard contract type in Europe .
Secondly , we must ensure that social partners are involved to a greater extent .
That decisions cannot be taken above the heads of employees lies at the heart of a flexible and secure labour market .
The inclusion of employees is absolutely essential , and this cannot be emphasised enough in the implementation of flexicurity strategies .
Finally , the report is concerned with what we might call the framework for flexicurity .
In other words , the national terms and conditions for implementing flexibility and security .
Flexibility and flexicurity cost money .
However , it is not wasted money ; it is by contrast money that is invested and produces a bonus .
For example , if you invest in your workforce , it might perhaps be an expense in the short term , but experience has shown that it will pay dividends in the longer term .
Therefore , flexicurity as we understand the concept in Northern Europe requires a welfare state of a certain calibre and size .
In this connection we must be honest and say that the developments that we are witnessing in some countries , where there is competition for lower and lower taxes , will make it very difficult to finance the security aspect of flexicurity .
Therefore , I will attempt once and for all to silence all the voices that claim that flexicurity is a neo-liberal concept aimed at undermining the rights of employees .
This is not the case ; on the contrary .
In conclusion , I hope that , through this debate here in this House and around Europe , we will be able to dispel some of the myths that abound in connection with flexicurity .
As rapporteur , I have , with considerable help from my colleagues , been able to draw up some balanced guidelines for flexicurity , guidelines that show how Europe should develop its labour market in the future in order to make it both competitive and social .
With such a strategy , we will also discover how to tackle the uncertainty that exists amongst employees in Europe .
Many are currently afraid that their jobs will be relocated and that their place in the labour market will become superfluous .
Finally , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteur , the rapporteurs from the other committees and everyone else who has otherwise contributed to this report . I will conclude by expressing the hope that the Heads of State or Government will incorporate Parliament 's recommendations in their further work towards achieving the common guidelines for flexicurity when they meet in Portugal in December .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( SV ) Mr President , I thank the rapporteur for a job well done .
The changes which globalisation engenders offer new and better opportunities for all the world 's countries but , of course , they also pose challenges .
Europe stands at a crossroads .
We can choose to welcome the new and flexible economy and its possibilities or retreat into protectionism in various forms .
Flexicurity is one of the most important tools for the creation of a labour market which , as the rapporteur says , fully utilises the potential of the labour force .
Training , mobility and employability are keywords .
Clearly no single model is universally applicable , but we can and should learn from one another .
We make the point in the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs that protection systems which are too rigid may indeed protect those who are on the inside , but they can make it difficult for others to enter the labour market .
Population growth in Europe is a problem too , which the rapporteur also pointed out .
More people will need jobs .
Flexicurity , when used correctly , is a good model for Europe to continue to develop positively in a global economy .
The example of Denmark , which the rapporteur did not mention , I think shows this .
Mr President , there is one thing at least that we should agree on in this House , namely that too many are without jobs today .
Europe must continue to grow so that new jobs can be created .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Christensen 's report has been crucial in taking forward the initial document .
These principles are potentially very valuable , but only if at the same time there are safeguards for all at-risk groups - immigrants , women , the elderly and the disabled - as well as for adults who have a low level of education and are more vulnerable and less well protected .
Furthermore , the inequalities in our society are becoming ever more widespread , such as the lack of a minimum wage - which must be adopted in all countries - and the need to recognise workers ' rights .
The knowledge base of workers must likewise be raised .
Allocating economic funding for the implementation of these principles and identifying genuine resources is also a matter of urgency .
Lastly , it seems to me that in recent years there have been many new sources of imbalance in the relations between capital and labour : profits and financial speculation have gained the upper hand while wages have fallen .
Addressing this imbalance is one of the tasks we must take on together in carrying these issues forward .
Mr President , the so-called flexicurity model is unlikely to be effective in the European labour market unless it is accompanied by other actions and proposals aimed at promoting entrepreneurship and making it easier to set up businesses .
I have in mind , for example , the work on drawing up a statute for the European private company .
Regarding the common principles for implementing flexicurity , I should like to emphasise that the introduction of complex legislative solutions at European level in this area runs counter to the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
Social and employment policy falls within the competences of the Member States , and any European Union action in the area of flexicurity must comply with the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in Article 5 of the EU Treaty .
In addition , the internal complexity of the model is not favourable to the introduction of Community legislative standards and to a so-called one size fits all approach to the matter .
The outcome of the impact assessment indicates that open coordination may be the most appropriate method .
This is particularly important for the new Member States which may be confronted with different structural problems in the area of employment in view of the legacy of their past .
The high short-term costs associated with the introduction of paths towards implementation of the flexicurity model must also be borne in mind , together with the significant burden on budgets .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the reforms that the European Union must carry out in order to secure a competitive position in the world economy cannot be seen purely as limited public sector initiatives but as also requiring changes in behaviour and attitudes on the part of both workers and companies .
These changes can only be successfully achieved if there is a climate of trust between social partners , and this can only be developed by promoting social dialogue .
As regards managing the labour market , we must switch from a mindset dominated by the culture of conflict to a new approach based on the culture of cooperation .
Personally I do not like the term ' flexicurity ' .
I would prefer to talk about ' change with security ' because any change involves risks .
The important point is to minimise those risks .
People cannot be asked to be flexible when they have no confidence either in themselves or in the world around them .
We therefore constantly stress in this report the need for active employment policies and lifelong learning systems .
The PPE-DE Group tabled 120 amendments to the initial report and , following a process of negotiation , we have arrived at a final version which I believe is balanced and comprehensive .
A good balance has been achieved between the concepts of flexibility and security and also between the interests of all the stakeholders in the process , in particular social partners and public authorities .
The report clearly refers to the need to apply principles of subsidiarity and proportionality when implementing and managing flexicurity .
I therefore recommend that this report be adopted by the House .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I offer many congratulations to the rapporteur .
I have four points , the first of which is to the Commission .
First in its Green Paper on labour law and now in its communication on flexicurity , it puts the emphasis on employment security rather than job security .
We put the emphasis on both and that is because we recognise the needs of flexible firms .
A flexible firm is one that needs to change a production line every six months or IT configuration every four months and that needs an adaptable , well-qualified , loyal workforce - and you do not get that at all from a fragmented , segmented , casualised labour force .
Secondly , flexicurity needs a whole range of factors in place to work properly : a good , stable macroeconomic climate , investment in good , active labour market policies , well-developed social dialogue and high-quality policies for social protection .
All these elements are important , and one thing is clear : they do not come cheap .
The Commission therefore has to recognise that flexicurity can only be put in place in some Member States over a considerable period of time .
Thirdly , a balanced form of flexicurity needs to be built around the principles included in paragraph 15 of this report , and those principles need to be incorporated into an amended guideline package .
They need to be given visibility and they need to be applied . Otherwise , all of the good work included in this excellent report will have been for nothing .
Finally , both the Council and the Commission talk endlessly about the importance of flexicurity , but how can the Council be taken seriously while the directive on temporary agency work remains blocked ?
How can the other institutions be taken seriously while exploitative forms of atypical work continue to proliferate in all of our Member States ?
For too many millions of our workforce , flexicurity is all about flexibility and nothing to do with security .
This report sets out ways in which that can change .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we wish to support the Commission in its bid to encourage collective reflection on flexicurity .
The EU must be behind dialogue among all players in this area .
Our Group is also pleased that , for the first time in Europe , the social partners have reached an agreement in a common document to ask the Member States to implement flexicurity policies .
This is most important , since flexicurity only makes sense if it ushers in an atmosphere of trust between employees and employers .
As the elected representatives of EU citizens , we have a special responsibility to create the conditions for this kind of trust .
It is in everyone 's interest to play the game , and above all we must not allow ourselves to be tempted to oppose flexibility , which would be to the benefit of employers , and security , which would constitute compensation for employees .
Implementing flexicurity means simultaneously guaranteeing flexibility and security for employees and employers .
Employees need flexibility to reconcile their professional lives and their personal lives , or to pursue their professional lives along new paths .
Employers need security just as much as employees , particularly legal security in their contractual relations with personnel .
The report is a step in the right direction .
It is balanced and proposes a framework for Member States to adopt common principles .
I wish to thank and congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
The Member States must not be forced to impose one particular vision of flexicurity .
The job markets in each Member State obviously have some extremely different characteristics .
We are looking at the coordination of employment policies , not premature harmonisation .
Our fellow citizens , however , wish to see a Europe that provides solutions to the challenges of globalisation .
By protecting professional options , facilitating the adaptation of employees , accepting and accompanying life 's sudden twists , flexicurity can form a unique way to modernise our social models .
Let us not miss out on the chance of us all agreeing to work towards a common objective .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the movement towards more flexible forms of employment developed at a time of very high unemployment , when it was relatively easy to force a worker to accept worse employment conditions in order to stay in a job at all .
When workers lacked the means with which to provide for their own and their family 's basic needs , they were prepared even to tolerate being humiliated at the workplace .
They were also prepared to agree to not being insured against accidents and to work illegally for starvation wages .
Fortunately , the situation in the labour market is now changing .
Most Polish employers undervalued the importance of permanent employment .
As a result , they are now short of workers , and Poland has witnessed the emigration of almost two million young people , many of whom are highly educated .
Flexible employment that does not recognise the importance of job security brings short-term benefits to employers at the expense of workers .
I am glad that the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution attaches more importance to the need for job security than the European Commission .
I should like to point out that research undertaken by the International Labour Organization confirms that workers with permanent contracts are more effective .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the debate about flexicurity shows that it is not possible to transfer a given social model from one Member State directly to the EU as a whole .
Nor does this seem to be what the Commission wants .
Its document is not about improving the social security of workers in light of radically changing labour market conditions ; no , the Commission wants to push flexibility of employment relations without actually being in a position to improve social security for workers : that falls within the competence of the Member States where there are many different notions of just how important it is .
What 's more , the key role and the control function performed by the trade unions - which in Denmark are an essential element of the flexicurity model - cannot be taken as a given in other Member States at present , or indeed at any time in the near future .
In some governments , too , where flexicurity is interpreted and championed solely as flexibility , trade union rights are being further curtailed at the same time .
We Greens are critical of efforts to use flexicurity as a vehicle by which to introduce the deregulation of labour law throughout the EU , thereby achieving global competitiveness for the European Union at the expense of workers ' rights .
Unfortunately , the coalition in this House is following the Commission 's lead and is missing out on the opportunity to introduce a core element - namely social security - as an equally important component into the flexicurity model .
I wonder how the Socialists intend to explain this to workers .
My concern is that we will be missing out on the opportunities for a future debate about the benefits that are undoubtedly inherent in the flexicurity model as well .
We therefore need to amend the report , or we will be unable to support it .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , flexicurity is nothing new .
It is an old Danish model , dating right back to the late 19th century , whereby security not enshrined in contracts of employment is guaranteed by the government , at great cost .
What is new in this Europe of ours is terrible insecurity , which affects young people at work but damages society as a whole .
In order to combat this insecurity we must change tack and dispense with the laissez-faire methods and ideologies which brought it about .
It is not true that insecurity creates jobs and economic growth ; the opposite is true .
Now , with flexicurity , we are experimenting with a new ideology , but one that preserves the old model of insecurity intact .
For this reason , my Group has fought for some very practical ideas : against the idea of a labour market rigidity indicator and in favour of a good employment indicator , so as to emphasise that stable , secure employment is the norm ; against unjustified dismissal , in that it amounts to discrimination ; against a recurring accumulation of atypical contracts , or lifelong insecurity , which is a modern form of slavery ; in favour of the right of those not in employment to an income , as they cannot live on air alone ; in favour of bringing together different forms of welfare assistance ; and against discrimination affecting women at work .
The fact that no resources have been earmarked to guarantee flexicurity - there has been a 2 % cut - and consequently that no reliable investment is possible , speaks volumes about the risk of this operation turning into nothing but hot air .
Workers and young people are calling for something tangible , not for outdated ideologies .
These are the points that we have fought for in this House and would like to see voted through .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( NL ) Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality was very nearly overlooked in this debate , but fortunately at the last minute it has been able to take its turn .
More than half of Europe 's population is female and , at the moment , these women are usually over-represented in the labour market as regards temporary and part-time contracts .
Women therefore already have to deal with more uncertainty , poor accrual of pensions and inadequate medical expenses .
When those such as the Commission and the Dutch Government want to make redundancy rights even more flexible , this group will only sink further into oppression and lack of rights .
I was therefore overjoyed when the Committee on Women 's Rights unanimously made a series of proposals for improving the Commission 's proposal on this point .
Unfortunately the rapporteur has chosen to adopt very few of these broad and elevated proposals .
In so doing he has dishonoured the Committee on Women 's Rights and ignored the very real inequalities that exist .
I therefore call on all Members to support , in tomorrow 's vote , the amendments which have been tabled to prevent this inequality .
( DE ) Mr President , fewer and fewer people are spending their entire working life with the same employer , so they need to be able to adapt without any problems to changing living and working conditions .
At the same time , people must have adequate employment security .
Commissioner Spidla , only if flexibility and security are brought into equilibrium will the new flexicurity concept become widely accepted .
On the one hand , there must be more flexibility for companies so that they can identify market niches and become more innovative and plan their development proactively rather than just reacting to events .
On the other hand , workers in the Member States need the security afforded by modern systems of social protection and reliable agreements between responsible social partners .
The right framework conditions must also be put in place for more permanent jobs and easier transitions to new jobs .
The abuse of new forms of employment must also be prevented , along with bogus self-employment and undeclared work .
A further priority is lifelong learning which is essential to make our workers fit for globalisation .
Agreeing a benchmark of 2 % of GDP on a binding basis is unacceptable , in my view , for we have to leave the Member States some financial latitude here .
However , governments and businesses must ensure that far more is invested in our most important resource , namely well-educated people who are highly skilled , motivated and adaptable .
The PPE-DE Group has again tabled various amendments at my initiative .
In one of these amendments , we say that companies must be able to decide for themselves on how they approach the issue of corporate social responsibility . CSR must continue to be based on a voluntary , not an obligatory system .
As my final point , let me say that bringing forward the date for lifting the transitional measures obstructing the free movement of workers from 2013 to 2009 sends out the wrong signal .
In areas where far higher hourly wages are paid with a high level of social security , the pressure from migration is intense and difficult to manage .
Here too , security must not be neglected , notwithstanding the flexibility that is undoubtedly necessary .
( SV ) Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur for a job well done and an excellent report .
Like José Albino Silva Peneda , I prefer to speak of ' change with security ' , change which we encounter in the form of globalisation and in the form of demographic growth .
I think that is a better way of putting it .
There is a difference between the Commission 's proposal and Parliament 's proposal , namely on the point of where the focus lies in the changes .
We have a different focus in Parliament 's proposal .
The Commission 's focus is on employment security rather than job security .
There should be no such distinction .
What is needed is to combine the security of being able to get a new job with a high level of security in employment .
In Parliament we try to focus on participation in the process , strong trade unions and a strong social dialogue .
We focus on an active employment policy , we focus on more investment in training and we focus on strong social security systems .
Many have said that there is no single model but that all must proceed on the basis of their own concepts .
The Lisbon process is applicable .
Now , when principles are to be established , I would endorse what Stephen Hughes said : look at paragraph 15 , see what principles should form the guidelines .
Finally I would say to Elisabeth Schroedter that it is not the case that the rapporteur had no contact with the European trade union movement .
There were close contacts throughout the period , and they fully support us in seeking to change the focus .
To refrain from forming views before the employment ministers do so would mean handing over to them the sole right to decide .
Parliament must have a line ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
The European Union does not need only to reform its own institutions quickly , but must also provide its citizens and businesses with a policy which alleviates the side-effects of intense competition and the opening up of the market .
I regard it as important to encourage stable employment relations in which there is a high level of confidence .
Any success in changes to labour law would be greater if employees felt more secure .
We must also bear in mind the fact that a feeling of security often also depends on how easy it is to find a new job .
I am of the view that the biggest problems in the European Union relate to the provision of a flexible , qualified workforce , and therefore that this issue should be at the heart of Europe 's flexicurity strategy .
The most important thing must be to create a flexible labour market by raising the level of education through training and re-training programmes .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , flexicurity is neither a panacea nor a taboo subject .
We just have to agree on the rules of the game .
It goes without saying that Europe must be equal to the challenges of globalisation and competition - not always fair competition - forced upon us by the world economy .
All of this requires flexibility , but that does not mean turning our backs on the European social model , its values , its standards of security and above all its solidarity .
Flexibility is therefore acceptable on condition that there are firm rules , guarantees and compensatory mechanisms in place .
Most importantly , Europe must lead the Member States in a strategy comprising certain key ingredients : a decent level of continuing training , adequate welfare measures , quality services beginning with childcare services , and social security systems to support workers during periods of inactivity .
Such support , incidentally , need not necessarily take the form of handouts ; it could also be the provision of opportunities to acquire the skills required for new jobs on offer .
Finally , there must be measures for reconciling work and family life , to enable women in particular to enjoy truly equal opportunities in the world of work .
Naturally , these objectives necessitate a substantial amount of funding , but only in this way can flexicurity be an opportunity rather than a shortcut towards deregulation of the world of work .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too am grateful to the rapporteur for his work , especially as it was completed in such a short space of time .
I too believe that a word is just a word .
Flexicurity in itself is neither a good nor a bad policy .
Nor is it just one policy : it is a set of combined and well-balanced actions .
Everything depends on how those actions are designed and put into practice .
Flexicurity is customarily believed to be a strategy aimed at making the labour market more flexible and rewarding the move from one job to another by means of economic support and training .
This amounts to a defensive attitude , to damage limitation , whereas what we need is a fresh approach , innovation and quality .
If we try to look at flexicurity from a female point of view , we obtain a useful perspective on the matter .
After all , it enables us to see that the majority of the most insecure and unstable jobs are geared towards women .
At the same time , moreover , we can detect the full positive potential of such a strategy if we understand flexibility not as insecurity but as flexible organisation of employment and work schedules to meet the needs of employees .
If we understand security not just as training allowances but also as assistance with the various activities and decisions occurring during a person 's lifetime , then we will break new ground and make forward-looking proposals , rather than harking back to the ways of the past .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will be very brief .
The work of this House will continue after this debate so I must say to you that it is this Presidency 's or rather our Presidency 's belief that this is of course an important and necessary debate .
This can be seen from the level of participation and from the high number of Members who wanted to participate and cooperate in this debate .
Flexibility naturally means mobility and , in a globalised world , the word ' mobility ' is necessary and signifies adaptation to change .
However , we are not only talking about mobility ; we are also talking about security .
This means committing to people , to workers , to their qualifications and training , and also to family protection and protection of the quality of work .
We are of course confident that the main guidelines that we have managed to agree with our social partners will in practice allow the necessary measures to be developed and established so that change and security can be ensured and so that Europe is better able to successfully tackle the challenges facing us as a result of globalisation .
At its meeting on 5 and 6 December , the Council will hopefully adopt these guidelines .
I am certain that in the future these will prove to be the right guidelines and the right bases for a policy that will make Europe stronger and more competitive .

Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when I look at the screen , I see how quickly time is going by , so just allow me to mention two things : firstly , it is clear from the debate , and I would also like to emphasise , that the aim of flexicurity is on no account to impose a single national model on the whole European Union .
The distinctive nature of different models is recognised .
However , I would like to suggest that states which implement the principles referred to have a better labour market situation , and here we are not just talking about the Scandinavian countries .
The other issue I would like to mention is the question of costs .
Again , you can see that a typical example , which has often been cited , is Denmark , whose social protection and health care expenditures are not above average in the European context .
This should always be pointed out .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for a very intensive debate which , although short , has helped to enrich the concept of flexicurity .
Allow me to thank the rapporteur especially .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) We regret that the report does not oppose , with sufficient clarity , the strategy of flexicurity defended by the European Commission .
It limits itself to proposing some palliative care for the principles set out in the Commission communication .
As a result , we not only voted against this report in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , but we also insisted on tabling proposals which rejected the flexicurity approach adopted in that communication .
We did this because this approach aims to deregulate the labour markets and labour legislation which will result , in practice , in the destruction of current contractual arrangements , in the liberalisation of unjustified dismissals and in increased insecurity for workers in general .
No palliative care can withstand the constant weakening of collective bargaining , the devaluation of the trade unions and the transformation of permanent contracts into temporary contracts on the pretext of capitalist globalisation .
In the huge demonstration that took place on 18 October in Lisbon , arranged by the CGTP ( General Confederation of Portuguese Workers ) , Portuguese workers said no to these proposals .
What they want is more employment with rights which presupposes a commitment to production , more investment in high-quality public services and respect for the dignity of workers .
We therefore insist on the proposals that we tabled .
If these continue to be rejected , then we will vote against this report given that we reject flexicurity .
in writing . - ( RO ) The report raises for discussion an essential European issue : the European Union actions towards integration into the labour market cannot ignore the arbitrary restriction of the free movement of workers .
Eight of the countries that joined the EU in 2004 - together with Romania and Bulgaria - have transitory periods of at least two years , which can reach seven years .
Starting with the second year of transition , the European institutions become actively involved in the process of authorizing the transition periods imposed by the Member States .
For this reason , I request that the European Council examine very carefully , in December , the issue of the free movement restriction in the European Union for the new Member States and that it adopts a mandatory common position to reduce at a minimum the barriers to free movement of labour .
The issue of the restriction of access to the labour market is directly related to the first principle suggested by the rapporteur , namely " European action against abusive practices in various types of non-standard contracts ” .
As a Member of the European Parliament , I have received numerous complaints from Romanian citizens who are abusively deprived of payment for their work and of the most elementary conditions of social and health insurance in the countries where they carry out their activity .
The regulations we will adopt based upon the concept of flexicurity should primarily eliminate such situations .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.05 p.m. and resumed at 5.10 p.m. )

Future of Europe ( debate )
Ladies and gentlemen ,
¡ Bienvenido al Parlamento Europeo , señor Rodríguez Zapatero !
Es un gran placer contar con su presencia .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to you for accepting the European Parliament 's invitation to attend this debate on the future of Europe , a debate which is a very significant one for this House .
Several Prime Ministers from around the European Union have already visited us to discuss the issues that are important for the future of the Union , including Guy Verhofstadt , Romano Prodi and Jan Peter Balkenende .
We have had an opportunity to listen to their views and debate matters with them , even at times when there was great uncertainty about the future course of the European Union .
Today , we are here in order to listen to you .
Based on a decision by the Conference of Presidents - the chairmen of the political groups - this form of debate will conclude with a speech by the Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt .
Prime Minister , I think it is important to mention that Spain was the first country , in 2005 , to hold a referendum on what was then the draft Constitutional Treaty , and 77 % of Spaniards voted in favour of this draft .
( Applause )
It is therefore a particular pleasure to be able to welcome you , Prime Minister , here today , shortly before the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon which comes after a long period of reflection and , indeed , crisis : a Treaty into which the substance of the Constitutional Treaty could be incorporated .
Spain is an important country within the European Union and has long made a valuable contribution to the European Union , not only since its accession in 1986 but long before then .
Spain has always demonstrated - and this applies to all the major parties - that it is a country with deeply held European convictions , a country which takes the initiative and is willing to show active commitment to the shared future of our continent .
The next item is the debate on the future of Europe with the participation of the Spanish Prime Minister and member of the European Council .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , esteemed Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I want to thank the Prime Minister of Spain for his thoughts on the direction of the European Union .
It is true that we would have preferred his speech and his thoughts on Europe to have been given at another time , before and not after the Lisbon Summit , and specifically not seventy-two hours after his appointment as Prime Minister , because these circumstances are never beneficial to achieving the real objective of such a meeting .
However , ladies and gentlemen , at the same time it would be unfair of me - and our Group would not want this - if I did not thank the Prime Minister for or rightly value his contribution which is without doubt very useful in terms of the future direction of Europe .
It is not easy for me to speak on behalf of the PPE-DE Group on freedom and the European Union , basically because there have been personal experiences in my Group which so typify the defence of freedom and which are so recent in their occurrence that I cannot find sufficient or adequate words to explain the deep and real meaning of the European Union for our Group .
Our Group is delighted at the definite progress made at the Lisbon Summit but , at the same time , we would be lying if we did not say that our Group considers that we still do not have sufficient political momentum and ambition to transform the European Union of today into the European Union that we need for the future of the European people .
We cannot achieve the Europe we need if we do not believe in ourselves .
We cannot complete the European Union with inertia or fine words or simply from common ground .
Words such as coherence and authenticity are not enough , for example , when tackling the transposition of European directives or complying with the Kyoto Protocol .
Prime Minister , what is missing is undoubtedly determination , defence of our values and effort .
It is these elements that will enable us to consolidate the moral strength of the Union and , ultimately , its own culture which is what our project essentially stands for .
However , we must make our European citizens aware of these missing elements .
We must tell them about these and clearly explain them .
We must share with them this political need for effort and dare to tell them the truth about what is missing .
They will not be discouraged by this but will , in fact , provide the hopes , dreams and proximity that we so desperately need .
We must tell them more clearly what the problems are .
We must prioritise these and work on these urgent issues to find a way to distribute powers between the European Union and the European nations , without generalising , but instead by prioritising and identifying the most urgent problems that remain .
Prime Minister , agreement , consensus and a gradual approach have been the traditional European methods , because consensus is a method more than a value .
This means that we must define and organise this consensus and , at the same time , we have to empower the European political groups , because there will be no European Union without European political parties .
This also means that we should not bring to this House any national disagreements or dissensions ( which are real and deep ) , as were regrettably brought from Spain some months ago , as you well know .
Prime Minister , there are problems that require a European solution .
This without doubt strengthens the Union but , in the opinion of our Group , it also strengthens the European nations .
The Union will not grow stronger as the European nations grow weaker , but in fact totally the opposite : the European Union , in order to be completed , needs its members to be strong and it will be impossible to complete this project with weakened nations which threaten its territorial integrity .
The value of freedom is what unites us .
This is the value to end all values and it is these values which are set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights that will be signed on 12 December in Strasbourg .
However , this is not just an illusion : it is a renewed commitment to freedom , and not just in the territory of our Union , but particularly in the territory of our friends with whom we have traditionally shared our culture , in Latin America and also in some republics of eastern Europe .
It is in these countries too that we must try to consolidate our framework of principles and values .
I have one further thing to say : coherence rather than words .
History has proven the beneficial effect of our culture on the world .
We should pass it on and , at the same time , be aware that we cannot lock up this value within our European Union .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are very pleased to welcome Prime Minister Rodríguez Zapatero here to the European Parliament .
We are pleased , too , that you came here after the Lisbon Summit , and that you came here just 72 hours after your nomination as candidate .
We would have been even more pleased if the PPE-DE Group had at least been represented by their Group chairman today .
I can tell you one thing : Mr Daul has missed a good speech from the Spanish Prime Minister this afternoon .
He has also missed a less convincing speech from Mr Mayor Oreja , so it was probably a good thing for him that he was not here .
Since the empty seats on the right of this House also tell their own story , let me say that when Swedish Prime Minister Reinfeldt visits us , who belongs to their political family , the Socialist Group will be in attendance in the same kind of numbers as today , because I believe courtesy is a quality that you either have or you do not , and those on the right do not have it !
( Applause )
Spain and the Spaniards , represented by the Prime Minister of their country , have the right to be respected , and that means respect from all the political families in this House .
We accord the Spanish people that respect .
Mr Zapatero , you have thanked this House and you have thanked the European Union .
That was a very memorable sentence from the head of the government of Spain , a country which for 40 years suffered under a ruthless and brutal dictatorship , and which gained its freedom and democratic diversity through its integration into Europe .
For you , the Spanish Prime Minister , to stand up and thank the European Union does you great credit .
However , we owe you a debt of thanks too , for the fact that Spain has succeeded in these endeavours .
We owe our thanks to the Spanish people and Spanish democrats , men and women .
Their contribution to Europe is a contribution to democracy , diversity , cultural progress and social stability .
We must therefore voice our own thanks to the Spanish Government .
( Applause )
Spain is a model for Europe , as is the Iberian region as a whole .
The same applies , incidentally , to Greece and all those countries which had to overcome Fascist dictatorships and set a course towards the European Union in the early and mid 1980s .
As Western Europeans , we had the freedom to travel to these countries at that time and so we can compare them then and now .
Spain is a country with a flourishing economy .
It is a country with a great future , full of hope , a country whose people have made an immense contribution to peace in the world , a country which is economically prosperous and which is rightly knocking at the door of the G8 countries because of its economic strength .
Who would have thought that was possible 20 years ago ?
So why do I say that Spain is a model ?
As you yourself said , Prime Minister , if the European Union 's structural and regional policies have the same economic effects in the countries which joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 as occurred in Spain , Europe as a whole can look forward to a very positive future , and that is why Spain is a model for Europe .
( Applause )
Prime Minister , Spain - you put this very well - has won out as a result of its integration into Europe .
Like many other countries in the European Union , Spain relinquished some of its sovereignty when it introduced the euro .
Relinquishing sovereignty over the currency means relinquishing part of national sovereignty .
However , let us imagine for a moment what might have happened if Spain still had the peseta , and imagine if the Zapatero government , as its first act in office , had said , ' we are withdrawing our troops from Iraq ' .
The US dollar could have played games with the peseta , and what economic effects might that have had ?
Relinquishing this currency element of sovereignty actually conferred a degree of independence and sovereignty for Spain .
That is another reason why Spain is a good model , showing how European integration brings more , not less , strength .
( Applause )
Mr Zapatero has talked about many different issues .
On behalf of my Group and on behalf of the men and particularly the women in my Group , may I say a few words about gender equality .
Very few heads of government in Europe have done more to promote the rights of women than you , Mr Zapatero , and the European Parliament owes you a debt of thanks for your endeavours in that area too .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr Zapatero , please continue with your excellent , modern and progressive policies .
They are good for Spain and what is good for Spain is also good for Europe .
Keep going , Prime Minister .
( Standing ovation from his Group )
Mr President , when Member States ratify the Reform Treaty , as we hope and believe they will , we can look forward , at long last , to a revitalised European Union - a Union with the capacity to confront new challenges , with the humility to listen to its citizens and with the political will to act .
Ratification of the Treaty cannot come a moment too soon , and my Group thanks you , Mr Zapatero , for your efforts to speed up the process .
My Group sees no need for a group of wise people to ponder Europe 's future .
We have been there , done that , and even have the T-shirts to prove it .
It was called ' the period of reflection ' and it has come to an end .
We are midway through the Lisbon Strategy and are only now making progress in growth and jobs .
We are completing the single market , freeing up the potential of Europe 's entrepreneurs .
We are opening legal migration pathways to help both developing and developed economies .
Now is not the time to go back to a French drawing board , nor to follow a new British plan for a glorified free trade zone .
Those visions are just views from the margins , packaged as majority opinion .
They are not where consensus lies .
The majority of our citizens want the Union to deliver a strong and growing economy .
They want more EU involvement across the board , more involvement in combating terrorism , more cooperation in security and defence , and more action on the environment .
Then , and only then , can Europe become a global player with the capacity to bring about lasting change .
For how can we assure growth and jobs if Europe retreats into protectionism ?
How can we combat climate change if we fail to act in concert ?
How can we spread peace , prosperity and justice in the world if Europe bickers at the sidelines ?
That is why Europe needs more politicians who are prepared to lead and to take a pan-European approach .
Mr Zapatero , by uniting the 18 friends of the Constitution in Madrid , you proved that your vision of an open , integrated and competitive Europe is one shared by many .
It is that vision of Europe that progressives from all parties in this House want to see thrive and expand .
The ALDE Group will work together with all those who share that vision and live up to it , whether on the right , on the left or in the centre , to ensure Europe moves forward .
What we will not tolerate are those who profess such a vision but fail to live up to it .
Prime Minister , Spain is often quite rightly praised for its social and economic transformation since joining the Union .
We need others to follow your example and pursue your ambition for a prosperous and open Europe .
( Applause from the centre and left )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming the Prime Minister , but in a different way .
The Prime Minister came prepared for a debate on the future of Europe but , unfortunately , heard some arguments about Europe 's past rather than on where we should all be moving forward .
I think that , when we look at the needs of Europe for the 21st century , each of us knows what those needs are .
Likewise , each of us knows that the ideologies of the past have failed to deliver in solving those needs on their own .
Only by a combination and a coordination of those different methods and those ideals have we seen progress .
Whether it is in the area of equality , whether it is in the area of justice , whether it is in the area of economic development or whether it is in the area of health and safety , it has always required individual opportunities to pick and choose out of the successful methods of the past .
On behalf of my Group , I should like to thank the Prime Minister for the respect he has shown to this House by thanking the Union and , in particular , Parliament , as the representative voice of the people of the European Union .
We see ourselves - some of the time - as being the true representative voice .
On occasions we may get it wrong , but nobody can argue with our democratic accountability and with our democratic mandate to speak on behalf of the people .
Too often , the views and opinions of the European Parliament are kept to the sidelines as regards what kind of discussion takes place at intergovernmental level .
I was delighted , some time ago , that , during the period of reflection on the Treaty that has now gone and will not be around again , the Prime Minister decided to regroup the ' friends of the Community method ' , calling it the ' friends of the Constitution method ' , to try and form a vanguard as regards how things can move forward .
He saw that the success of that move opened up other doors and opportunities for him in government when he needed support with regard to immigration and other developments .
If I could make an appeal to the Prime Minister today as regards the future of Europe , I would ask that he would continue to use his influence , not just in the European Union but particularly in Latin America , where issues with regard to freedom , democracy and respect for human rights are becoming ever more apparent under the guise of democratic movements .
Finally , some of us see a vision of Europe that brings bright stars , great opportunities and , most importantly , respect for the fundamental differences and dignities that exist within the European Union .
We should reach a point where no longer do we try to homogenise everything into one single shape or size but understand that , by giving dignity to that difference , we can actually create a better , more colourful and , certainly , more vibrant European Union for the future .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Prime Minister , the Verts / ALE Group truly appreciates your firm pro-European position , your courage to hold a referendum on the Constitutional Treaty and the ability shown by your government in driving forward , calmly and without a religious war , legislation and measures on equality , individual rights and freedoms which are an example to many countries in Europe , although I do not see many women among your entourage today .
We also appreciate your comments on immigration , although not always your actions , and we appreciate the fact that emphasis has been placed on the positive aspects of immigration and not just on its illegality , as perhaps your predecessor did .
For this reason I will say to you , Prime Minister , that we have missed you in the last two years and in recent months during the institutional crisis which ended , without a great deal of passion or glory , in the ' mini ' Lisbon Treaty .
The agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference was dictated by the enemies of the European Constitution , whereas its friends , like yourself , proved to be far too discreet following that famous meeting of the eighteen .
Now in Europe we are faced with several approaches : the two-tier system of Sarkozy , the Atlantic nationalism of Gordon Brown and the rather formal but very sincere pro-Europeanism of Romano Prodi .
What is your view ?
Who are your allies ?
Prime Minister , you spoke briefly about the issue of climate change , although the idea of your new contract between mankind - and womankind too I suppose - and the planet is old news .
You also talked a lot about gratitude for European aid .
I have to tell you that it is clear today , and has been for some time , that these European funds are also being used to make Spain the country with the most kilometres of road per inhabitant and the place where concrete , also using European money , has led to serious incidents of speculation and corruption and has helped to make Spain , together with my country of Italy , and Denmark - although you are a bit worse - a long way off complying with the Kyoto targets .
As I understand it , Spain has not transposed the Eurovignette Directive and still has a very extensive infrastructure policy .
We hope that , as a result of the election promises that you have made on climate change - and there is no harm in doing a bit of electoral campaigning , even here - Spain will firmly change direction .
We also hope that your fantastic Environment Minister will have much greater room for manoeuvre in your government than she has now .
( Applause )
Prime Minister , to end , I must say that we here in the European Parliament very much appreciate and thank you for your words , but we need allies in the governments of the Member States .
We cannot rest because we need people who want Europe and have a vision of Europe .
( Applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Prime Minister , you made a fine speech .
In many respects it was a humanist speech which I am willing to accept as an ideal for the Europe of the future .
However , we must admit that , for the current reality of Europeans to resemble the vision you have just described , many changes must be made to the procedures and structures of the European Union .
You say that our Europe is a social Europe .
Bravo !
It is not , however , pessimistic to say that in the main this social Europe has yet to be built .
The current framework of European social policy is , according to the Treaties , an open market economy with free competition .
This is a framework that naturally encourages competition between social models and naturally tends to diminish our entitlements in the name of competitiveness .
This is a framework that naturally pushes down the cost of manpower , encourages job insecurity and undermines social rights .
The social issue is undoubtedly the main reason for our citizens ' distrust of European institutions .
The President of the European Central Bank , for instance , saw this for himself when he spoke recently at the European Trade Union Confederation Conference , putting forward his theory , the official EU theory , on wage moderation in the name of competitive prices .
He encountered unanimous opposition .
I have already said that the German Finance Minister mentioned the risk of a crisis of legitimacy in the European social and economic model .
Let us , therefore , take a look at these aspects , precisely to give some credibility to your vision of the future .
You also mentioned relations with Africa and the need to provide a response to their calls for justice .
You are right .
However , in that case , for instance , we must come back to the draft economic partnership agreement which has been rejected by all our African partners because they feel sure - and I think they are right - that development of human capacities and free trade are not a good mix .
To end , Prime Minister , I wish to thank you for reminding us of what I feel to be Europe 's ultimate objectives , and if we still cannot agree as to our view of the present , let us at least agree as to the future prospects .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it is a pleasure to see the Prime Minister here in Brussels .
He is an exemplar to other European heads of government , as a man who allowed his own people to decide whether they wished to have the Constitution .
For that he must be applauded .
In the event , the people of Spain voted overwhelmingly to support the plans .
What I would like to know is why he has no intention of repeating the exercise .
After all , he should be confident that he will get a similar result .
Is it because , as the Prime Minister has said , the Reform Treaty has not let a single substantial point of the Constitutional Treaty go ?
If so , it would stand to reason that he feels there is no need to ask his people the same question twice .
Or , is it the case , as presented to the British people , that the Reform Treaty is so different as to be an entirely separate thing altogether and too complicated for the people to understand ?
This , of course , is key to all our futures .
Either the political elite do not care what people want , as in the case of Mr Sarkozy and Mr Brown , or they feel that the people are too stupid to make any decision more important than what burger to buy at McDonalds .
It seems to me that the European Union is rapidly becoming the world 's first post-democratic state .
I can tell the Prime Minister this : if the European elite do not allow the people to speak , then , in the end , they will find other ways to make their voices heard .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my view the biggest challenge facing the European Union at the moment is the total lack of democratic participation in the decision making process .
The European institutions are increasingly distrusted - quite rightly in my opinion , as it happens - by our citizens who do not accept that many very important decisions which directly affect their lives are made in ivory towers which are no longer monitored by any means or person .
No democratic basis , moreover , exists for these decisions .
I will give two examples .
First example : the text of the new European treaties will soon be signed in Lisbon .
Everyone knows that it is a barely-altered version of the European Constitution .
Mr Zapatero himself has said of it that not one substantial component has been changed .
Well now , that text was voted down by democratic referendum in France and in the Netherlands , but that has all been laughed off now .
The best-case scenario , as it happens , is that we may perhaps get another vote from time to time to keep the Eurocrats happy , but actual democratic statements made by means of referendum are being thrown out with the trash .
In this way , I fear that Europe is increasingly heading towards becoming a small club of the type which , if it governs a super-state , will tolerate no participation and consequently can no longer really be called a democracy .
The same applies , as a matter of fact , to the way in which the possible accession of Turkey to the European Union is being handled .
Our citizens do not want it , quite the reverse , as Turkey is not a European country - not culturally , not geographically , not religiously , not in any way at all - but , nevertheless , the Commission and the Council are taking no account of the opinion of the majority of our citizens on the matter .
Instead of a debate about the future of the Union , we should have a debate about the convalescence of democracy in the institutions of the European Union .
President of the Spanish Government . - ( ES ) Mr President , I firstly want to thank everyone who has spoken for their comments and the tone of these .
I can also say that I am delighted at how lively this debate has been , which was in fact just what I had hoped for .
I am also delighted to have been able to contribute to a debate of such liveliness and intensity , particularly given some of the speeches for which I thank you from the bottom of my heart .
Spain is grateful to the European Union , to the founding fathers and to the large countries such as France , Germany and Italy which have helped us to bring democracy to our country , which have welcomed us into Europe and which have then , with their resources , contributed to our development .
We are grateful to other public figures and statesmen that I have not mentioned today , such as Helmut Kohl , Mr Mitterrand and Mr Palme who have contributed so much to both the democracy of Spain and its future .
We feel very proud to be contributing to this common cause .
This gratitude is accompanied by the thought of what Spain has been able to achieve in the last 25 years .
Probably no other society in the world has seen such a political and economic transformation and such progress in its rights , freedoms and the social situation of its people as Spain has seen in the last 25 years .
Spain has always been very committed to Europe and has always been very pro-European .
Representatives of all parties , cultures and political ideologies and representatives with great political weight have served the European institutions , in the Commission and in this Parliament where we have had three Presidents .
All have served very well and I want at this point to pay tribute to those who have represented Spain in the European institutions .
They have managed to forge a common pro-European culture in a form of political organisation which , according to the speeches that have just been made , is unprecedented .
The political union that we call the European Union has no precedent or model to turn to because it does not fit within any of the known political classifications .
Therein lies the greatness of the European Union and also its unpredictability given the necessary process of establishing a common will shared by 27 countries , 27 flags , 27 states , 27 nations , 20 languages and a wealth of ideologies that can be seen here in the European Parliament .
As a result , every advance that we have made in the European process has had no one colour and has come from no one country or ideology .
It has had no one colour , no one ideological colour , and no one flag .
In fact every advance has been the sum of all parts with its own flag and its own colour which is that of coexistence and unity .
If anything really represents the European soul , it is a union of democrats .
That is Europe : a union of democrats which means making progress based on positions which are as consensual as possible , which respect and involve everyone and which offer the same opportunities , even to those who profoundly disagree with what the European Union represents .
The greatness of the European Union lies in the fact that it is a club which offers the same opportunities to those who are in favour of Europe and to those who do not want Europe to advance .
That is the greatness of the European club ; that is the greatness , in short , of a union of democrats .
Someone referred to a ' mini Treaty ' .
The perspective that we adopt can always leave us unsatisfied in terms of achieving our objectives , but if this new Treaty is ratified by everyone and if it works , it will be a great Treaty , not a mini Treaty .
That at least is the position which , in my opinion , we should adopt today .
We must give it time and see the potential that it may have when brought into force and when used to tackle the challenges that lie ahead .
Reference was made to ratification of the Treaty .
This was necessary because Spain was one country which held a consultative referendum on the Constitutional Treaty which has since been through a process of renegotiation with the nature of a treaty , in the most classic sense of what the European concept represents .
I have been asked - and I do not want to avoid any questions - why we did not submit this to a referendum .
There are two very obvious reasons : the first is because the Spanish people said they were in favour of a Constitutional Treaty .
The Treaty that we have now adopted , pending ratification , which is already known as the Lisbon Treaty , contains many of the aspects of the earlier Constitutional Treaty .
The second reason , which is very important , is that there is broad consensus in our country on the parliamentary ratification of this Treaty , both among those of us who agree with this Treaty and even among the minorities who do not agree .
However , I must make one point which I feel is important for the future .
I do not know whether we can achieve this at any point , but it is an obvious problem in the European Union : we have an imperfect system of ratification on which there has never been any in-depth debate .
In my opinion , ratification should be common , by all countries , and , if possible , in a single act and with a single instrument .
This is clearly difficult at the moment , but very desirable , and I hope that in time we can have this type of ratification .
Some speakers raised the issue - which has existed from the start , since the foundation of the Union in its first configuration as the European Coal and Steel Community and then as the European Economic Community - of the relationship between the European Union and the nation states .
This issue has often called into question the whole democratic health of the European Union , as many decisions are logically taken through an intergovernmental procedure .
I will now very briefly give my opinion on this issue .
Firstly , the nation state is a form of political organisation which , in historical terms , seeks to unify territories , rationalise public action and subsequently pave the way to democratic systems .
It has therefore fulfilled an important historical task .
The European Union is a form of political organisation which is based on the experience of the nation state .
It is a higher stage of the nation state .
It does not take anything away from the nation state , but rather adds to this and its traditional configuration .
This is because , as demonstrated by the history of political coexistence , political civilisation and political community , to unite usually means to add .
Uniting and sharing are what the European Union is all about .
It is not about taking anything away from or weakening what the traditional concept of the nation state represents .
In fact , the stronger the European Union is , the stronger our nation states will be .
That is my opinion .
This also means that the European Union will be more capable , through its institutions which need legitimacy and constant legitimation by the politicians and governments of these countries ...
I absolutely reject one particular theory which exists in the European Union which is that , for many of the problems that exist in our economic , private or social lives , responsibility lies with Brussels .
This attitude is detrimental to the integration of the European Union and to our citizens and is also , on most occasions , usually incorrect .
I believe that history can show us and the present can teach us that the tendency to blame others for what we have failed to achieve results in melancholy and a negative attitude among people .
Some speakers mentioned concrete objectives and fine words .
I agree : there can be no actions without words , and no words without actions in terms of political action .
I therefore believe that everything that represents an option for the future has to have priorities , political priorities which are credible and which are observable in actions and in decisions .
These are under discussion .
I will summarise the three that seem most important to me for the future of the European Union .
Please allow me to say that these priorities have nothing to do with treaties or operating rules or structures or revision of legislation or the reduction of legislation by the Commission which , however , would be very convenient .
They relate to the political objectives of the time in which we are living .
I agree with the person who said that the European Union is the fruit of the interaction of many ideologies and many values .
However , the European Union can be a regional force leading the world in values and actions only if it correctly identifies the priorities of the historic times in which we are living now at the beginning of the 21st century .
The first priority is to look at what Europe knows , because the best experiences of this continent constitute a priceless lesson .
Science , creativity and innovation are what have made our economies strong and our countries socially integrated .
The challenge now posed by science , which is both a challenge and an opportunity , is climate change and energy sources .
I must underline something that was said in some of the speeches because it is not well-known and I did not make it very clear in my speech .
It is true that Spain is a long way from meeting the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol .
This may be true , but it is also true that , in 2006 , in other words one year after my government came to power , greenhouse gas emissions were reduced by 4 % even though the economy grew by 4 % .
We are therefore engaged in intensive action which will continue with regard , firstly , to alternative and renewable energies and , secondly , to energy efficiency and saving .
Some 20 years ago , the big debate on how to take the lead in innovation in Europe - I am sure that this Parliament had this debate on innumerable occasions - was all about developing the new economy , the economy of information technologies .
Now the new economy that will ensure the future of productive capacity and therefore its prosperity will be the economy which can , as quickly as possible , reduce our dependency on coal and provide an alternative energy source which is increasingly powerful .
In my opinion this is the first challenge .
I must stress that this is not only a challenge but also a great opportunity , because herein lies a good part of the knowledge that is going to guarantee us many things and also a good part of the potential sources of jobs and activities with greater added value and , therefore , with good social capacity .
Secondly , Europe must advance socially .
It is true to say that Europe can only advance socially , bearing in mind the African continent , the Latin American continent or part of the Asian continent , if at the same time we make determined and decisive advances in cooperation and development aid .
This is because , and please forgive me for saying this publicly , I do not know what the people and governments of many countries in Africa can think when they see the European Union sometimes having a debate on what it thinks about a deep crisis .
I do not know what they can think .
I am just saying how I see it .
I believe that , fortunately , thanks in particular to our work on democracy , innovation capacity and the welfare state which was born in this continent , thanks to these three values ( work , democracy and the welfare state ) , we can be the continent and the Union which has the best social protection and the highest level of income and welfare .
For me , improving social welfare continues to be a fundamental objective .
An open economy and a social state with social rights for the people are not incompatible .
In fact , these are complementary .
Social policies do not consume wealth .
They can help to create wealth , to create the conditions so that everyone can participate , through education with equal opportunities , reconciliation of family and working life which requires a social policy , and employment stability which is the best incentive for productivity in the task of helping to create wealth .
Social policies with productivity and people-oriented objectives are a possible model which works .
Of course , the model which can achieve the biggest transformation is the model of full integration and full equality for women in all labour and social spheres .
Spain has changed a great deal , in part due to democracy in the last 30 years .
However , what has changed Spain the most has been the integration of women into working life , social life and the civic life of the country .
That is what has changed us most and what has changed us for the better , for definite , because it has involved values of solidarity and progress .
I want to remind you that I have a government which consists equally of men and women ; none of the people here are actually from the government .
Finally , I want to mention our third objective which , together with the challenge of climate change , the extension of social welfare and the affirmation of social rights , must be developed as a trade mark of Europe .
It has enabled us to get where we are and to be a reference point for other countries .
This third main objective is to ensure and reinforce coexistence in a very particular manner , bearing in mind that we live in a continent which , in the last 20 or 30 years , has seen increased demographic changes in many countries .
This coexistence means integration and absolute and total intolerance of any signs of racism and xenophobia .
This is what coexistence means .
Europe must not betray a single one of its values and , if there is one essential value in the democratic Europe , it is respect for cultural and religious diversity and therefore the firm rejection of any signs of xenophobia or racism .
We would fail as Europeans if we succumbed to this temptation .
This coexistence must be accompanied by great tolerance .
Increasing individual and collective rights is not only the best expression of freedom , it is also another value with which , in my opinion , Europe must identify .
For indeed , what better freedom can there be than respecting the religious , cultural and political beliefs of everyone or their sexual orientations when forming a partnership or entering into a marriage ?
What better expression of freedom is there than this ?
If Europe is the union of democrats , as I said before , it cannot be just about freedom : Europe must be about freedom and equality .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Prime Minister .
You will not be speaking again but you will nonetheless be staying here to listen to further speakers .
The meeting of the Bureau is about to take place , so I would like to thank you , before I go , for your visit and your speech .
I would like to thank you and Spain - all the governments which worked in a free Spain on European matters - for your contribution to Europe .
Based on our experience of the last two decades , we are confident that no matter who governs in Spain in future , Spain will always remain true to its European calling .
In this spirit , may I thank you once again very warmly for your visit today .
( FR ) Prime Minister , I will limit my remarks to the issue of immigration , a major concern for the future of Europe in relation to which you made some consensual proposals .
It is true that nobody can teach any lessons in such a difficult area , but it is also true that nobody can feel they are exempt from the solidarity required in a unified space .
Opinion polls show that certain countries have a more economic approach , and others a more cultural approach .
In countries that place economic interests first , of course it is convenient to secure essential labour by adapting the laws , and hence the regularisation measures occasionally adopted en masse by national governments , without worrying too much about the concern that this causes , while the other Member States attempt to control migratory flows .
We could mention , for example , your government 's operation to regularise hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants .
France expressed its regret and disapproval at the time .
Our President was quite candid about it .
There must be no repetitions of this kind of operation in the future .
All the more so since Spain legitimately receives EU funds to deal with the dramatic situations on its African borders .
The PPE advocates policies based on individual processing of applications for regularisation , and therefore refuses to accept en masse regularisations which do nothing but increase concerns .
Along the same lines , the French Presidency will propose a European immigration pact .
Moreover , Prime Minister , in the years to come , the Lisbon Treaty will provide the means to act in unison and refrain from implementing go-it-alone policies .
This is in the long-term interest of the European Union , Spain and all the Member States .
( ES ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Spanish Socialists I should like to thank the Prime Minister for coming here today .
It has been said that his speech was an ideal speech .
It has also been said that he has a very ambitious agenda .
What I should like to say to the Prime Minister , first of all , is that his approach has been proven in practice ; in other words , he has given a series of economic , political and social data that not only justify pro-Europeanism in general but also in fact .
At this point , please allow me to briefly refer to something that was said here today .
The issue of mass regularisations was mentioned .
At the moment , France and Germany are copying the system of regularisation
( Applause )
adopted by Spain , involving individual regularisation and the participation of employers and trade unions .
Please tell us , Mr Toubon , what is happening in your country .
Secondly , Mr President , I want to give my personal thanks to the Prime Minister for the reference he made to certain veterans and to our work which we have been carrying out here for many years .
I want to make one point in this respect : in addition to what we have received - and it is only right and proper to be grateful - we have contributed certain elements .
The popular and social Europe , cohesion and the Charter of Fundamental Rights are not under Spanish copyright but they have been heavily influenced by Spain and of this we can feel legitimately proud .
As regards ratification , I agree with what the Prime Minister said .
What is striking is that people who have done nothing in their country and who have not taken one step towards ratifying the Constitution or approving the Treaty are trying to give lessons to those who have done their job .
( Applause )
I must now make one very specific point .
In this ratification process , there has to be a call for solidarity and mutual loyalty ; it is not right that some do their job while others try to renegotiate .
This must stop in Europe once and for all .
Finally , Mr President , Mr Mayor Oreja has suffered a slip of the tongue because he has re-elected Mr Zapatero as Prime Minister some months before the elections .
Mr Zapatero is , at the moment , only a candidate for Prime Minister .
What would be interesting is if , with a view to the election of the next Commission President , the political groups , starting with the PPE-DE Group , were to pass the candidate a copy of Mr Zapatero 's speech .
( Applause )
( ES ) Prime Minister , welcome to this House .
Fortunately , in Spain , the commitment to European construction has united most of the political forces , including those in Catalonia .
This unity , which began in 1986 , continued with the euro and was repeated in the debate on the European Constitution .
It has enabled previous governments and also your own government to lead the campaign for a political and ambitious Europe .
Your speech today confirms this same commitment and I congratulate you on this .
However , Prime Minister , your responsibility does not end with enthusiastic speeches laden with European fervour .
Europe needs leaders committed to its project in their day-to-day political actions and not just on solemn and institutional occasions .
We cannot always see this commitment day to day in certain actions of your government , with the result that unproductive confrontations with the European Commission cannot be avoided .
We also cannot see this commitment in those people who seem to wait for others to take the initiative before deciding on their own position .
In any event , it is time for the political leaders to build a Europe which gives its people hope for this joint project .
This is because , Mr Zapatero , Europe is more than just the sum of the domestic successes of its governments , including those that you may have had .
The adoption of the Lisbon Treaty will mark the end of one phase , but the work will only just have begun .
It will be time to continue building a space of freedom , security and justice ; time to build a truly European immigration policy ; time to improve the competitiveness of our companies and the welfare opportunities of our citizens , and time also to raise the voice of Europe in the world and improve relations with our neighbours , including those in the Mediterranean where so much help can be given by Spain .
Without renouncing or failing to reflect its extreme national and linguistic diversity , Spain therefore has much to offer in making this great common ideal a reality and you , if the ballot boxes give you back the confidence to govern , either alone or in company with others , will have to make an absolute personal commitment to achieving these objectives .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Prime Minister , the Lisbon Treaty adopted in December will not just shape institutional preconditions for Europe 's future .
In my view there are three assessments regarding Lisbon 's results on which everyone to whom Europe 's future is important can agree - both those who welcome what was achieved in Lisbon , and those who reject it .

Since the agreement in Lisbon there have been grounds for a certain optimism about the future of the European Union , firstly with regard to the Member States ' ability to agree ; secondly , there is a cautious attitude towards assessing the agreement achieved , since it will not be possible to evaluate the real effect of the Treaty in that area until it has been in force for several years ; the third is a negative assessment of the fact that , following the outcome of the referendums in the Netherlands and France , the Constitutional Treaty became a treaty partly by avoiding listening to public opinion .
Paradoxically , however , one of the Constitutional Treaty 's basic tasks was to make it more comprehensible and acceptable to European society .
As a member of the European Convention I object to the use and the spirit of the word ' constitution ' for the new treaty .
The outcome of Lisbon follows an approach that I endorse , but I do not think that the reasons for the changes will serve Europe 's future .
Thank you .

( ES ) Mr Zapatero , I am absolutely delighted that you are here today and that you have placed such importance on the challenge of climate change and also on the need to act now .
Welcome to the club .
At the same time , words must be accompanied by positive political decisions and the undeniable truth is that Spain is still the black sheep on climate change with figures well behind the Kyoto targets .
This requires a substantial response in terms of renewable energies ; we need a policy with taxation .
I am very happy about the , albeit deceptive , proposal made with regard to the additional cent on petrol .
At the same time , I should like Spain to present a proposal on a European-wide environmental tax to tackle the avalanche of foreign products and imports of polluting products .
We would be delighted if the extensive coal subsidies could be abolished , at both European and Spanish level , if tax measures to reduce the crazy Spanish energy consumption could be taken seriously and if investments in infrastructure could be redirected towards the railways and other forms of public transport and not towards the roads .
On a more positive note , I should like to congratulate you most sincerely on the abandonment by Spain of nuclear energy .
This gradual abandonment is very important and I would ask other European leaders to take note of this because nuclear energy is very expensive , very dangerous and very slow to build and is not the answer to climate change .
( ES ) Welcome Prime Minister .
You know that I am in one of those minorities that would have liked the Lisbon Treaty to also have been submitted to a referendum in Spain and in all the Member States .
I have listened to you closely and there is still time for you to take the lead on this .
There is still time for Europe to hold a referendum , in all the Member States , on the same day , to take account of the one fundamental element in our history : the people .
Our position is not merely window-dressing ; it is deeply democratic in the sense that we cannot build a European project or finish building this without the direct participation of the people .
I believe you are being excessively optimistic when you say that we have finished building our social Europe .
In this House we very often have to co-legislate with direct attacks on the European social state in terms of work and job security .
We currently have a debate ongoing about flexicurity . I therefore believe that we have a debate pending on the consolidation of this social state .
I will end with a request , Prime Minister .
The EU-Africa Summit is imminent .
Please do not forget the occupied territories of the Western Sahara .
Spain and the European Union have a fundamental responsibility in this area .
The United Nations Security Council has demanded a right of self-determination and it is up to us in the European Union to give substance to this demand and , if possible , to realise it at the EU-Africa Summit .
( SK ) Prime Minister , you have paid your respects to Parliament , and I would like to pay my respects to you and , through you , to Spain .
The future of Europe represents a massive task for the European Parliament .
In the context of adopting legislation , the codecision system is being extended to cover 68 areas .
These are energy , climate change , structural funds , cooperation in criminal law , intellectual property , and so on .
The European Parliament is becoming co-legislator for 95 % of European legislation .
Therefore Parliament will be deciding double the amount of legislation that it does today .
Moreover , the European Parliament will elect the President of the European Commission who will have to report to the European Parliament on each of his discussions in the European Council .
Therefore , in 2009 , the European Parliament will be the strongest Parliament since its first session in 1968 .
It will be an equal partner with the other European institutions .
Therefore we will be obliged to increase turnout in the elections to this strong body in 2009 .
Turnout in the last elections to the European Parliament was the lowest ever .
Only 47 % of the electorate took part , and in Slovakia , which I represent here , the figure was as low as 11 % .
A great deal of work lies ahead of us .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , actually , I wanted to congratulate Mr Schulz .
He has managed to ensure that he will get a pat on the back from his Socialist friends with his dull - if not to say dumb - polemics directed at the PPE-DE Group .
Soon after he had finished speaking , there were just as many empty seats on the Socialist side as there are over here .
Tempting though it is to claim that the Socialists only listen to their great leaders but are not interested in debate , I will refrain from doing so because we are supposed to treat each other with respect .
I think an apology is warranted from Mr Schulz .
Let me inject a bit of life into the debate by asking you this : what lessons have we actually learned today ?
Well , we have found out that the Spanish are a European nation .
I think I am right in saying that they were the same nation when Prime Minister Aznar addressed us .
However , we have also heard a domestic policy speech with an eye to the elections .
I do not think it is the task of the European Parliament to go along with that .
Angela Merkel and President Sarkozy were also here , and they did not pursue a domestic agenda ; they talked about Europe .
These debates are only of any value if we look at matters of detail .
In that respect , my colleague Mr Dupont is quite right , of course .
The fact that Spain has legalised 700 000 immigrants was condemned in unequivocal terms by President Sarkozy last week here in the European Parliament .
It would have been interesting to hear why there is obviously some dispute over this issue in the European Council .
It would have been interesting to hear how we are really tackling immigration .
We know that there is massive illegal immigration taking place and we know that clear European directives setting out rules and procedures for the return of illegal migrants are on the table .
These directives are being blocked in the European Council and are not moving forward .
I fail to see how we can explain to our citizens why we are talking about Europe 's great and noble values here in this House , and yet in the daily business of the European Council - of which you are also a member , Prime Minister - progress has stalled , unfortunately .
My message is this : European speeches are important , and talking about Europe 's fundamental values is important , but European action must take priority .
( FR ) Prime Minister , when we speak of the future of Europe , history is never very far away .
It was quite straightforward for our fellow citizens while the Berlin Wall was there .
We knew where the threat lay for it had a location and a face .
We were the vanguard of freedom , even right next to Franco , and anyway it was not necessary to talk about borders because they were drawn by an Iron Curtain .
This sectioned Europe off nicely , and that was the end of it .
Nowadays I feel the future of Europe lies in its geography .
We need only take a look at our surroundings .
We are right next to the world 's battlefield , from Gaza to Kabul .
They need some European spirit of reconciliation over there .
We are also in close proximity to the hunger zone , the world 's land of pandemics , Africa , which you also mentioned .
Some sharing has to be done there , for it is here we can control the migratory flows .
Then we also find ourselves in close proximity to a region that has been showing signs in recent years of religious fanaticism .
I do not include everyone , of course .
Here , at the same time , we must call for a dialogue of cultures and not of culture shocks .
We are also in close proximity to oil and gas reserves .
We need them .
This means that part of our prospects depends on secure supplies and energy independence .
These are a few explanations we could give to our fellow citizens who are a little lost here .
Modern Europe is located at the centre of continent nations .
There are no empires any more .
You had one , and so did we .
There are some bits of it left here and there .
There are no blocs anymore .
Europe must be given a new direction .
This cannot be achieved by simply adding directives .
Some broad prospects must be outlined in order to rebuild or attempt to rebuild a kind of European dream .
This is my partial vision of the future of Europe .
Finally , I wish to beg your indulgence , Prime Minister , for next year is the two hundredth anniversary of Napoleon I 's Spanish campaign .
Since you are an acquaintance of mine , and next year includes the French Presidency , please be indulgent with us .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Prime Minister for his refreshing speech about political union .
I would be grateful if he could find the time to travel to London to repeat it to Gordon Brown , his fellow Social Democrat Prime Minister , including the passages on the importance of the social dimension of the single market , and the importance of solidarity and the cohesion of the Union faced with global challenges .
In a fortnight the Prime Minister will be at the December European Council meeting , discussing with President Sarkozy the proposal to create a comité des sages .
I would be grateful if he could tell President Sarkozy that we ought not to upset the prospects for ratification of the Treaty by reopening quarrels about procedures and the balance of power .
Please could he also tell him that it is not sensible to try to set the geographical frontiers of Europe .
The enlargement process is firmly established .
Europe will find its final shape when European countries as yet outside the Union stop wanting to join us .
( PL ) Mr President , from a geographical point of view , Europe has been clearly defined and its borders established .
In a political context , however , the term Europe has become synonymous with the enlarging European Union .
On the one hand , not all European countries belong to this organisation , yet on the other , most Members of the European Parliament are pressing for the admission of non-European countries like Turkey .
When discussing Europe 's future it is important to consider its roots and fundamental values .
There are thousands of documents referring to European values .
The latter are not always clearly defined , however , not even in the Charter of Fundamental Rights debated today , for example .
When all is said and done , European roots are Christian , and those fundamental values were defined long ago .
Constant efforts to define the obvious lead to distortions of proportion .
They also affect the potential for responding to the real problems of the old continent , such as the worrying ageing of Europe 's population , migration , aggressive competition from Asian countries , terrorism , epidemics , new diseases and also energy security .
( ES ) Prime Minister , it is right and proper that we should recognise that , following a worrying period of uncertainty , you have been one of the leaders who has reinvigorated the European transatlantic relationship and I must congratulate you on this .
However , for those of us who regard ourselves as deeply pro-European , it is sad to see that this transatlantic relationship is still laden with two items of ballast that previously made it sink : too much mercantilism and too much intergovernmentalism .
We also note that , although the ship is sailing well , the direction taken - or the course set , to put it in maritime terms - is the one shown by the compass of Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy which is making the boat list clearly towards the Conservative right .
The question is : what room for manoeuvre do you have , Prime Minister , in order to right the ship and correct the course ?
How do you think you can convince those who , despite being pro-European , are afraid of boarding the European ship because they do not see it as safe , or because they do not know where it is going , or because they cannot see either a social Europe or an environmentally sustainable Europe or an internationally responsible Europe or a transparent , democratic and popular Europe of which we have spoken so often ?
Do you think you can lead the jump from market Europe to political Europe ?
How ?
Also , as you have congratulated this House so much , do you not think it is time for this Parliament to be the main European legislator ?
Incidentally , while we are on the subject , and in light of the new information on the use of Spanish bases for the transport of prisoners to Guantanamo , does the government intend , though the UN Security Council , to review its relations with the US ?
I am saying this , Prime Minister , because all this relates to Europe , in particular European credibility .
( DE ) Mr President , Prime Minister , Parliament will be deciding tomorrow whether the Charter of Fundamental Rights will be legally binding in future .
For me , having been a member of the Convention established to draw up the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights , this will be a very important vote , not just because I had the honour of working on what is the most modern European document on fundamental rights , and not just because I - like many others - fought for seven years to ensure that it became legally binding .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is based on the indivisibility of civil , political and social rights .
For me , as a left-wing Member of this House who comes from Berlin and lived in the GDR until the peaceful revolution in 1989 , this is of fundamental importance .
For me , the resounding ' yes ' to the Charter is the logical consequence of our critical appraisal of our own history : an appraisal which was necessary and which focused on the massive violation of fundamental and human rights under ' actually existing socialism ' .
Your country , Prime Minister , plays an important role in the EU .
By voting ' yes ' in the referendum to what was then the Constitutional Treaty , the citizens of Spain made a major contribution to the Charter not being shelved .
You can and should build on this achievement .
Everyone has great expectations of Europe .
They expect Europe to address their daily needs and concerns .
They want Europe to work in a substantive way - and not just hum the melody , as Jean-Claude Juncker said - in order to create a Europe of the workers , a Europe that is genuinely based on solidarity .
That is why a vigorous campaign needs to be conducted in the European Union against social and wage dumping .
Minimum wages for everyone which safeguard people 's livelihoods : that is what we need .
The social issue is indeed crucial for the future of Europe !
Mr President , Prime Minister , the Lisbon Treaty , or rather the renamed Constitution , is your view of Europe 's future .
This is the Constitution that was decisively rejected by French and Dutch voters in 2005 , and which we are now seeking to force through without the consent of the people .
Across the 27 Member States , opinion polls show that a majority of citizens want a referendum on the Treaty .
In the UK , 80 % want a referendum , and two thirds would vote ' no ' , yet our government denies us the vote it solemnly pledged in its election manifesto .
Prime Minister , you speak of a Europe of democracy , but Europe tramples on public opinion .
The contempt we show for public opinion makes a mockery of our claim to be a ' Union of Values ' .
Over and over again my constituents tell me that they voted in 1975 for a free trade area , not a political union .
It is time to dismantle the supranational political structures of the EU and return to the simple trading group which the British were promised in 1972 .
( NL ) Mr President , the fact that we are welcoming the Spanish Prime Minister to our sitting today could mistakenly give the impression that we are still in the reflection period about the Constitution , as this series of discussions with prime ministers was set up for that purpose .
Happily , however , that period is behind us and in the meantime we have agreement on a good Reform Treaty .
Of course you are welcome here , Prime Minister , because it is now worth talking about the future of Europe .
This is more the case now then ever , because the Treaty is not an end but a new beginning .
It is not an end in itself ; it is an instrument that we must employ effectively and that offers us a perspective on a better administration , on more democracy , on the realisation of values such as freedom , security , prosperity and a further extension of our socio-market economy in an open and globalised world .
You can take it from me , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that these are the same goals that are pursued by many of the Belgian people in their desire for state reform .
Although that is purely incidental , it is aimed at the realisation of the goals which we share here with so many people .
Mr President , I should like to salute the Prime Minister for being one of the not so many prime ministers who speaks the same language here in Brussels as in their respective capitals .
I should also like to salute him for being one of the very few prime ministers who does not hide what Europe is and should be to their own people .
Therefore , his people support him , so there was that great ' yes ' to the European Constitution .
I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Prime Minister on regaining for Spain the right level of representation in this House , in this Parliament , with effect from 2009 .




I think that the message of Spain is clear to us , and we share this message : Europe will be either social or not at all ; Europe will be either a global player or not at all ; Europe will either be able to combine solidarity with subsidiarity or it will fail ; Europe will either be able to offer a model of sustainable growth or it will vanish ; Europe will either able to offer a solution in favour of social inclusiveness , gender equality and popular empowerment or it will fall apart ; Europe will be able to associate multiculturalism with civic cohesion , free competition with generosity , efficiency with justice and flexibility with security , or it will become meaningless .
I also share the Prime Minister 's point of view that security is indivisible and it should be individual , social , national and international for all .
I also share his point of view on immigration .
Yes , the right answer to immigration challenges is integration and not expulsion ; integration and not marginalisation .
The right answer should be directed towards treatment of the causes and not of the symptoms .
I understand very well why the Prime Minister does not need a new referendum for the new Treaty .
He already has a ' maxi-mandate ' and , therefore , he may accept a mini-Treaty . We have to ratify this Treaty quickly and then restart on our way towards a more integrated Europe .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , as I have followed this debate , the impression I have gained is that everything is fine and is going to be better still , though it is actually so good already that it could hardly be any better .
There are , however , a number of problems about which the great leaders of the European Union speak as one but seem to be mistaken .
We are confronted by a new quasi-religion , namely the so-called greenhouse effect .
The greenhouse effect is presented in such a way as to lead to a call for maximum reduction of emissions .
European countries are therefore forced to compete with countries that do not have such strict plans for restricting emissions , In the meantime , all serious scientists now believe that the greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon that occurs on a cyclical basis and that the sum of mankind 's efforts can only make a difference of a few percentage points at most .
Ladies and gentlemen , I urge you not to engage in wishful thinking .
Instead , please set about devising a sensible energy policy , because oil now costs USD 100 and some people believe it will soon be even dearer .
The obvious questions are : why is this the case and who is profiting from the situation ?
( ES ) Prime Minister , I must echo the words of welcome expressed by all my colleagues in my Group in an act of respect and parliamentary courtesy which I very much feel has not been extended by the PSE Group .
Prime Minister , we Spanish Members should also be flattered because you have come here today , before reporting to the Spanish Parliament on the result of the Lisbon Council , something which you no doubt plan to do , before the Spanish Parliament is dissolved , because you must agree that the Spanish people deserve an explanation given that , as you have mentioned , they were the first to have a referendum on a Constitution that still does not exist .
Prime Minister , the pro-European commitment of your speech is fully shared by the vast majority of this House .
That is why I would imagine that now , from Europe and towards Spain , as you have said , you will share our concern that Spain has been the worst in Europe for transposing the Community directives into national law and yet has been in the lead in terms of proceedings for infringements of EU laws .
Likewise , I have to say that your commitments here today on the environment - which can only deserve praise - contrast with the harsh reality of the facts , because just today we have heard about a European Commission report which indicates that our country is the one that is furthest from meeting the targets laid down in the Kyoto Protocol .
Prime Minister , I cannot wish you luck in the elections next March .
It is true that your speech was more like a campaign speech than anything else , but I do want you , and this is the crux of the matter , to do your utmost to re-establish the consensus between the Spanish political forces in the European institutions which has disappeared , Prime Minister , not due to initiatives which have come from this side of the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President of the Spanish Government . - ( ES ) Mr President , I will very briefly make two points on the issues that have been raised most insistently : immigration policy and the regularisation of the situation of migrants in Spain .
I am in favour of a common immigration policy for the European Union covering border control , integration and a statute for its common regulation .
We are far from this point but I can assure the two Members who raised this issue of one thing : when I became Prime Minister , I found that in my country there were 700 000 illegal migrant workers who were being exploited , who were not paying any taxes or social security contributions and who were working in the informal or illegal economy .
Our European values are rights , legality , transparency and the rule of law .
I will therefore always try to ensure that , in my country , no one is working illegally , no one is being exploited , no one is being denied their rights and no one is failing to contribute to the burdens shouldered by a democratic country .
Never .
( Applause )
I do not know how many of these 700 000 entered through France .
I do not know .
What I do know is that France and Spain , after much dialogue , because there were differences of opinion , now share a common philosophy and a common political approach .
The same is true with the German Government .
The experiences and circumstances of each country have been very different due to the lack of a common immigration policy .
When there is no common immigration policy , we tend to blame our problems on France , or those of France are blamed on Spain , or those of Germany on Italy or those of Italy on Germany .
This serves absolutely no purpose and is also harmful to European construction .
When we have a policy of shared external borders , with everyone controlling these together , and a policy of integration and common status , we will not be tempted to criticise a country which tackles the issue of 700 000 people working illegally so that they can become legal .
On climate change , I cannot stress this any more firmly , but I also do not want to look back to any particular government , because there have been governments in my country of all colours ...
Without doubt there has been enormous economic growth in Spain .
The only thing I know is that the government over which I preside is the only one to have stopped the growth of greenhouse gas emissions - which we did in 2006 - and the only one to have started to reduce these while increasing economic growth by 4 % .
Also , 2006 was the first year when the primary consumption of electricity in Spain was reduced .
We are extremely determined in this area , as we have been in other areas of political action where we have not hesitated to pass far-reaching laws on rights or to take forceful decisions on foreign policy when we have been against certain actions .
In the international arena , we will not fail to be firm or determined when tackling what I have described as a huge challenge and a huge opportunity .
I can assure you that Spain is not the worst and certainly will not be so in the next few years because we are going to make a huge national effort to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions , to invest in alternative renewable energies and to pursue a policy of energy efficiency and saving .
I will end by reiterating my profound gratitude to the European Parliament .
I have felt content here and also European , deeply European and , when I leave this common House of the European people , I will feel even more European .
I should very much have liked to come here earlier .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , economic development and job creation are primary requirements in Europe today .
Progress must be made in the field of job creation through economic development and this needs planning of a longer term than 1-2 years , and more flexible use of the solidarity funds .
We must confront the threat of climate change , and we must arrange a secure , sustainable energy supply .
Environmental protection and the introduction of environmentally friendly technologies are now global issues that affect the whole of society .
Following the Lisbon Strategy , and amending it where necessary , the Union must be turned into a region of prosperity , solidarity , security and freedom , striving for new partnerships with the whole world , but especially with its immediate neighbours , Asia and Africa .
Europe must play a leading role in globalisation !
The creation of a knowledge-based society is important for this , where citizens can acquire flexible , transferable knowledge that they can use in their everyday lives , through education and training .
Lifelong learning is the basis for labour mobility .
In employment , we must achieve full equality of opportunities , combat social exclusion , support those who lag behind , those in disadvantaged situations and those who have been forced onto the edges of society .
Particularly great attention must be devoted to small and medium-sized enterprises , which may be tokens of a welfare society and an appropriate level of employment .
Energy production must be built on firm foundations , consumption must be brought down to a lower level , and waste must be halted with the introduction of energy-saving technologies .
The proportion of alternative energy sources must be increased in parallel with a reduction in the use of fossil fuels .
Economic partnership agreements ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on Economic partnership agreements .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to explain where we are in the economic partnership agreement ( EPA ) negotiations .
I am glad to note that the strategy proposed by the Commission in its communication of 23 October was endorsed by the Council last week .
As Commissioner Mandelson said to Parliament 's Committee on International Trade last week , we have turned a corner in these negotiations .
These negotiations are moving very quickly .
Let me give you a sense of where we stand at this moment .
In East Africa , a stepping-stone agreement has been initialled with the East African Community : Kenya , Uganda , Rwanda , Burundi and Tanzania .
We are very close to an interim deal with the Indian Ocean countries in the context of the Eastern and Southern Africa grouping .
In the Southern African Development Community , we have initialled a stepping-stone agreement with Botswana , Lesotho , Swaziland and Mozambique .
Angola will join as soon as it is able .
South Africa and Namibia will decide on their participation in the next day .
Regarding the Pacific region , we are working in parallel on an umbrella agreement for the region as a whole and specific agreements on market access to safeguard the immediate interests of those countries which account for the region 's trade with the European Union .
I expect agreement on those to be announced very shortly .
In the remaining regions , the picture is less clear .
For West Africa and Central Africa , meetings are taking place with so-called ' subgroups ' .
It is possible that we will be able to conclude interim agreements on goods with the countries most affected , which could then be enlarged to full EPAs with the whole region in 2008 .
That will , of course , depend on the wish of those concerned to take this route and to present WTO-compatible market access agreements .
In the Caribbean region , we have an agreement on nearly everything but , crucially , not on trade in goods , where the region 's proposal falls well short of what can be defended in the WTO .
Negotiations are continuing , but we now need a clear political decision from the region to unlock the negotiations by producing a WTO-compatible market access schedule .
In all regions , we are taking a pragmatic and flexible approach to achieving what remains our objective for these agreements : full EPAs with four regions .
This will modernise our trade relationship and put it at the service of development , so full agreement with four regions is our objective .
We have made significant progress in recent days , but we cannot today guarantee that there will be an agreement including new WTO-compatible trade arrangements with all ACP countries .
WTO compatibility is the essential component of all agreements , whether they are full EPAs , stepping-stone agreements , or even goods-only deals .
Without this , we can only offer the generalised system of preferences .
Next week , the General Affairs and External Relations Council will decide on the EC regulation to implement the market access which has been offered to the ACP .
It is the best ever offer in a bilateral agreement : full duty / quota-free access , with transition periods for only two products - sugar and rice .
We will continue to do everything possible to reach agreements .
Our offer is on the table and the moment any ACP state provides a WTO-compatible offer to complete a deal , we can move quickly to propose to the Council that it should benefit from the EPA market access regulation .
We have indicated our willingness to work with subregions , if that is what the ACP states wish .
We have agreed to continue negotiating beyond 1 January 2008 on other issues , like services , investment and other trade-related areas , which are such an important part of the development component of these agreements .
We have delivered on our commitment to provide trade arrangements equivalent to or better than Cotonou to any country reaching an agreement with us .
We have offered to open our markets fully and match the goods trade offer with generous services offers .
What we cannot do is extend the Cotonou trade regime while we continue negotiations .
In the absence of an EPA , we have made clear that we cannot and will not propose solutions which are illegal or insecure .
Our ACP partners will need support to implement the agreements and make the necessary adjustments and reforms .
This is why the Commission is working to ensure that the European Development Fund will make ' aid for trade ' in the context of EPAs a priority .
It is why we are working closely with Member States so that they bring additional money in the context of the newly-adopted EU aid-for-trade strategy .
We know that concluding these negotiations means taking difficult political decisions , but we welcome the leadership shown by those ACP regions and countries which have decided to join us in initialling EPA agreements .
We will continue to support them as they implement the commitments they have made and as we work together to ensure that this is a trade relationship that genuinely contributes to their development .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , after seven years of negotiations , to say that we are not where we should be is perhaps an understatement .
I am not sure that is correct to say that we have turned the corner .
Over the last few weeks some ACP members have grown increasingly uneasy at the prospects of the limited - as the Commissioner himself described it - GSP tariff regime that awaits them on 1 January should they not sign up to an EPA agreement .
The European Commission claims to have been successful in its pursuit of an interim agreement with both individual states and subregional groups .
As the Commissioner said , it signed with the East African group yesterday , while the SADC signed last week - but without South Africa and without Namibia !
What sort of economic agreement is it that misses countries out ?
It is reported that the Commission is pushing West Africa into an agreement without Nigeria , which is one of the biggest countries in Africa and has huge trade negotiations on the table with the European Union .
What is the long-term effect of these so-called framework agreements being signed ?
What about regional integration ?
As far as I can see these are breaking up the very regions described in my report that are what EPAs are all about .
Parliament 's resolution , prepared by a political group , sets out clearly the need to look forward to these now fast-moving negotiations .
We may not like these arrangements , but the deadline is almost upon us and at the moment there are no alternatives .
The Kigali Declaration was extremely heavy and critical .
Our resolution today in Parliament is forward-looking , and I hope that we can look forward .
As their name suggests , EPAs are a stepping stone to full and comprehensive trade relations between the EU and the ACP .
I am disappointed that the PSE Group has decided not to vote on them .
I leave the Commissioner with one final thought .
In the United Kingdom there is a saying which goes there are three great lies in the world : ' the cheque is in the post ' ; ' it was not my fault ' ; and ' I am from the European Union and I am here to help ' .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , we cannot help noticing that the way in which negotiations were conducted by the Commission has failed to secure signature of genuine EPAs before the scheduled date .
Here I agree with Mr Sturdy : the interim agreements call into question the regional groups that had been created and formed the basis of discussions to sign these EPAs .
Far from strengthening links and trust between Europe and ACP states , negotiations have aroused great concern .
There is concern in relation to losses of public resources : the Senegalese President recently told the press that between 35 % and 70 % of African budgets were made up of customs tariffs : Nigeria is set to lose 800 million euros , for instance .
There is concern in relation to the consequences of liberalisation for fragile sectors of ACP economies , which will have to face competition from European businesses .
There is concern in relation to the requests to include a number of subjects in the second phase , which do not correspond to WTO obligations .
Here I am thinking of services , investment , public markets and the rules of competition .
There is concern in relation to the threat of introducing higher customs tariffs in 2008 for non-LDC ACP states as a kind of blackmail forcing them to accept any agreement .
I feel we need to give ACP-EU relations a new lease of life and get negotiations back on the tracks of the main Cotonou principles .
EPAs are development instruments .
Liberalisation is not an end in itself .
The aim of EPAs is to strengthen ACP economies to help them move into the world economy .
No ACP state should be worse off after an EPA than before it was signed .
The signatories must benefit from a preference system at least as favourable as before any EPA signature .
Agreements must be based on the interests of the ACP states and their economic diversification .
The rules of origin must be clarified to ascertain the extent to which they will benefit from any new market access measures we put forward , and genuine mechanisms for financial compensation must be implemented .
The message in the Kigali Declaration by members of parliament in ACP states and in Europe must be understood .
The date of 31 December is not as fatal a blow as the one you dealt .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we in the ALDE Group backed the request from the leader of the Socialist Group to postpone the vote , in an attempt to reach a broader agreement on the text of the resolution .
We likewise share the concerns and hopes summarised in the concluding document of the Kigali meeting .
EPAs are an important tool of development , regional integration and poverty reduction .
EU action in this globalised world of ours must pursue these goals .
Free trade , the WTO rules and even EPAs are not an end in themselves but tools at the service of world trade .
Nevertheless , we must also acknowledge that the legal void arising from the expiry of the Cotonou Agreement puts the ACP countries themselves at serious risk ; there is much more at stake than whether or not these agreements are legitimate in the light of WTO rules and decisions .
We too hope that the negotiations underway in the six regions can be concluded rapidly , and that the resumption and successful conclusion of the more complicated Doha negotiations on the reform of world trade can provide a clear-cut framework in which the developmental needs of the poorest countries can be better met , including in terms of EU-ACP relations .
We are aware , however , that the ACP negotiations are proceeding slowly and that the reform of world trade , which would also have the merit of revitalising multilateralism in world trade , is flagging .
Feasible solutions should therefore be pursued in a pragmatic manner .
To this end we believe that the Commission 's chosen strategy of a two-stage approach - namely first interim agreements relating only to trade and then a more general agreement - serves to avoid an interruption in the flow of goods at favourable rates , as provided for at Cotonou , which could be very detrimental to the ACP countries .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it was astonishing to hear you talking about the negotiations as though nothing had gone awry and everything had gone swimmingly for the Commission .
In the last few months , we - here in Parliament - have pointed out on several occasions that the Commission has overburdened the negotiations with the ACP countries .
We pointed out that an agreement on goods was enough to meet the WTO conditions and that an agreement on the Singapore issues was not essential .
This criticism fell on deaf ears in the Commission ; indeed , the Commission brushed our criticism aside .
Your abrupt change of course towards interim ' goods-only ' agreements is too little , too late .
' Goods-only ' at this stage is a confession of failure caused by your own lack of insight .
It would have done you more credit had you admitted self-critically for once that your negotiating strategy was a mistake .
The second big mistake was the way in which the negotiations were conducted .
They were obviously conducted as if they were simply about an ordinary free trade agreement , not a development-based framework agreement .
The ACP countries were unanimous in complaining that they were put under pressure , and this testifies to the miserable atmosphere at the negotiations .
We heard this message very clearly in Kigali , and I must say to the Commission that the tone of negotiations is very important too , not just the substance .
It is vital to avoiding making yet another big mistake .
We now need a solution for those non-LDC countries which do not feel able to sign up at present .
We must avoid a collapse of trade relations , so we need a proposal for a transitional arrangement for 2008 .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission 's negotiating strategy was completely wrong ; in fact , it was a catastrophe .
It was based on the ' Global Europe ' strategy , which is all about market access for Europe 's major transnational corporations .
I have always wondered what this approach has to do with partnership agreements .
Partnership means something completely different .
Partnership means respect for the country which needs to carry out economic and social development .
A partnership agreement must foster respect for the fact that the provision of development aid must not be linked to the conclusion of an EPA .
Economic partnership agreements have to take account of the development of the weak , and weakest , countries .
No country , if it does not sign , should be in a worse situation than it is already .
That is fair partnership and that is an approach based on solidarity .
The Commission was miles away from that .
I think it is a good thing that , under pressure from many sides , it is now starting to pursue a different strategy , although I am very sceptical about this when I see how it is acting with Mercosur , ASEAN and the Andean countries , where it is still pursuing the same old way of thinking .
We Europeans seem to be saying , ' this is what is going to happen , take it or leave it ' .
I repeat , that has nothing to do with partnership .
I was rather annoyed - in fact I was appalled - by what happened here today , that we could not use the Kigali decision as a basis , even though it was endorsed by all the Members who were in Kigali .
Parliament should have given this delegation its support by endorsing the decision .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( NL ) Mr President , EPAs are a controversial theme in Africa and are increasingly developing into one in Europe .
This issue involves fundamental differences of insight concerning the possibility of fighting poverty by means of sustainable economic growth in ACP countries .
It is clear that purely financial aid has not made a real contribution to the reduction of poverty .
We believe that these trade agreements can offer a window through which we can get away from a long history of barely effective aid .
The global trade with ACP countries has decreased .
It is now less than 1 % and the Millennium Development Goals have not been achieved in Africa .
The situation must change .
Europe has a moral duty to help the ACP countries grow economically and to increase trade with them .
The EPAs must make a contribution to this .
Mr President , the benefits of trade and economic integration are evident , particularly in an increasingly globalised world .
Competition , a good climate for investment , market access , and working factories are essential for economic growth in ACP countries .
We must be flexible and pragmatic , but within the framework of the World Trade Organization .
The signing of the completed trade agreements is no longer expected by the deadline of 1 January 2008 .
Some countries in East and South Africa have , however , reached interim agreements .
These are goods-only agreements .
They cannot be called a step towards regional development .
We must quickly start supplying technical support to strengthen these countries and then eventually reach a complete agreement , including , for example , services .
Mr President , my Group recommends , as others have said , that , in the interests of credibility and authenticity , Parliament establish a position which reflects what was unanimously agreed at our Joint Parliamentary Assembly and was reflected by the Kigali Declaration .
I believe that it is both a moderate and balanced document , which represents lengthy and successful negotiations between all our political groups - including , of course , Mr Sturdy 's political group , as he made reference to it - and with the ACP .
I have never encountered the kind of pressure that the ACP has faced during these negotiations , especially as they are threatened with being severely disadvantaged by Europe 's GSP tariff regime .
It is that threat that has caused the emergence of new regional groupings , and we will possibly see bilateral agreements , for example with Côte d 'Ivoire .
These subgroupings which the Commissioner has talked about are not something that we should see as a great achievement , but rather as something that threatens regional integration and is causing massive regional tensions amongst the ACP .
Mauritius , Seychelles , Madagascar and Comoros have agreed a subregional EPA ; West and Central Africa have put forward no market access offers and so face GSP .
South Africa and Namibia , in the SADC , seem to have reached a red line they cannot cross and are being asked to include most-favoured-nation clauses which would oblige them to give the EU any market access they may concede in the future to other countries .
The Pacific , of course , is also not experiencing the best of negotiations and it is unlikely that any countries other than Fiji and Papua New Guinea will sign or initial .
Intransigence and a lack of flexibility have clearly alienated the ACP , especially when they realise that the Commission is pushing for agreements from the ACP that it has not sought from others , and colleagues from the Committee on International Trade will confirm this .
Both technically and politically , the ' goods-only ' agreement has proved impossible , even for the Caribbean .
The capacity of the Caribbean is greater than of any other region .
Only last week , they said that what was on offer was simply not tenable for them .
Surely , the Commission must now step back , take the pressure off and reassess how it can ensure that we do not do the unthinkable and throw the non-LDCs to the wolves .
The willingness of both sides to continue negotiation in good faith should be communicated to the WTO in order to avoid the trade disruption which failure to sign an EPA by the deadline would cause .
The EU must make the required internal legislative changes to permit the continuation of the current trading arrangements .
Subsequently , the EU and the ACP could work together to ensure that there is no opposition or challenge in the WTO .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , simply cannot return to our constituencies , wherever they are in Europe , and say that vulnerable ACP states are going to be treated in this way when they are already agreeing amongst themselves that they are being asked to agree economic partnerships that they see as being harmful to their economic interests .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to inform you of the serious concerns expressed in recent months by overseas communities in relation to EPAs .
The EPAs cannot amount to mere free trade agreements under the auspices of the WTO , nor can they jeopardise the already fragile economies of our overseas communities .
They ought to represent a genuine partnership to create a new economic and trade framework favourable to development in all such territories .
The geographic location of overseas communities in close proximity to many ACP countries places them at the centre of the preferential reciprocal agreements with these countries .
I am well aware that the outermost regions and overseas countries and territories ( OCTs ) making up Europe 's overseas territory concern only six EU Member States and that obviously issues in these territories are largely unknown .
Nevertheless , the particular situation of the outermost regions is known and must be taken into account much more specifically within these negotiations on the basis of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty .
Additionally , OCTs next to ACP countries must also be given a special focus in terms of respect for the association agreements which already link them to the EU by virtue of this Article .
I thank you for supporting the amendment I intend to table in a bid to secure an intelligent balance between regional integration of overseas territories and their European links .
Although negotiations may be difficult , particularly concerning protection of local markets and the list of sensitive products , I trust the Commission will find a respectful compromise between the specific interests of outermost regions and OCTs and of ACP countries .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that what will be important is to use the next few weeks to shape the agreement so that everyone can be happy with it .
It is an agreement of great importance and it has immense symbolic resonance .
It is not just about negotiating a free trade agreement for the regions and countries of Africa and bringing them closer to Europe .
It is also about producing an agreement for a real development round , which fights poverty and genuinely shows that the European Union is in a position to negotiate an agreement in a way which puts the African countries at their ease and helps them feel a bond with the European Union .
There are several points which are important , as you yourself said , and you mentioned a number of them .
We must ensure that the regional agreements genuinely benefit the countries concerned .
We must ensure that the non-LCD countries also get an agreement and are not left out , and we must ensure that all the countries can develop in the right direction .
The agreement which you proposed , in the form of a two-step approach , must also guarantee that no one is left out , so that ultimately , we are genuinely moving in the right direction , which is still not guaranteed today .
Mr Markov , we should utilise the opportunity available to us now as a result of not adopting the resolution tomorrow , in order to reach a consensus in Parliament , and I think we have enough points of convergence for that to happen .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank all who contributed to this interesting debate .
I am sure that we see it as an ongoing process .
I am not part of it directly or personally but , for an agreement , you need goodwill on both sides and for many partners to agree .
As I said in my introductory statement , we are working in a pragmatic and flexible way .
Those who are ready or willing to follow the same approach follow not to the detriment of the others , but for the gradual achievement which is important for all regions and for international trade as a whole .
There were some questions or criticisms about the tone of the negotiations .
I want to assure you that it is in a spirit of partnership .
We take into account , in this spirit of partnership , the development objectives and the constraints on our partners .
Some questions were about goods-only deals .
The stepping-stone agreements lead towards comprehensive EPAs and these are supportive of ACP development and regional integration .
So we are not losing sight of the overall picture and overall needs of our partner countries and regions .
I do not want to repeat many of the points I made at the beginning , but the process continues .
Sometimes a deadline brings pressure to find a solution during the last few days or weeks , and we are making real progress .
I quoted many names and countries where we have recently initialled stepping-stone agreements , and we will continue doing so , but our interest is really in finding solutions .
Processes will continue , because there is more than one stage in this situation .
As I said , after 1 January , we will continue working on issues like services , investment and other trade-related areas .
I believe that the General Affairs and External Relations Council next week will support the proposal for a regulation of the Community to implement the market access which has been offered to the ACP .
As I said , it is the best ever offer in a bilateral agreement .
We are being not only open but also very constructive .
The strategy the Commission proposed , and I tried to describe , was fully confirmed by the Council - all 27 countries - and , in this spirit of partnership and this constructive manner , we will continue .
The objective is really a fully-fledged economic partnership agreement .
This will be a catalyst for regional integration .
Once the first-step agreements are concluded , we will continue towards this objective .
Nobody is left out or forgotten in this process .
We not only have in mind , but support very actively , the least developed countries .
I think that is all I can say for now , either in response to questions or by way of confirmation , but I am sure that this House will come back to this point in the coming weeks and months , because this is also about the timing of our agreements .
in writing . - We have reached a critical period for the economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) .
A WTO-compliant agreement is crucial for the non-least developed ACP countries .
It is unfortunate that a relationship of trust between the two sides has not always been evident .
No country should feel pressurised into entering an agreement .
The Commission should have done more to make the negotiations more inclusive .
The EU is the most important trading partner for most ACP countries .
The EU imported goods worth a total of EUR 28 billion from the ACP countries in 2004 .
This amounts to double the amount of development assistance that was made available through the ninth EDF to the ACP region , from 2000 to 2007 .
Trade , and not aid , is the key for sustainable economic growth and development .
While no one can deny that many ACP countries face considerable challenges , if the EPAs are framed correctly they should be seen as an opportunity for the ACP .
The European Union should be fully supportive of the development agenda that shall accompany any EPA agreement .
Interim deals should be put in place to ensure that there will be no disruption to trade and that the livelihood of millions will not be put at risk .
Amendment of Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety on the Community 's railways - Interoperability of the Community rail system ( recast ) - Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on the safety on the Community 's railways - 6-0493 / 2006 - ;
by Mr Ortuondo Larrea , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the interoperability of the Community rail system ( recast ) - C6-0474 / 2006 - ;
by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency - C6-0473 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the adoption of the first two railway packages in 2001 and 2004 and before the adoption of the third railway package on 13 December 2006 , the Commission proposed a new set of legislative measures on cross-acceptance of rolling stock , particularly locomotives .
The aim of the measures is to revamp the rail sector by removing hindrances to the operation of trains on the European rail network .
The Commission launched this initiative for two main reasons : to facilitate free movement of trains within the EU by making the procedure for placing locomotives in service more transparent and efficient , and also to simplify regulations by consolidating and merging the three rail interoperability directives into a single directive .
The full package contains a communication , three legislative proposals and their impact assessment : a communication setting out the current difficulties and proposing a number of solutions to simplify certification of railway vehicles ; a proposal to recast the existing rail interoperability directives ; a proposal to amend the Regulation establishing a European Railway Agency , and a report on the impact assessment .
What is the central focus of these texts ?
One crucial aspect is facilitating free movement of trains , and this concerns the procedure for approval of locomotives .
According to railway companies and manufacturers , the approval procedure is extremely long and costly , and there would appear to be very little justification for a number of the authorities ' demands from the purely technical standpoint .
The Commission shares this view and intends to solve the problem by amending the legislation and also by asking railway authorities in the Member States to modify their attitude , and hence the importance of the communication issued along with the legislative proposals , suggesting solutions that may be applied immediately with no need to wait for any amendments to laws .
This communication has not been issued in vain .
One cooperation agreement has already emerged , signed in May for the Rotterdam-Genoa corridor .
This agreement follows the concepts proposed in our communication to the letter .
We could also mention the proposed recast of the directives on interoperability and safety .
The Commission had two objectives in mind when it drew up these proposals .
The first was to simplify the approval procedure for railway vehicles .
To this end we have introduced the principle of mutual recognition of authorisations for placing in service already issued by a Member State .
This principle is that rolling stock which has already been granted authorisation for placing in service in one Member State will not require any further certification in another Member State beyond that required by additional national regulations arising out of the characteristics of the local network , for instance .
Secondly , in a bid for clarity , we have used a single text to combine the 1996 Directive on interoperability of the trans-European high-speed rail system and the 2001 Directive on interoperability of the conventional rail system .
In that regard , the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny has been introduced for certain powers delegated to the Commission by the Council and the European Parliament .
Amending the interoperability and safety directives prompted us to carry out two further operations .
We have made a number of amendments to technical issues in the new interoperability directive in light of experience gained during ten years of work not only by the Commission but also by the Member States in relation to comitology , by industry and the sector and , as of 2005 , by the European Railway Agency .
We also wanted to respond to other operators by clarifying , in the safety directive , relations between the railway company and the entity carrying out maintenance .
The aim is , through this directive , to set out the new regulatory framework emerging from the Community directives on the opening up of the market and from the new contract on the use of wagons implemented on an international scale by the COTIF Convention .
Now I come to my final point on the proposal to amend the Regulation establishing a European Railway Agency .
This concerns extending the powers of the European Railway Agency to allow it to compile the various national procedures and existing technical rules for authorisation of locomotives , and to draw up and subsequently extend the list of requirements to be verified once only , either because these are internationally recognised rules or because they may be considered as equivalent between the Member States .
This task will be carried out in cooperation with national safety authorities under the guidance of the Agency .
The Agency must issue technical opinions at the request of national safety authorities or the Commission .
While making these amendments , we also clarified a number of other points in the Regulation on the basis of past experience , particularly in relation to the introduction of the ERTMS ( European Rail Traffic Management System ) and registers of rolling stock .
Mr President , I apologise for this rather technical commentary , and wish to say that the first and second rail packages , and soon the third package also , form the legal and economic framework for sound operation of rail services within the single market .
The operation will be completed by the opening up of national markets from the technical point of view .
This is the objective of these proposals so eagerly awaited by the railway industry .
I wish to thank Parliament for its splendid and rapid work on these texts .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , even though we are compelled to hold a ' technical ' debate , as the Commission Vice-President has said , we are taking a major political step forward today .
Ever since the first Treaty was drawn up in the late 1950s , European transport policy has had three goals : to create a single market , to connect networks which were separate from one another - so as to create a single market for and between modes of transport , of course - and to make networks interoperable at the construction stage .
Interoperability is not a technical matter , therefore ; it really is a precondition for establishing Europe-wide markets which are absolutely necessary and the stated aim of the Treaty .
Major progress has been achieved in almost all respects , yet the railway sector lags behind somewhat .
We find ourselves today with the same goals as those in the 1960s .
The reasons are different , and this is not the time to explore them , but this point needs to be made in order to strengthen our conviction that we are taking a major step and that it is crucial for us to succeed .
Interoperability is therefore a key condition for building , and being able to move around on , networks free from technical barriers which prevent full freedom of movement for engines and carriages .
As such , it is a fundamental step that had to be taken and must be taken as rapidly as possible .
The Commission was right to stop distinguishing between interoperability on high-speed networks and traditional networks , and hence to push as far as possible in this direction .
It was also right to put the problem of safety on the table at the same time , since safety is sometimes presented - and I need to tread very carefully here - as a reason for attaching conditions to interoperability .
How can an engine-driver be made to cross a border when he may not understand the language of the country to which he travels ?
How can a locomotive be made to cross a border when it might not be perfectly suited to the network on the other side ?
I could go on .
The Commission therefore did well to bring the two elements together .
We absolutely must guarantee safety , but within the bounds of a system that is interoperable , because if safety is put first as a condition for preventing interoperability , there is something amiss in this business .
The very fact that it was decided to create a European Agency dealing with these matters and others , as we shall see , is undoubtedly a sign that we are taking things seriously .
What has Parliament done ?
Parliament has broadly approved the Commission 's proposals , with a few recommendations intended to make the system more interoperable .
In the report on interoperability , Parliament envisages setting deadlines by which authorisations should be granted , in relation to existing rolling stock , of course .
It also advocates that the burden of proof of the fact that something is not interoperable - even on safety grounds - should be shifted onto Member States : in other words the initial assumption is that , once certified , everything can go everywhere , unless someone can give me a serious reason why that should not be the case .
Thirdly , Parliament envisages that the retrofitting of all existing rolling stock should be eligible for state aid .
Those , I believe , are the contributions made by this House .
The same applies to safety .
Here too , we have attempted to say that certification should be mandatory by a certain date : 2010 is our proposal .
This should allay everyone 's fears , without exception , given that everyone is treated in similar fashion , rather than continuing to regard the monopolies still running railway services as automatically being particularly competent and therefore exempt from these obligations .
The third point concerns getting the Agency up and running .
On this point I have one key question on my mind , and I would address it to everyone , in particular the Commission .
We quite rightly saw fit to separate out safety from everything else by creating 25 European agencies .
That was a major decision taken some time ago .
I now wonder , given that these agencies are not yet operational , whether it might not be worth considering whether to have one single European Agency working through 25 offshoots in the different countries .
This is a fundamental issue and would help us find a positive solution to the allied problems of interoperability and safety at European level .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , as a result of globalisation , our economy , the progress of the Community and the welfare of our citizens depend more than ever on an effective , efficient , economic and , above all , sustainable system of transport .
All modes of transport are needed .
The railways enjoyed glory days in the beginning , but were then pushed aside by vehicles travelling on roads and motorways , due to their greater versatility , individuality and accessibility .
Now , with our roads at risk of collapse and our environment in a critical state due to pollution , we are once again looking at the railways as a hope for the future to meet our needs for domestic mobility .
Aware of this , the Commission has proposed a new legislative package to improve the technical part of the regulatory framework for rail transport .
This involves revising the directives on interoperability and safety and the Regulation on the European Railway Agency .
In general terms , it was years ago that the European institutions first considered the need to consolidate the railways at Community level .
Just on the issue of interoperability , everyone knows that , in July 1996 , in other words 11 years ago , we adopted Council Directive 96 / 48 / EC on the high-speed rail system followed , in March 2001 , by the Directive on the trans-European conventional rail system .
However , for more than a decade , the levels of interoperability of the European networks have not gone beyond 7 % and it is the requirement for national approval of locomotives and traction units in each of the Member States where these are to be used that is currently one of the main barriers to the creation of new railway companies dedicated to the transport of passengers and freight , and also a major obstacle to the interoperability of the European railway system .
As Member States cannot decide on their own that their authorisations for placing in service will be valid on the territory of other Member States , a Community initiative to simplify and harmonise national procedures and to encourage more systematic use of the principle of mutual recognition is necessary .
The current directives regulate only new rolling stock placed in service .
The new directive is intended to consolidate , recast and merge the current directives .
For our part , based on brief technical reports that we requested in accordance with Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , we have proposed transferring to our Interoperability Directive the contents of the former Article 14 of the Safety Directive .
This is specifically intended to give the rail sector greater legal certainty and enable the simplification of the authorisation for placing in service .
We agree with the condition of there being at least one authorisation issued by one Member State for each vehicle .
This authorisation will stem from compliance with the ' EC ' declaration and with the applicable technical specifications on interoperability .
Member States will consider as meeting the essential technical requirements those structural subsystems authorised to be placed into service in any other Member State and will not require any further authorisation , except where compatibility with infrastructure characteristics or limitations may be affected .
In our report , we wanted to structure the various aspects and sections of the directive in a way more easily understandable to those concerned , by devoting a specific chapter to the requirements for placing vehicles into service , depending on whether this involves first or second authorisations or vehicles meeting all the TSIs ( Technical Specifications of Interoperability ) or only some of these .
On all the aspects mentioned and throughout the whole procedure , we have remained in periodic contact with the shadow rapporteurs of the various political groups , the Commission and also the Council Presidency .
We have finally been able to reach agreement , having resolved an important issue which was the maximum time limits for deciding on an authorisation , thus eradicating the well-known and paralysing administrative silence due to a lack of decision .
Following a great deal of effort , we have agreed that authorisation will be automatic in the absence of a decision and we have also agreed on the rest of the articles .
On behalf of this Parliament , we have therefore tabled a joint amendment , signed by all the parliamentary groups , which contains the same text that will be presented to the Council of Transport Ministers .
I hope that the fact of having reached agreement at first reading will be beneficial to the whole sector .
I want to end by thanking all the shadow rapporteurs for their help and cooperation in achieving this objective .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my Group , I would like to thank both rapporteurs very warmly for their good and constructive cooperation .
I think we always succeeded in finding common ground on matters of substance , we were able to reach agreement very quickly and I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs for the way in which they managed to reach a deal so swiftly with the Council .
After all , what benefit would a protracted dispute with the Council have brought ?
We could have lost a whole year !
No , in my view , in spite of everything , we have managed to make progress on this matter at first reading and that is a great triumph for the House , the Commission and the Council .
I would just like to focus on two or three points , and I am sure , Commissioner , you will pass this on to the European Railway Agency .
We are giving the Agency greater responsibility for the setting of safety standards and interoperability criteria .
I hope that the Agency will utilise these opportunities in the interests of our industry , that it will set new standards quickly , and that it will operate in an efficient and practical manner .
As a passing comment , I also hope - and here I turn to Mr Costa if only he could hear me , he is on the phone , and phone calls are always more important - I hope that as more tasks are taken on by the European Railway Agency , the less the national agencies will have to get involved , and the less the national agencies have to do , the less bureaucracy there will be .
If the bureaucracy works properly at European level , we will not need 25 national authorities .
We want to save the European rail industry unnecessary overlap and duplication of work .
I have a final comment for the Commissioner and the two rapporteurs : it is very important that we have reached an agreement .
If the Member States miss their deadlines to decide on mutual recognition , then they are assumed to have given their authorisation .
It is only through this authorisation function that we can exert the kind of pressure on national authorities that is needed to prevent them from constantly dragging their feet .
Together , then , let us ensure that we save costs through cross-acceptance of locomotives and rolling stock , thereby increasing availability and giving further impetus to European rail freight in particular .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Vice-President Barrot , I must admit that I am torn today because my Prime Minister , Mr Zapatero , having appeared before this House , is now attending a reception at the Council .
However , I have decided to remain here to listen to you and hopefully therefore to reinforce to some degree the Europeanisation of rail transport .
I am delighted at the truth and the opportunity that have been presented to the European people by the Commission through an exercise which is really better law-making , involving the recasting of a series of old directives in order to produce a single text and make substantial progress in favour of the railways .
In this respect , I congratulate Mr Ortuondo once again on his dedication and his almost punctilious tenacity in developing such a good legislative text .
I must admit that I am also delighted at the excellent cooperation that there has been between all the groups in order to make progress on such an important issue as interoperability .
I must also say that the best possible balance between safety and the need to advance courageously towards interoperability has been achieved .
Safety is also absolutely guaranteed by the two reports produced by Mr Costa , also with great dedication .
The Agency is improved and strengthened and its tasks and needs are also better defined .
We also hope to be able to develop these more harmoniously in the future .
European citizens must not therefore be afraid as rail safety has been Europeanised and therefore strengthened .
The work on interoperability urgently needed to be completed as we must first Europeanise rail transport and then improve convenience and logistics , bearing in mind that we also now have a new text on dedicated routes that will make interoperability even more essential .
As Mr Costa has said , progress needed to be made in terms of realising the ambitions of the legislator , in other words Parliament and the Council , with regard to allowing trains to circulate freely .
I believe we have managed to create the conditions to minimise the ever-present legal uncertainty which was why all the issues of mutual recognition of authorisations for rolling stock and locomotives constantly kept running into barriers and obstacles .
I believe that we have even made clear who , how and when these must be recognised .
We have even given a bit of a push , through the progress made on administrative silence ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate may certainly seem quite technical to our fellow citizens .
It certainly is technical , although the harmonisation of rail safety and interoperability rules constitutes one of their major concerns as they go about their daily lives .
I recall , for instance , the terrible accident a few months ago in Zoufftgen , between Luxembourg and France , which shocked us all .
If we wish to find a solution to the challenges ahead , particularly climate change , if we wish to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and bring about the modal shift , in other words reduce road freight services in favour of other means of transport causing less pollution , we must remove some of the present technical barriers .
To create a genuine European rail space , we must either harmonise Technical Specifications of Interoperability or introduce mutual recognition of standards .
The current procedures for national approvals of rolling stock are too long and costly .
We must facilitate administrative procedures , reduce time-limits and do all we can to harmonise national safety regulations , which sometimes lead to major traffic restrictions for no good reason .
I wish , of course , to offer my warmest thanks to our rapporteurs , Paolo Costa and Josu Ortuondo Larrea , for their splendid work , especially since this seems to satisfy all our political groups and it would seem , I hope , that we are heading for an agreement with the Council at first reading .
I wish to make three quick observations .
First of all , as all my colleagues have said , I am pleased we have achieved greater readability .
The provisions in relation to authorisation will be grouped within a single legislative document , the Interoperability Directive , for both the trans-European high-speed rail system and the conventional system .
Second observation : I am also extremely glad that a number of principles , rather technical a priori but nevertheless very important in this case , have been adopted in relation to approval ; particularly cross-acceptance of rolling stock except in the event of specific characteristics of the local network , the obligation for the national authorities to demonstrate the actual safety risks , and the role of the Agency in the compilation and classification of national rules for clarification purposes .
Here I also feel it is important that the Agency avail itself of expert advice from network managers .
I am also pleased with the principle of implicit authorisation in the absence of a decision by national authorities within three months but , on the time-limits laid down for holding the keeper responsible , I wish to state a clear reservation because I fear this could remove responsibility from the rail company .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in amending the Directive on safety of the Community 's railways , it is important to support efforts aimed at creating a common market for rail transport services .
That is why a common framework for regulating railway safety must be established .
The Commission should be authorised to adjust and adopt common safety measures and common safety targets .
It should also be authorised to introduce a single certification system .
To that end , existing requirements should first be checked , together with current safety conditions in Member States so as to establish whether the current safety level of the railway system has not been eroded in any Member State .
Priority areas where safety needs to be improved further should be identified too .
A safety certificate should constitute an assurance that the railway undertaking has put in place a safety management system covering the provision of transport services on the European network .
Items of rolling stock authorised to be placed into service in a given Member State must be covered by this authorisation in other Member States , if indeed the latter require such authorisation .
The directive in question states that whenever rolling stock is authorised to enter into service a legal entity responsible for its maintenance must be appointed .
That is very important .
The entity in question could be a railway undertaking , a sub-contractor or the owner of the rolling stock .
This measure responds to the expectations of the market in services .
The initiative before us will ensure that rail transport becomes more competitive and will allow jobs in the sector to be saved .
Amendments to this directive have been eagerly awaited , especially in the new Member States .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , with these three reports , the convergence of the European rail network will take a massive step forward .
Safety standards will be harmonised and monitored in future by the European Railway Agency .
Mutual recognition of railway vehicles within the EU Member States , which is long overdue , will be ensured .
That being the case , I would like to express my warm thanks to the two rapporteurs and the shadow rapporteurs , for without this good cooperation , we would not have achieved this result .
The difficult times are finally over .
In order to be able to operate a locomotive which was licensed in another Member State , it often took three years and could cost up to EUR 10 million .
This was provocative and to the detriment of environmentally friendly rail transport long before the EU had 27 Members .
In future , the authorisation of a railway vehicle will apply in all 27 Member States of the EU unless , within three months , a Member State raises an objection and justifies why the operation of the vehicle is not possible on safety grounds .
Its operation cannot be prevented for trivial reasons such as the colour of a fire extinguisher or the size of the wing mirror .
The burden of proof will thus be reversed .
In the past , manufacturers had to carry out a great deal of painstaking work to demonstrate that there were no grounds for concern , but in future , a good case must be presented for any safety concerns , and it is the European Railway Agency - whose powers will be enlarged - which will decide whether these concerns are justified .
If the three-month deadline passes without any objections , the authorisation applies to the EU 's entire rail network .
This means that railway vehicles can be manufactured in greater numbers and at lower cost .
Germany 's Federal Railway Administration , in particular , resisted the curtailment of its powers to the very end .
It is thanks to the persistence of all the groups in this House that a viable compromise has been reached and that Josu Ortuondo Larrea 's report can now be adopted by consensus at first reading by the Commission , the Council and Parliament .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , following the rejoicing over the unanimous support for these three reports by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would like to wind up the discussion with two critical observations : the European Railway Agency can fulfil the useful task of further developing and applying the new European Rail Traffic Management System and reducing its dependence on manufacturers .
But the Agency is especially needed in other areas due to the increasingly large scale of operations , liberalisation and competition on the tracks .
These developments necessitate more and more bureaucracy to make it possible to coordinate everything properly .
Long before the creation of the European Union , that coordination happened differently .
There were good agreements between national railway companies , which organised train connections together over long distances , together with the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons Lits .
I doubt whether the new model is an improvement .
From now on , any railway vehicle which is approved in principle in one Member State will automatically be accepted in other Member States .
Such a situation does not even exist yet on a small scale between town tram companies ; this is because the sharpness of the bends , the location of stops and sometimes the distance between two tracks mean that some trams cannot travel every route .
I expect too that the railway companies will frequently appeal for possible exceptions on the basis of security .
In practice , therefore , very little will change .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the Commission 's Interoperability Directive admits that it is about enabling ' citizens of the Union ... to benefit to the full from the advantages deriving from the establishing of an area without ... frontiers . '
This vision is a burden to the UK because many of the EU population buy only one-way tickets .
I am pleased that isolated , narrow-gauged and preserved railways will be exempt .
But what about secondary rail routes ?
Presumably , all this extra paperwork allows Luxembourgers , Latvians and Lithuanians to line up and run services from Long Eaton to Letchworth .
I know it is mainly about freight trains , ' non-stop from Lisbon to Liverpool without changing locomotives or train crews ' , says the briefing .
Some hope !
What will the crew say about the Working Time Directive ?
Also , it will be stopped and checked for illegal immigrants west of Folkestone .
Current Portuguese locos would come off the track before the Channel Tunnel , as the rails in France are too narrow .
This train will stop .
The triumph of blind ideology over commonsense makes this place into the paper mill that the UK has come to despise .
Have a nice day , Mr President , but first cure the tunnel vision .
( IT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , with a view to achieving interoperable railway networks and ensuring a high level of sustainable mobility for our citizens , as well as efficient connections between EU regions , we should undoubtedly welcome the simplification of the current regulatory framework sought by the Costa and Ortuondo Larrea reports .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank both colleagues for their excellent work , especially given the strategic importance of interoperability , the indispensable need for safety and the need to establish the European Railway Agency with an extended mandate .
It is undoubtedly a good idea too , for the reasons given , to improve the technical part of the regulatory framework and promote the cross-acceptance of rolling stock .
The new procedure will thus be based on the principle of mutual cross-acceptance of authorisations already granted by a Member State , for which the necessary additional certification will be little more than a pro forma .
This is all very well , then , but all rolling stock absolutely has to be in decent condition : not only rolling stock which moves from one country to another , but also that which travels on local networks .
Railway users in Italy suffer obvious discrimination , since the most obsolete and often defective rolling stock is used on Italy 's local network , at least by comparison with standards in many other EU countries .
If the Commission could investigate further , it would ascertain huge differences in the service provided .
As I have pointed out on previous occasions , the Italian railways provide an altogether unsatisfactory service , especially as regards local transport .
For this reason among others , I believe that the responsibilities of railway companies and owners should be more clearly defined with respect to safety , and also as concerns compliance with social standards and standards of service to users .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , I firstly want to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work on the various reports which represent another step towards the integration of the European railways .
We are faced with the challenge of developing a competitive , profitable , sustainable and safe European railway system , in other words a true alternative to other modes of transport , thus enabling a modal shift .
However , the European railway system currently still suffers from many problems which have not yet been solved .
We can travel by train from Madrid to Berlin but , unfortunately , this journey , in a Europe in which we do have a single currency and an internal market , would be a real epic as we lack an integrated rail system .
The differences in track width between certain countries , the lack of standardisation and technological harmonisation of rolling stock and signalling systems , the disparities in training and certification of locomotive drivers and the insuperable difference in voltages supplying the tracks all make rail transport less competitive and work against the very reason why trans-European transport networks were planned , in other words to achieve a truly internal market in transport thus enabling more European construction .
Please allow me , ladies and gentlemen , to raise with you and the Commissioner , albeit briefly , the well-known and serious problem that is threatening the connection between the Iberian Peninsula and the European rail network , particularly in the Mediterranean area .
This is not just a Spanish or French issue , it is a European issue .
Commissioner , if the work on this line is not speeded up , we will not , in the medium term , be able to overcome the almost insuperable orographical obstacle of the Pyrenees .
In this respect , I want to call on the European Commission and the Commissioner to urge the Spanish and French Governments to solve this problem with a view to achieving a truly European rail system .
I know that things are difficult at the moment in Spain because a minister is being questioned and the government is a lame duck , but there will soon be another government and , with this , a new hope .
I truly hope that this problem , which is neither Spanish nor French but European , can be successfully overcome .
( PL ) Mr President , the conditions under which the economy operates are constantly changing .
As a result , ongoing changes in many sectors are required , and we are today concerned with changes in the operation of railways , and in particular with the safety of their operation .
Accordingly , the relevant provisions need to be systematically brought into line with the current situation .
Many changes have taken place recently . These include the enlargement of the Schengen Area to admit a number of countries whose railway systems vary considerably where technical conditions are concerned .
In addition , railway monopolies have been done away with in many countries and undertakings owning the network have arisen , along with regional and international transport undertakings .
This all calls for tightening up of the definitions and principles of procedure related to ensuring security on the territory of the Union .
The situation will largely be resolved by amending national provisions to take account of developments .
The proposals contained in the report by Mr Costa represent added value in this regard .
Mr Costa has proposed changes aimed at simplification , such as transferring Article 14 of Annex VII to the directive on interoperability .
This will significantly improve the readability of the directive .
Establishing clearer responsibility for safety is fundamental .
I should like to thank Mr Costa for all the work he has done preparing the report .
( FR ) Mr President , in relation to this apparently technical issue of interoperability of the European railway system and the role of the European Railway Agency in terms of safety , we find ourselves at the heart of a genuine choice between civilisations .
Either the EU implements a European railway market based on competition of ' everyone against everyone else ' and the dismembering of national railway companies in the vague hope of retaining the proper safety levels - this is what the Commission 's proposals mean - or we make arrangements for cooperation between all the Member State rail companies to implement a network throughout the EU to transport passengers and freight at high speed in all safety .
The latter could be achieved by developing the Railteam alliance , bringing together the main European high-speed operators .
We should note that European railway history has already made a decision between the two systems .
Great Britain implemented the choices that the Commission is now proposing on its own rail network ten years ago .
The result : a general deterioration in the service , and a deterioration in safety leading to fatal accidents .
On the other hand , ten years ago Thalys was set up on the basis of cooperation between the SNCF and the SNCB , despite opposition by the Commission .
The result : an efficient , safe , quality service in response to passengers ' needs .
On the strength of this historical experience , I wish to ask the Commission to abandon its choice of railway competition in favour of cooperation .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has much to offer to help all of us make our lives and our economies better .
Unfortunately , almost all these good intentions have names which are difficult to pronounce .
This applies especially to one of the priorities in today 's railway package .
Interoperability is the magic word which describes what we want and what we must achieve if we are genuinely to have a functioning railway system in Europe .
Locomotives and other rolling stock must be aligned with each other , but for that , we need authorisation procedures which are interlinked .
The Commission has presented a relevant proposal which we have developed further in Parliament in a consensus between all the political families .
We hope that , along with the Technical Specifications for Interoperability ( TSIs ) and other things , this will help us achieve a better-coordinated rail system for a single Europe .
Our system is based on the concept and principle of mutual recognition and technical harmonisation , sets clear deadlines and criteria for authorisations , and requires - and this is very important - that , in the event of an application for authorisation being rejected , the national safety authority must prove that there is a risk to safety , not the other way around .
What we want , and what we hope to achieve , is that many of the tasks which have been transferred to the European Railway Agency in this context will be carried out by that Agency as quickly and purposefully as possible .
My hope is that , as my colleague Georg Jarzembowski has said , during and at the end of the process , there will be less bureaucracy here in our single Europe than is currently the case .
We are confident that our proposals can secure broad consensus in the House at the vote , so that the tangible outcome will indeed be more interoperability .


Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Ortuondo Larrea and Mr Costa , for their splendid work within a very short space of time on a rather technical issue .
Concerning the proposal to recast the rail interoperability directives , I see that an agreement at first reading is within reach .
This has been achieved as a result of several working sessions and I wish to congratulate Mr Ortuondo Larrea in particular for his personal undertaking to see this proposal through .
It was important to establish a precise detailed procedure for certifying locomotives and other railway vehicles in relation to possible action by national safety authorities , and to simultaneously impose a ceiling on the maximum time-limit for the certification procedure , as Mr Jarzembowski said .
The result of the negotiations to which the Commission has made a technical contribution is an amendment which completely remodels the text of the directive , and with which the Commission agrees entirely .
Thus , Mr President , if this agreement is confirmed , we will be sending out a firm political signal to industry and the national safety authorities .
It is now up to the national safety authorities to make the approval procedures for railway vehicles less expensive and more rapid .
We will also be adopting this legislation in record time , showing that European laws can move at the same speed as the TGV .
I wish to reply to Chairman Costa in relation to the national safety authorities .
These were created in response to the 2004 Railway Safety Directive .
For most of the Member States , this meant creating a new authority from scratch , with all the budget and recruitment difficulties this entailed .
It would be a rather difficult task , Mr Chairman , to take away a function from these authorities which has only just been allocated to them , and this would also cast doubts on the credibility of our railway policy .
I agree with you , however .
In the long term , we can imagine that one day there will be more extensive Europeanisation of this device .
I wished to give you a reply on that point .
I now come to the issue of safety , where you acted as rapporteur .
As you wished , a portion of these directives has been transferred to the new interoperability directive .
With the exception of compliance with the new comitology decision through the introduction of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny , the only remaining major component of this proposal is the issue of railway vehicle maintenance and the role of vehicle keepers .
More than half the amendments tabled are acceptable to the Commission as they are in principle or in part .
However , I must mention the situation of Amendment 21 .
On this rather technical issue , any amendments envisaged must comply with the legislation already in force , particularly the Safety Directive , but also the Technical Specification of Interoperability for wagons that entered into force on 31 January 2007 and the decision on the national vehicle register that entered into force on 9 November 2007 .
These amendments must also be line , as far as possible , with the various situations that may be encountered in practice .
They must bear a close relationship to the practices in force in other modes of transport .
They must not enshrine in legislation a contractual commercial model that may evolve along with the reform of the railway system .
That is why Amendment 21 does not meet with the approval of the Commission .
The same is true , Mr President , with Amendments 3 to 7 , 10 , 14 , 17 and 22 , essentially for purely technical or judicial reasons .
I want to finish with some remarks on the proposed amendment to the Regulation establishing the European Railway Agency .
Since the new functions assigned to the European Railway Agency basically depend on the interoperability and safety directives and the driver certification directive , the text should not pose any major problems .
In relation to Amendment 4 , where you want the Agency to act as the national authorities ' certifier , I am pleased that a reasonable compromise has been found in relation to Mr Ortuondo Larrea 's report .
In the long term , the Agency could take on that responsibility , but at the present time experts agree that this kind of reorganisation would be premature .
The potential models for cooperation between the European Railway Agency and national safety authorities must be examined .
The Commission has undertaken to assess the impact of all these options to allow the best decision to be taken by 2015 .
The other amendments are acceptable as they are , either in part or in principle , with the exception of three .
Firstly , Amendment 5 grants the Agency a mediation role in problems with the issue of safety certificates .
We do not agree with this amendment for the reasons already stated .
Secondly , we do not accept Amendment 6 for reasons of coherence with the corresponding article in the Railway Safety Directive .
Finally , we do not accept Amendment 8 , since this would bring the Agency in as an adviser on commercial projects , whereas this task corresponds to a Community body .
I have listened carefully to all the speeches today .
I feel that in the main the European Parliament has properly gauged the value of these provisions which are set to truly Europeanise our railways .
I do not intend to answer all the questions posed .
I simply wish to state that we have allocated 85 % of funds for railway projects to the trans-European networks .
I wish to tell Mr de Grandes Pascual that we have not neglected mountain routes , particularly the Pyrenees .
I also wish to say that , whatever approach is taken to the railway system , we must nevertheless admit that , if we want trains to make a comeback in Europe , we must make a genuine effort to Europeanise the system through technical interoperability and harmonised safety regulations .
Mr President , the year 2007 will be a key year for rail transport .
As of 1 January national and international freight transport has been open to competition .
We are seeing that the revitalisation process in this sector is beginning to bear fruit .
The railways ' market share , following a decline since 1970 in most of the Member States , has now stabilised and is in fact growing .
The legislative proposals you are discussing here today will help railway companies compete with road traffic .
I am therefore extremely pleased with the agreement on the interoperability directive , and the Commission will do all it can to bring about a rapid agreement on the other two aspects of these measures .
Mr President , please allow me to express my most sincere gratitude to all the Members who made a sustained effort on such a technical item .
I feel this has helped us to make much more rapid progress since , had we been compelled to contemplate a second reading , we would have lost one precious year .
Thus I feel that 2007 will be a good year for rail transport , and this also makes it a good year for the fight against global warming , in which we know rail transport may be particularly useful .
The debate is closed .
Since two trains cannot pull onto the same station platform simultaneously , we shall vote on the Costa report tomorrow and the Ortuondo Larrea report on Tuesday 11 December in Strasbourg .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The Commission 's proposal to improve legislation in the field of interoperability is welcomed , taking into consideration the need to improve the rail transport system in the European Union .
National procedures for the certification of locomotives and rolling stock , as well as those for certification of locomotive engineers , are very different , actually preventing the free movement of trains on the Union 's territory .
It is extremely important for the regulations on interoperability to be extended to the entire Community railway network .
TENs are already designed on the principle of interoperability and , therefore , investments should focus on the normal railways and on all categories of rolling stock , in order to make them reach the European common standards in the future .
Interoperability is a requirement , but there are also regions of the European area where no railways compatible with high-speed trains can be built : mountain regions , isolated regions in general , railways going through tunnels and viaducts .
I believe the lawmaker should issue specific provisions because , on the one hand , we cannot deprive these regions of the benefits of rail transport and , on the other hand , we cannot ignore the conditions for the safety of passengers , trains and infrastructures themselves .
in writing . - ( RO ) The national railway safety rules imposed by the Member States are essential for the railway systems to meet safety requirements and for their interoperability .
Upon putting into operation any rolling stock , a legal entity in charge with its maintenance shall be appointed .
I believe technical specifications should indicate the basic parameters and the technical characteristics required for the maintenance of components , subassemblies or assemblies incorporated or designed to be incorporated in a railway subsystem .
Speed restrictions are imposed on 66 % of the Romanian railways due to the condition of the railway infrastructure , and 77 % of the rolling stock is worn out .
Romania has to invest in the development of railway transport .
I consider it extremely important for Romania and Bulgaria to be rapidly connected to the system of high-speed rail transport .
Rail transport safety is essential .
The first set of projects regarding the common safety objectives for railways , which aims at improving performances in the field of railway system safety in the Member States , will be adopted by the Commission by 30 April 2009 and the second set of projects , by 30 April 2011 .
I ask the European Commission to support the new Member States in accessing the available Community instruments to develop transport infrastructure .
Coordination of certain of the Member States ' provisions on television broadcasting ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities ( 10076 / 6 / 2007 - C6-0352 / 2007 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Hieronymi ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing a pre-negotiated common position of Parliament and the Council on the revision of the Directive concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities .
We can view this as a great success for Parliament , the Council and the Commission , so I would like to start by expressing my warmest thanks to my parliamentary colleagues from all political groups and from all the committees involved , especially the shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on Culture and Education , Henri Weber , Ignasi Guardans Cambó and Helga Trüpel .
They have done much to make it possible for us to present a success , a joint result , today .
My thanks also go to Commissioner Reding - Commissioner of the Year 2007 , congratulations ! - who tabled the proposal for the revision of the Directive with great resolution and willingness to cooperate , in equal measure , and worked on it with us .
I would also like to thank the Council , specifically the German Presidency , under whose leadership it proved possible to achieve the common position , and the current Portuguese Presidency , which stalwartly defended the common position achieved , thereby enabling us to debate it today and vote on it tomorrow .
' Television without frontiers ' is crucial for freedom of information and pluralism of the media in Europe .
We therefore greatly welcome the fact that we have been able to update this Directive just in time .
On the basis of the country of origin principle , we have achieved joint objectives for traditional and new forms of television , regardless of platform .
For traditional TV , this mainly encompasses the right to short-term reporting Europe-wide , safeguards on better access for the disabled , better controls on advertising aimed at children , and independent national media supervision .
However , we have also improved the financial bases for commercial broadcasting , not by increasing advertising - that still stands at a maximum of 12 minutes per hour - but by introducing more flexible rules .
We have taken the difficult step of allowing product placement so that private TV broadcasters , in competition with Google and other rivals , will be able to offer free-to-air TV services in future .
It was the European Parliament which worked to achieve adequate transparency directives here .
For modern TV on the Internet , the principle which will apply after tomorrow 's decision and its ensuing implementation at national level is that TV will remain an economic and cultural product regardless of the technology used .
That is the European model which we have safeguarded with this Directive for audiovisual media services , as it will be known in future .
TV on the internet and mobile TV should also have a future in Europe , not only as an economic product but also as a core guarantee of freedom of information and media pluralism .
That is why it is so important to have initiated this modernised Directive just in time .
' Just in time ' means that the forthcoming negotiations on the telecoms package , which have now begun , as well as the deliberations on online content can take place against the backdrop of this clarified legal framework for traditional and new audiovisual media services .
That is why I would ask you for your support in tomorrow 's vote so that we secure a broad majority in favour of progress in our European media policy .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is always a great satisfaction for a mother to see the child she brought into the world grow up into an intelligent lively teenager .
This is how I feel this evening about our audiovisual media services ' without frontiers ' directive , a feeling of satisfaction and pride I wish to share with the child 's godmother , our excellent rapporteur Ruth Hieronymi .
There are many ways of testing a child 's intelligence .
Mrs Hieronymi has listed them : a scope adapted to future audiovisual means , since it has been broadened to audiovisual media on demand such as VOD ( video on demand ) ; reaffirmation of the principle of the country of establishment , and thus consolidation of freedom of movement of programmes , adding in an intelligent cooperation and dialogue procedure to prevent or settle any potential conflict ; a balance between respect for consumers and additional freedom for our businesses ; enhancement of the right to information with the new rules on access to short extracts of key events .

All these new features , and more , I feel go to prove an intelligent balance between renewal and respect for values .
As testimony to the child 's vitality , I wish to point to promotion of cultural diversity in the digital field , acknowledgement of new advertising techniques , a legal framework finally provided for product placement , attention finally paid to access to audiovisual media for our fellow citizens with visual or hearing disabilities , and the trust placed in the industry by arrangements to apply the directive using self-regulation or co-regulation .
Parliament played a major role in bringing the child to adolescence , and I wish to express my gratitude .
This is another example of splendid cooperation between the three institutions which have successfully completed legislation that will form an essential basis for the industry and the culture of tomorrow .
It is now time for the child to leave the nest and spread its wings as an adult .
In the case of a Community directive , this means transposition by the Member States .
In keeping with EU policy , I do hope this stage does not make the child obese . It would be all the more paradoxical as , in the new directive , we call on industry to draw up codes of good conduct on advertising aimed at children that leads to obesity .
Therefore I hope that , as far as possible , the Member States will refrain from adding national obligations to the detriment of their audiovisual industry .
I am absolutely sure that the text to be submitted for your approval tomorrow will provide genuine legal security in the industry , and will also promote our values of society and culture .
With this legal framework , the EU is moving ahead of legislation on other continents .
I think we can be proud of it .
We are also helping our industries in terms of creation .
We are making a contribution to the best possible financing scheme for our films and to access for Europeans to premium content schedules on free television networks : so it is this evening that , with you and thanks to you , I have the feeling that our mission has been accomplished .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , first of all let me congratulate and thank our rapporteur for her work on this matter , as also the Commissioner .
This is a question on which there are many different and very strong views , yet we have produced a proposal which we are discussing here this evening and which points the way forward for European television .
There are a few things that I think are important to emphasise .
Among other things , we establish the principle of country of origin legislation , which means a better and stronger basis for diversity but also for common European television and - an important point - better conditions for a European film industry , since that is a closely related issue .
It also means better scope for free media to exist across Europe 's borders .
Of course certain things could have been even better .
I myself thought it would have been good if we had had greater openness on the matter of advertising time , but more flexibility is created here .
I think that the proposal which has now come back on the matter of product placement also amounts to an improvement .
We therefore have reason to be satisfied with the progress which has been made .
Let me just say one thing regarding the future , since this legislation is based extensively on the existence of a difference between what are called linear and non-linear media services .
I think that the difference will play less and less of a role in future .
It is already apparent now that this difference is not so great or so relevant .
I think that it will be important to follow developments in this field , so that we do not end up with a situation in which traditional TV media in Europe are in a less favourable position than those which broadcast in non-linear ways , via the Internet or by other means , because in the long term that can damage our chances in the global context .
Once again I would like to thank the rapporteur and to note that we have taken a step forward .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by quoting my colleague Henri Weber .
This text is an acceptable compromise for the Socialist Group and , during the negotiations , we succeeded in adding some valuable provisions to preserve the European audiovisual model .
I wish to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Hieronymi , for her determination , patience and also a particularly open and positive spirit of compromise .
Certain issues in relation to the digital revolution within the context of the knowledge economy made this review necessary .
The rules have been extended , in an appropriate manner , to the new audiovisual services .
Protection of minors is guaranteed , as is the protection of EU citizens from incitement to all discrimination .
These new services shall contribute to the financing of films and the European audiovisual component .
A percentage of their turnover will be paid into support accounts , and there will be guaranteed exposure of European productions in on-line catalogues .
Pluralism in the media has now become an official requirement .
The role of the regulatory authorities has been enhanced , and the adoption of provisions in relation to accessibility for all is recommended most strongly to the Member States .
In terms of advertising , the Socialist Group wanted to retain the rules of the current Directive .
With advertising limited to 20 % per hour , the duration between two advertising screens is now 30 minutes , whereas we wanted to retain 45 minutes for European screens .
We are nonetheless satisfied that product advertising is banned during documentaries , information broadcasts and children 's programmes .
The Member States may , however , choose to allow this kind of advertising for films , television fiction and sports broadcasts .
In this case there are strict regulations for product placement in order to prevent abuse and certain perverse effects .
A balance has therefore been found between freedom of expression , circulation of information , public access to new services such as VOD ( video on demand ) , and content with a cultural and economic value .
The emphasis on quality will allow European production to strengthen its position .
This is one of the major effects of the directive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I feel we have reached the end of a very long journey .
It has taken us a long time and has involved the efforts of many people , many Members and many experts , even people who followed this debate very closely outside the House because it was so important to them .
We should all feel very pleased with ourselves because tomorrow , barring any surprises , the text arising from all these negotiations and debates will be unanimously adopted , perhaps even without a vote , the real test that such a text may be adopted almost by acclaim .
The time has therefore come to congratulate Mrs Hieronymi and the other shadow rapporteurs , but especially Mrs Hieronymi and , I must say , the Commissioner as well .
She says she feels the mission has been accomplished . She is right .
She really can feel that way today .
This means we will be adopting a very clear legal framework with clear rules that will make investment in audiovisual means more secure and certain .
The rules will be extendable to new digital media and to new means linked to new media , with all the essential features required for consumer protection and protection of minors , without simultaneously overlapping or simply amplifying the existing provisions , for the means are new and the legal responses must also be new .
The new rules certainly make advertising more flexible . We are aware of this .
We debated them and we gave them our support .
By and large it was my Group that worked hardest to ensure this text finally came through , because we have not denaturalised the European audiovisual model .
We never actually went that far , but we know - and we ought to say this out loud because we also supported product placement , and we did it in all conscience - that if we want free television for viewers , although this is never free , but it is for the viewers , and if we do not want this kind of free television to be paid for only through taxation and public finance , there must be means of finance within a framework of competition .
This , then , is the context in which we have authorised product placement .
We have made it transparent and we have made it very clear how and when it ought to be implemented .
It is now time to make arrangements for implementation .
Here I would ask the Commission to assume its responsibilities again .
It is true that the child has flown the nest , but not completely .
Implementation must be monitored very closely , and in particular , Commissioner , something must be done in relation to one aspect where I have serious concerns .
I think there is a general feeling in certain Member States that there are now no regulations for European television between now and the time of implementation .
There are no laws any more , we might say .
This , however , is not true .
The Television Without Frontiers Directive , which is still valid , laid down advertising rules , and the rules set out what could be done and what could not be done .
There is a general feeling that , until the new regulation , until the new directive is applied in the Member States , the rules already in force are not applicable .
Here it is your responsibility and that of the Commission to make it clear that this perception is incorrect , and this is not the way in which the situation ought to be viewed .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the amendments to the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities aim to ensure that recipients of audiovisual media services in Member States can take full advantage of the benefits of the internal market by implementing the principles of regulation according to country of origin .
Amendment of the Directive will bring the European Union 's provisions into line with the most recent technological advances .
The European Commission 's proposal distinguishes between linear services , namely transmission through traditional television , internet or mobile television that delivers material to the viewer constantly pursuant to an ongoing programme , and non-linear services similar to television downloaded from the network on demand .
Retaining the so-called Television Without Frontiers Directive in its current form would aggravate the unjustified differences in the regulatory treatment of different methods of distributing similar or identical media content .
The current provisions regarding television should remain in force for linear services .
For non-linear services , however , minimal essential provisions should be established .
These could , for instance , concern the protection of minors , a ban on incitement to racial hatred , and a ban on surreptitious advertising .
This is all provided for in the proposed changes .
The Union of the Europe of the Nations Group will therefore vote in favour of the proposal .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , in our renewed deliberations on the new version of the Directive concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities , henceforth to be known as the ' Audiovisual Media Services Directive ' , we have constantly conducted a cultural policy debate as well , concerning cultural diversity and maintaining quality in TV broadcasting .
With Parliament 's final decision , the legislative process is really just starting , so we are already looking ahead .
I urge the Member States to make use of the subsidiarity principle enshrined in the Directive and fully exploit the scope for more cultural and media diversity .
This applies especially to more rights for independent producers , the contribution of non-linear services such as video-on-demand providers in support of European productions , and limiting the scope for product placement .
Public broadcasting in Europe , in particular , should do without product placement .
Throughout the work on the new version of the Directive , we had a dispute over matters of fundamental principle .
This focused on how much market liberalisation we want and where , precisely , we intend to regulate .
From the Greens ' perspective , this dispute has been resolved in favour of more market-oriented liberalisation , especially advertising .
Our Group will therefore not support the new version of the Directive in tomorrow 's vote .
The numerous new opportunities for even more advertising - whether in sports programmes , series or feature films - will result in a loss of quality in Europe 's media .
Public broadcasting will therefore play an even more important role in future , and national legislators must enable it to fulfil its mandate to inform and educate as comprehensively as possible , also via new media such as mobile or Internet TV .
That is why , also when dealing with the new version of the Telecommunications Directive , we need to establish an appropriate framework at European level , if broadcasting is in future to be received to a greater extent via mobile phones or the Internet .
( DE ) Mr President , the compromise which Ruth Hieronymi - of course with help from her colleagues - has devised here is one which I can wholeheartedly support .
I really would like to thank her very warmly ; this was a very difficult piece of work and she has done a marvellous job .
In my view , the compromise covers most of what we wanted to achieve at first reading .
As we know , the rapid pace of technological development had rendered the old Directive obsolete .
I myself worked on this first Directive .
We now have something new : new transmission opportunities , new services ' on demand ' alongside traditional TV , so we need this new directive .
For me , it was important in this context to uphold the country of origin principle and maintain short-term reporting .
More flexible regulations on advertising have been introduced , but I believe that maintaining a maximum of 12 minutes per hour is the right thing to do .
As before , cinematographic works and news programmes will not be interrupted .
One sticking point , as you know , Commissioner , was product placement .
Many of us voted for the present compromise with a heavy heart .
What is positive , however , is that the ban comes first , followed by the exemptions which have already been mentioned here .
I think that if these are correctly applied , we will not have any American-style conditions .
The restriction on advertising in children 's programmes is also something which I welcome .
This compromise enables the audiovisual sector to face up to the major changes taking place and adapt to technological and market conditions .
The compromise helps the audiovisual sector to become more competitive in future .
This compromise is , at the moment , the best balance between media pluralism and cultural diversity , and offers the opportunity to develop a more competitive European audiovisual industry .
Once again , may I express my warm thanks to the Commissioner but especially our colleague Ruth Hieronymi .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I can only agree with what has just been said : in fact , thanks to the assistance of the institutions and the commitment of our rapporteur and her colleagues , we have produced a directive which is set to take our audiovisual industry into the future with due respect for our values and our cultures .
It is a considerable step forward for the European audiovisual industry , and I can only rejoice in this along with all the speakers who have said so .
A question was asked : what will happen between now and actual implementation of the new directive ?
I am able to reassure the Member on this point . We will continue to apply the rules of the Television Without Frontiers Directive .
In fact , I have just initiated infringement proceedings against Spain for exceeding advertising time .
The same will apply to all Member States who do not play by the rules : until we have new rules , the old rules are still the rule .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) I wish to congratulate Mrs Hieronymi and Mr Guardans for their splendid dialogue with the Members and for the quality of the reports that they drew up with the Council which have led to the presentation of this extremely consensual report at second reading .
The Council has accepted a large number of Parliament 's requests and all the requests of my political group .
I am pleased that two items particularly dear to my heart were included in the text : the country of origin principle and the protection of children in relation to advertising messages .
Parliament has shown that it was able to conduct negotiations with the Council , with these having produced a much more elaborate text than before .
It was not an easy task , but we have achieved our aim .
I now hope that transposition into national law will be facilitated by goodwill among our governments .
in writing . - ( HU ) The new regulation for borderless television has had uneven success .
It is pleasing that we are creating legal bases for digital and non-linear television .
It is already the eleventh hour , due to the rapid development of technology .
I feel it is very important that the public service television stations that broadcast the values of the Community should make use of the opportunities provided by the new technologies .
If public service broadcasters cannot keep pace with commercial channels with regard to technological quality , then it is to be feared that they will lose the viewers they have had up to now , and their cultural , public-life and other quality programmes will not reach younger generations .
The final version thoroughly softens the rules on advertising .
It is particularly annoying that we have not managed to ban the crafty increase of volume in advertising either , even though our electorate throughout Europe deplores this practice .
It is also saddening that even children 's programmes can be interrupted by adverts .
The product placement regulation is a sober compromise .
The legislation does not bring about many of the objectives of the European Parliament , but if it were not created the lack of regulation would presumably be even more problematic .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the Council 's common position , which brings some significant changes regarding the protection of children and minors , the access of disabled persons to audiovisual services and the placing of advertising products .
Spot announcements for alcohol and tobacco are perceived by young people as a way of being socially accepted among adults and these vices are correlated with physical attraction , fun , adventure and recreation .
Moreover , intensive advertising , especially addressed to children , for food products and beverages with a content high in fats and sugar undermines the positive initiatives for public health protection , such as nutrition education and correct labeling of products .
The European Union is dealing with an obesity crisis and television aggravates this problem .
In Spain , 48 % of the advertising during children programmes is for sweets , fast-food products and crisps , and in Great Britain , food products high in fats and sugar represent 80 and 90 % of the TV advertising .
The Council 's text lays an emphasis on the development of codes of conduct related to " junk food ” advertising to children , as well as on introducing filter systems and PIN codes that will increase the protection of minors from the negative influence of audiovisual services and will play an important role in the fight against obesity .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , the European Parliament recently adopted a wise resolution on relations with one of its neighbouring states .
I would like to quote you some actual lines .
Please listen carefully and free from any fear : ' whereas the ' Russian ' public is not sufficiently informed about the extent of the crimes committed in the ' Second World War , ' most notably in ' Finland , the Baltic States , Katyń and the Königsberg region ; Parliament ' believes that the citizens of ' Russia ' are entitled to be told the truth about the ... policies of war and genocide committed in their name and to have knowledge of the perpetrators of war crimes ' ; Parliament ' believes that ' Russia ' must honestly confront its ' Soviet ' past in order to progress and that coming to terms with the past is an integral part of the road to reconciliation with ' Russia 's ' neighbours ' .
It was , indeed , addressed by our Parliament - to Serbia , which appreciated our suggestions , but , as this House does not exercise double standards , the same forms of encouragement are to be used in our documents regarding Russia .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I would like to say a few words about the situation of European Roma , in connection with our opinion , which was adopted at the last plenary session .
I feel it is essential that the European Commission and the Parliament should work side by side and take responsibility for this minority , assuming a much more emphatic role than they have done up to now , and preparing , implementing and monitoring programmes aimed at the inclusion of social groups that have been excluded and marginalised .
As part of this , it would be very important for the Members of the European Parliament work side by side with the Commissioners who are directly or indirectly responsible for minorities , their integration and their inclusion and , as a specialist group , jointly to prepare a comprehensive , cross-border Roma strategy with effective monitoring , which would provide an opportunity for those who live in the most deprived areas and for the groups in the most disadvantaged situations to have access to the Union 's development programmes .
In order to do this , a joint European crisis map must be drawn up , through which it would be easier to assess the areas afflicted by abject poverty .
Two years ago , the European People 's Party were the first in this Parliament to adopt a Roma strategy .
I would like the other parties to join this .
I feel it would be very important for us to appear together , side by side , at the Roma hearing on 14 February and to act for this minority .
It is very important that something should happen . Thank you .

( DE ) Mr President , eyewitnesses are reporting a speeding incident which almost defies belief , involving Harald Rømer , the Secretary-General of the European Parliament , at around 3 p.m. on 14 November this year , apparently in a Luxembourg-registered CD vehicle which was travelling from the European Parliament into the centre of Strasbourg .
Sparrows were crushed beneath his wheels as he roared along the Allée de la Robertsau , blasting past slow-moving vehicles in traffic queues at speeds of more than 100 km / hour and forcing startled pedestrians to leap to safety off the zebra crossing .
I therefore have a few questions to ask Mr Rømer : were you indeed travelling in this vehicle at the time ?
Who was at the wheel ?
What instructions had you - or had you not - given to the driver ?
Why was the vehicle in question being driven in such a reckless manner , and why was the speed limit exceeded so dramatically ?
Do you think that traffic regulations do not apply to you ?
Would you not say that as the European Parliament 's most senior official , you should be showing special consideration to others and keeping within the limits of traffic law ?
Is this how you intend to behave in future , and should all road-users run in fear from you ?
( RO ) Last Sunday , Romanians elected their representatives in the European Parliament for the first time .
Romania joins the European tradition of direct elections to the Parliament , which started in 1979 .
The election in Romania has showed us that we have a big responsibility to the Romanian citizens , to whom we have to speak more about the European Union and explain the benefits and rigors of the family we belong to .
Although Romania is the second country in favour of the European Union , the turn-out to this election was relatively low - 29.4 % .
Nevertheless , the election was a resounding success for the European people 's trend .
The representatives of the Democratic Party in Romania are now almost three times more numerous in this forum , and , following our victory , the PPE-DE weight in the European Parliament has increased by almost 4 % .
I thank Romanians for their trust and I thank you for the positive messages you sent to the Romanian voters .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sand in the Kosovo hourglass is trickling down relentlessly , and 10 December is almost upon us .
Unfortunately the dialogue of the deaf continues between an extremely autonomous Kosovo inside Serbia 's borders and supervised independence .
The legislative elections of 18 November only increased political aspirations , with the victory of the independence supporters in a ballot marked by a record abstention .
The EU must therefore come up with a strategy other than independence , thereby affirming a European foreign policy .
The very word independence is a trap , a synonym of chaos for our Europe .
By accepting this process we are opening up a Pandora 's box with all the nationalisms , regionalisms and localisms this implies on our own territory .
In a globalised world , independence is an illusion .
A call must be made to all parties to build a regional community with peaceful exchanges which duly respect democratic principles .
Supporting partition and independence will simply reinforce nationalisms .
Let us remember the words of President François Mitterrand to Parliament : nationalism is war , and war is not only the past , but can also be our future .
Mr President , it is highly likely that Ireland will be the only European country to hold a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
I myself am pro-EU and have voted ' yes ' in all Treaty referendums .
However , I have a problem , and I am asking the Council to solve it .
We need a consolidated version of the Treaty before we ask our citizens to make an informed choice .
To illustrate my point , just look at page 51 of the Treaty , a section entitled ' Non-discrimination and citizenship ' , one which any citizen might want to read and assess .
Point 32 states , ' Article 17 shall be replaced by the text of Article 12 . '
Point 33 states , ' An Article 17a shall be inserted , with the wording of Article 13 ; in paragraph 2 , the words " when the Council adopts ” shall be replaced by " the European Parliament and the Council , acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure , may adopt the basic principles ” and the words at the end of the paragraph " it shall act in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 251 ” shall be deleted . '
Mr President , I do not need to read any more : I think the point is well made .
( RO ) Mr. President , I am glad to see you today , three days after an extremely important moment for Romania .
In compliance with the Treaty of Accession to the European Union , this Sunday , six months after the initially established term , Romania organized elections to the European Parliament .
Thus , the citizens of Romania , European citizens , were able to directly elect those who represent them in the most democratic institution of the European Union .
Even if the turn-out to the election was within the European average , that is not very high , I have the conviction that , due to the involvement of our new colleagues in Romania , Romanian citizens will become ever more aware of the impact the European Parliament 's activity has on their day-to-day life .
The fact that extremist parties did not obtain the required number of votes to enter the European Parliament shows that Romanian citizens have already proved European maturity and responsibility .
On this occasion , I would like to congratulate all those who were appointed by the citizens of Romania to represent them in the European Parliament and I hope to cooperate for the well-being of Romanians , irrespective of their membership in different political families .
( PL ) Mr President , Polish fishermen demonstrated in front of the European Commission 's headquarters in Brussels yesterday .
They were protesting against the unfair and discriminatory action taken by the Commission against the Polish fishing industry .
The problem relates to the ban on fishing for cod in the Baltic Sea .
Cod is the main source of income for Polish fishermen .
The fishing ban was imposed by the Commission as a punishment for exceeding the annual quota for cod catches .
In addition , the Commission has threatened that Poland may not be allocated a fishing quota at all for 2008 , or that its quota will be reduced .
That would certainly bankrupt the Polish fishing industry .
The quotas allocated are very restrictive and are based on incomplete and distorted data concerning stocks of cod in the Baltic .
Against this background , the question arises as to why Poland was the only country subjected to control , when my country called for detailed control of fishing in all countries .
German , Swedish and Danish fishermen are also exceeding the quotas .
Are Polish fishermen to become Commissioner Borg 's sacrificial lamb ?
Alternatively , is this perhaps an effort to eliminate competition by recourse to the European Commission ?
The Union has evidently failed to take the notion of equality on board , and I therefore support the protest .
( PL ) Mr President , I call for us to take up the cause of an Egyptian woman , Shadia Nagui Ibrahim .
This woman was sentenced to three years ' imprisonment because , when she married , she allegedly stated untruthfully that she was a Christian .
In fact , she stated the truth , because she is a Christian .
She belongs to the Coptic Church and was unaware of the fact that her father , also a Coptic Christian , had converted to Islam for a time , and then returned to the Coptic faith .
Under Egyptian law , Shadia Nagui Ibrahim is a Muslim , because her father was once a Muslim .
A person 's faith cannot be determined by the position of national or legal authorities .
It is a matter of personal conviction .
If Egypt wishes to be deemed a civilised country , it must amend its intolerant anti-Christian legislation .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to address myself to the Commissioner regarding the misguided use of the Structural Funds , which regrettably is a growing phenomenon in the European Union .
What has happened in Hungary concerning the LEADER programme is quite shocking .
The LEADER Local Action Groups ( LAGs ) which are supposed to bring together local authorities and municipalities in order to use and develop the LEADER programme on Hungarian soil have been made up solely of authorities belonging to one political party , namely the national government party , to the exclusion of local authorities run by non-governmental parties .
This is an absolute scandal , and I think the European Commission must take action against the Hungarian Government , perhaps by opening infringement proceedings , because the Structural Funds are not being used properly .
Local people are losing out purely because their authority does not see eye to eye with the government .
( EL ) Mr President , the Annapolis Conference on the Middle East ended with mixed results for the European Union .
In recent months , both Commissioner Waldner and the High Representative Mr Solana have reassured us in plenary that the European Union is playing an active role in forging Middle East policy .
On reading President Bush 's speech today , however , I see no sign of this .
On the contrary , I read that the parties agree to create a mechanism to implement the roadmap plan , which is to be controlled by the USA .
The forthcoming peace treaty will also be implemented on the basis of the roadmap , with the USA as the final arbiter .
Where , then , is the European Union ?
What message of hope can we give for the future , when we are mere spectators of events ?

( LT ) Mr President , last Saturday in Russia - in Moscow and St Petersburg - peaceful and entirely lawful attempts by Russian citizens to demonstrate their disapproval of the policy pursued by today 's Russian Government were brutally suppressed .
The leader of the opposition group The Other Russia , Gary Kasparov , the leaders of the Union of Right Forces , Nikita Belych and Boris Nemtsov , and other followers have experienced violence and were detained by the Militsya .
Gary Kasparov was even sentenced to five days in prison .
This incident is further proof of the fact that in Russia people have no freedom of expression and are living in constant danger , with members of the opposition constantly fearing for their families ' safety .
Mr President , I am absolutely certain that we , the European Parliament , are in no position to remain silent in view of these events .
We cannot apply different standards of morality , democracy and human rights to Burma and Pakistan while applying other , lower standards , to Russia .
Mr President , I urge you to take action with a view to defending the rights of freedom of speech and assembly in Russia .
It does not matter in which country people are fighting for freedom - they are fighting for our freedom too .
Therefore , wherever a free person is being kept in chains ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you very much , Mrs Andrikienė .
Unfortunately , we cannot devote any more time to this item on the agenda .

Mr President , on a point of order , some of us have been waiting here since 7 p.m. - the time now is 9.40 p.m. - just to get a chance to speak in the one-minute speeches .
Now you cut it down to less than 15 minutes .
It is not fair for the MEPs who have been waiting here all evening .
We should , perhaps , have been warned earlier on so that we would not have had to wait so many hours .
I can understand your annoyance .
I only took the Chair two minutes ago .
I have been informed , however , that unfortunately we have very little time left .
We have to close our debates at midnight , and still have many items on our agenda to deal with .
I am very sorry about this .
Control of the acquisition and possession of weapons ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Kallenbach , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 477 / EEC on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons - C6-0081 / 2006 - .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a very protracted process is nearing what I hope will be a successful conclusion .

Let me start , then , by expressing my warm thanks to everyone who has made a valuable contribution to this process : the shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mr Podestà , Mr Lehtinen and Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , the Committee Chairman Arlene McCarthy , and the secretariat responsible , the staff of the rapporteurs for the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , Mr Alvaro , and others who supported the process , the Council Presidency , represented by António Delicado and his colleagues and last but not least , the Commission , represented by Mr Michel Ayral and his colleagues , who were motivated by their Commissioner , Mr Verheugen , to find a common solution .


I have learned a great deal throughout this process .
I have learned about the true role that lobbyists can play : some of them contributed constructively to achieving common solutions , whereas others deliberately set out to obstruct the process with half-truths and misinformation .
From the outset , it was obvious to me that it is no simple matter to strike the right balance between the requirements of a well-functioning internal market , the justified safety concerns of citizens about the illegal use of firearms and the understandable desire of hunters and sports marksmen to pursue their hobbies largely unhindered .
As Mr Verheugen has said , we wanted to utilise the experience gained with the application of Directive 91 / 477 / EEC , remove some of the shortcomings identified , and transpose the UN Firearms Protocol , which was signed by the Commission back in 2002 , into Community law .
We were therefore obliged to include specific articles to cover the illegal use , trade and acquisition of firearms .
This compromise takes account of these requirements .
I admit that I would have preferred even more clear-cut provisions here and there , for example in order to achieve better legislation or to simplify matters , and indeed to reduce the number of firearms categories to two on a Europe-wide basis , as is already the case in two-thirds of the Member States .
However , I was unable to secure majorities here .
Overall , however , I am very satisfied with the compromise achieved .
Let us consider for a moment : we will thus be implementing a partially harmonised firearms law in 27 Member States .
We still have very disparate firearms laws in place at national level , and this partial harmonisation will facilitate legal trade and make a contribution to greater safety .
A 100 % guarantee that there will be no abuse is impossible , but as we have already heard , we should recognise that we have an obligation to try , as far as possible , to prevent tragedies such as those which occurred in Germany , Finland or Belgium .
I do not intend to focus on the details of the new legislation now ; you are familiar with them already and Mr Verheugen has already mentioned a number of them .

I welcome the fact that , by 2014 , we will have a computer-based firearms register in the Member States ; this will improve information exchange and do much to facilitate traceability in the event of abuse , and may even make traceability possible in the first place .
We take the Internet age into account as well , as the provisions will apply to online purchases just as they do to face-to-face trade .
May I conclude by making a number of points which should make your decision easier and counter the arguments of those who oppose better European firearms legislation .
The directive will not apply to weapons and ammunition collectors , to public services or to cultural and historical institutions .
The provisions will not apply retroactively .
We are proposing national firearms registers , not a European register .
Although we do have a register of that kind for cows , it seems to be more difficult to achieve in relation to firearms .
Nor are we opposed on principle to manufacturers , dealers , sports marksmen or hunters who deal responsibly with firearms with full awareness of their special nature .
I have been told that , when the original Directive was debated in the 1990s , very serious concerns were expressed , and the discussions became very emotional .
Later , though , this Directive came to be regarded as very helpful , practical and effective .
In that sense , I am confident that the compromise before you will also be a success , and I count on your support .
Mr President , I do not think there is much to be added to what Mrs Kallenbach has just said , other than that it has been a pleasure for me to work alongside the Chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Arlene McCarthy , and my colleague on that Committee , Gisela Kallenbach , with whom I worked very closely with great confidence during this phase of the process .
Not least , I would also like to thank the Commission , represented in this case by Commissioner Verheugen .
Such close cooperation is a rare commodity .
What can you say in a minute when you have taken 30 seconds to thank people ?
In essence , what we have achieved is this : the European Union has sent out a clear message that , when it regulates the legal firearms trade , it is equally concerned about tackling the illegal transfer and abuse of firearms .
We have made it clear that the European Union will not tolerate any form of crime involving firearms on its territory , that we will not tolerate people using weapons which they have not acquired through a legal process , and we will not tolerate a situation in which people abuse the rights they have acquired through the EU .
I say this to everyone who has today received countless e-mails , as I have , from hunters and sports marksmen accusing us in the European Union of restricting their freedoms : read the directive , contact the Commission and you will see that the European Union has taken action to protect its citizens , not the reverse !
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Kallenbach , and to the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups for having made themselves constantly available for consultations , enabling us to achieve an innovative but , I must say , well-balanced compromise .
The purpose of the proposed amendment to the Directive is to adapt it to the UN Protocol on combating organised crime , as concerns the legal purchase and trade in firearms intended purely for civilian use .
The Directive covers issues to which everyone is sensitive , such as the safety of our citizens , but also sporting traditions and the customary lifestyles of millions of Europeans who go hunting .
Close consultations with the Council have enabled us to produce a text that strikes a fair balance between the desire to draw up harmonised rules and respect for individual countries ' specific cultural practices , in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity .
On the first point , I would emphasise the marking system for firearms and their essential parts , not least for purposes of ensuring their traceability , the obligation to retain data for no less than 20 years , more rigorous monitoring of online selling , given the risks this is known to entail , restrictions on the use of firearms by minors and by people thought likely to endanger public safety , and the introduction of general principles on the deactivation of firearms .
On the second point , I would recall that the present four-category classification has been preserved , out of respect for the already-mentioned cultural and traditional practices , with a reassessment of the advantages and drawbacks of perhaps cutting back to just two categories to be carried out by 2012 .
However , the Council 's lack of availability has meant that the European Firearms Pass will not be the only document required for the carriage of firearms , and in my opinion this is a missed opportunity .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , my sincere thanks go to the rapporteur Mrs Kallenbach , to the other shadow rapporteurs , and to Mrs McCarthy , Chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , for seeing through this complicated legal package .
When almost two years ago we started this work , we were assured that this would above all be a technical measure , the sole purpose of which was to use the UN Firearms Protocol to enable it to become EU legislation .
The process , however , was anything but a technical one .
Some wanted to ban weapons completely and restrict people 's legal enjoyment of them , whilst certain people did not want to see any kinds of controls on the purchase and use of weapons .
Under the leadership of our rapporteur , Mrs Kallenbach , however , we found a balanced compromise among the main groups , one which takes account of the safety of individuals and society as well as the needs of those who enjoy using weapons as a pastime and hunters too , for example .
It is a good thing that all weapons in the EU should be registered in order to make it easier to trace them and that Member States in future will have to keep the details of a weapon and its owner for a period of 20 years .
It is also important that imitation and converted weapons should be covered under the directive .
The lives of hunters and marksmen will be made a lot easier when the European Firearms Pass is the only document they need when travelling from one country to another , and there should be no fee charged for one .
The age limit of 18 years old which is stipulated in the directive and its exceptions is sensible , in my view .
It means , for example , that in my country , Finland , the thousands of registered underage hunters may continue to pursue their hobby with the permission of their parents , just as they have up until now .
It is directives such as these which prove their worth in the eyes of the public .
The EU 's Four Freedoms will likewise gain strength when the EU is developed as a safe area of internal rights .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I too first of all would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kallenbach , for a very well drafted report .
It is important for everyone 's future to prevent the illegal manufacture of , and the trade in , firearms .
The report will help achieve this objective .
We Finns have been concerned about whether or not young people should be allowed to continue to hunt for pleasure .
The sport is subject to licence in Finland and closely supervised , and there is guidance available from experienced hunters in the safe and responsible use of weapons .
I think it is important that this best practice and long tradition in Finland will also be able to continue after the new directive has been adopted .
It is important that tomorrow we agree a carefully prepared compromise , in which the different practices in the Member States are made compatible and the Member States can allow , subject to certain conditions , the purchase and possession of firearms for the purposes of hunting for under 18-year-olds too .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is very important to control possession of firearms if we wish to ensure the safety of people living in Europe .
Clearly , any relevant provisions must not unduly restrict the right of citizens to ensure their own security on their own property , nor must they restrict their right to ensure their personal safety when undertaking important public duties or after having done so .
In addition , citizens are entitled to possess weapons that are family heirlooms or are used in hunting or for sporting purposes .
This is all part of Europe 's tradition .
All restrictions should relate to the psychological state of the individual and should also apply to people suspected of offences classed as crimes .
Furthermore , I believe such restrictions should apply to people who publicly advocate Fascism and radical Communism and to extremist Islamic activists .
Technology is currently available in Europe allowing anyone good with their hands to create an amateur firearm relatively quickly .
The implementation of undue restrictions will not therefore prevent the criminal fraternity from possessing firearms and will unduly restrict the rights of citizens , including their right to self-defence .
Our border controls must be strengthened still further , because illegal immigrants are still managing to enter Europe and weapons can be smuggled in even more easily .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , the proposed changes to the EU 's weapons directive are aimed at improving the control of weapons .
There will be better labelling and more stringent requirements on trade in and the manufacture of weapons .
That is good , and it is especially good that the committee wants to tighten up these requirements even further .
This issue takes on particular importance , seen in the context of the tragic fatal shootings at Jokela School in Finland a few weeks ago .
The combination of drifting youngsters , the spread of a culture of violence on the Internet and access to weapons is unfortunately a lethal one .
That is why the tighter measures we now have to adopt are immensely important .
It is also good that this is a minimum requirements directive .
In other words Member States can go further and have more progressive legislation .
I would like all EU legislation to be on this basis .
That would solve many problems .
It looks as though we can reach agreement on first reading .
That is good because it enables us to save time and resources which can be devoted to something else , for example work to bring about a more peaceful and more child-friendly society .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , hunting is an old-established custom .
Every Member State has its unique hunting tradition to protect .
Today 's debate therefore represents the conclusion to a long process .
Strong wills have opposed one another , many discussions have taken place and the shadow rapporteur has been barred from taking part in the tripartite meetings .
Many of the original proposals could have threatened the hunting cultures of Member States .
Regrettably , the European Firearms Pass did not suffice as the only document needed for the occasional use of hunting and marksmen 's weapons in another Member State .
Freedom of movement is prevented by the fact that certain Member States are permitted to require additional documents .
Huntsmen and marksmen from the Community will be subject to greater bureaucracy than persons from third countries .
Fortunately fees for such permits have been prohibited .
In the course of the process , as shadow rapporteur , I tried to influence the final report on those occasions when I was permitted to participate in the meetings .
My work focused mainly on two questions .
I was concerned to prevent a ban on ordering weapons on the Internet and to forestall changes in the availability of exemptions for schools offering training in nature management and marksmanship .
In remote regions a ban on the purchase of weapons on the internet would prevent access to weapons for hunting purposes .
In Sweden today we have good regulations on internet purchases , which are accepted by both the hunting community and the authorities .
The second question was about the minimum age criteria , which would affect various types of upper secondary school programme .
In Sweden training in hunting performs an important function in teaching future generations about hunting and game conservation .
Now our hunting traditions can live on .
What had been an unwieldy bureaucratic proposal has now become an acceptable , though not ideal , compromise .
( DE ) Mr President , Schengen and ever more brutal criminal gangs undoubtedly make it essential to adopt a tougher approach to the illegal possession of firearms and to organised crime .
However , the whole thing becomes a farce when innocent citizens , hunters and sports marksmen are , in effect , treated the same as criminals .
Instead , the overriding priority must be to increase numbers in our police forces , which have been cut back in recent years .
In the United Kingdom , crime statistics have soared since the total ban on handguns was introduced , and in my view , this should make us pause for thought .
In our increasingly unruly times , when the state is making savings in the security sphere , it must be permissible for innocent citizens who have all their mental faculties to ward off a threatened attack on life and limb if necessary .
The fact is that most crimes are not committed using legally acquired weapons .
The EU should perhaps focus to a greater extent on better protection of its borders , for example by increasing the resources available to FRONTEX , and on improving cooperation in the security sphere .
The EU countries have perfectly serviceable firearms legislation and if more stringent provisions are required or necessary , the relevant decisions should be taken in the countries concerned .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we look at the starting point of this dossier and look at how far we have come , I think it is fair to say that we have managed to put this very controversial issue back on an objective footing .
In cooperation with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , we have found a solution which allows better controls on firearms throughout the European Union , without neglecting the justified interests of sports marksmen and hunters who are concerned about excessive bureaucracy and excessive registration requirements .
I am most grateful to Commissioner Verheugen but also to the Chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Arlene McCarthy , and of course our shadow rapporteur , who worked very hard on this dossier for many months with the rapporteur and the other colleagues concerned .
This was not a simple matter for the various groups involved , but I think we have achieved a compromise solution which - given the background in the Council - was the only possible route .
As far as the trade-related part is concerned , which is covered by the UN Protocol and which still lies ahead , the question is to what extent the Commission is capable of presenting a proposal which will meet with the general approval of Council and make Parliament 's work rather more straightforward .
I am not being ironical , Commissioner : in all seriousness , I wish you every success in skilfully convincing your colleagues in the Council that the obligations they have undertaken under the UN Protocol must naturally apply in the EU as well .
I would therefore like to thank everyone who played a part in keeping the ball in play on this very controversial issue .
I think that a sound solution has been reached for all concerned on the basis of a compromise , and I hope that tomorrow we will be able to endorse this compromise with a broad majority .
Mr President , I am speaking as a concerned MEP , and not as committee chairwoman .
I believe that , with this new law on weapons , we can demonstrate to our citizens that Europe can act to tackle the problem of illegal guns .
We have tough laws in Britain , but without this EU law guns will continue to find their way onto the streets of cities like Manchester and Liverpool .
Colleagues , this is a 9 mm Smith & Wesson copy - a convertible weapon designed to fire blanks or CS gas pellets - which , when converted , fires live ammunition .
Do not panic - it is not loaded , it is convertible , not converted .
A gun like this tragically killed a 12-year-old Manchester girl , Kamilah Peniston .
Mothers Against Violence , mothers who have lost children to gun crime , ask me where these guns are coming from and what we are doing here to stop the illegal smuggling of these deadly weapons .
Greater Manchester Police tell me that 46 % of all guns seized last year were converted weapons .
Converted weapons are now a cheap , popular choice for criminals , and they are a growing problem in Europe - not just in the UK .
Therefore , I thank Commissioner Verheugen , Ms Kallenbach our rapporteur , Mr Alvaro and 25 of the Member States for supporting my amendments to crack down and tighten controls on these convertible weapons .
Putting them under the same control system as real hand guns will make it much more difficult for criminal gangs to get their hands on them , and it will cut the smuggling of these weapons , which are banned in Britain .
The Association of Chief Police Officers in the UK fully supports this law and its requirements for convertible and deactivated weapons , for marking , for traceability and for controls on weapons ' sales by distance communication , including the internet .
Following the recent tragic shooting in Finland and the attempted shooting at a school in Germany , it is clear that we need stricter EU-wide standards of gun control .
This is Europe being pragmatic and taking practical action to protect our citizens .
The tragic and senseless gun deaths of young people in my region - 15-year-old Jessie James , 11-year-old Rhys Jones and 12-year-old Kamilah Peniston - are a deeply sensitive issue .
Their lives were taken from them .
We , here in Europe , owe it to them and their families to ensure that we take these guns off the streets .
( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
In today 's society with all its dangers , all attempts to increase people 's security are whole-heartedly welcomed .
Security is a prerequisite for all freedoms .
Security is a basic quality of a democratic society .
Fresh in all our minds is the Jokela School massacre , which was not the first example of such an occurrence .
We must , however , ensure that it is the last .
According to World Health Organisation data , interpersonal violence and suicide rank respectively third and fourth worldwide among people aged 15-44 years as the leading causes of ill-health and premature mortality .
A large proportion of these occur through the use of firearms .
The easy availability of firearms has been associated with higher firearm mortality rates .
It is most welcome that the European Union understands the need to shift the focus to the specific threat .
I would like to go into one more aspect .
Specifically , since the transposition of the Directive in 1993 , the internet has developed considerably and become an electronic market place .
The Directive 's aim of stopping trade in firearms can only be achieved , therefore , if internet trading is included in its scope .
I am therefore of the view that the Member States of the European Union must react in an appropriate and consistent manner to the situation regarding the firearms in question .
To do so we need harmonised preventive and punitive measures and we need to integrate them into a single policy .
Finally , my thanks to the rapporteur and the people who worked with her .
( DE ) Mr President , I would simply like to point out to Mrs McCarthy that firearms are banned from the House .
Mr President , with time to make only one point , I want to draw attention to the unequal way in which the European firearms pass operates in practice , particularly as it affects the hunting fraternity .
If the owner of a registered weapon wishes to go hunting in most other EU countries , he simply produces his Europass at his point of entry , but if he wants to enter the United Kingdom he must supply his original Europass in advance , and then wait six to eight weeks for it to be processed by the local police .
Thus he is without the pass for that time and cannot hunt in other third countries in the mean time .
There is no need for such bureaucracy , which is severely damaging the promotion of hunting holidays in the United Kingdom , including in my constituency of Northern Ireland .
Surely , even an advance photocopy of the Europass would serve the same purpose .
I trust , therefore , that , in due course , that anomaly will be addressed .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the basis for the amendment of this Directive was the UN Protocol and the question of how we can tackle terrorism effectively .
That was also the basis for the Commission 's proposal .
The rapporteur 's proposal adopted a fairly revolutionary approach to the existing Directive .
If we look at what we are discussing today and voting on tomorrow , we see that it is a compromise which , as so often , does not completely satisfy all sides .
The compromise is this : on the one hand , we are trying to tackle everything that is illegal - and here , we are never rigorous enough - and on the other hand , we do not wish to overly complicate the use of legal firearms .
There are certainly some aspects , such as categories or registration , where tougher rules on the basis of subsidiarity would have been appropriate , but this was not a 100 % success .
However , a start has been made and we will see how the exercise works out in practice , and how Member States tackle this issue .
I think that this is a viable compromise , and I know that everyone involved has worked very hard to achieve it , so I too would like to express my thanks .
In this context , however , I think we must constantly be mindful of the difference between legal and illegal firearms .
We have to tackle the issue of illegality in a rigorous and consistent manner , but we must apply a judicious approach and a lack of bureaucratic complexity as the appropriate benchmarks in the legal sphere .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the text we will be voting on tomorrow is a compromise which finally satisfies almost all legal gun users .
The Commission 's original text was perfectly acceptable to us , as were the positions of the Council .
The rapporteur , unfortunately , adopted rather weird positions , and we had to put up quite a fight against her initial ideas .
I also wish to thank Mr Podesta for his truly carthorse work , his patience and his diplomacy within the PPE Group and at many working meetings .
The compromises we have produced satisfy all legal gun users .
I should say that French hunters are quite satisfied that the four categories have been maintained : this is an important issue in France , and I am very pleased this evening that we managed to retain them .
I am also pleased to say that I am satisfied with the central registration system , for it is also logical that we should be able to trace guns .
I feel this is a most important point for the safety of citizens .
Arms dealers are also satisfied with the CIP marking .
We are also satisfied with remote sales .
We are relatively satisfied with the text as a whole .
Having said that , I feel that the past year 's work ought to make us reflect on the matter of the initial positions of the rapporteurs , and I must say we should be wary of adopting excessively inflexible positions on certain initial aspects .
In fact , if the Commission , the Council and the PPE Group had not firmly defended their positions , I believe we would have been steered towards a text that would have been impossible to apply , and towards green positions and an ideology to the great detriment of hunters and legal gun users .
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to ask Mrs McCarthy whether the weapon she has with her is marked and registered and whether she has permission to bring it into the House .

Mr President , I have to answer that question because it just shows that Mr Rübig does not understand the legislation in front of him .
Because it is not defined as a firearm , you do not need a permit : anybody off the street can buy it - a criminal can buy it .
So Mr Rübig should get his facts right before he intervenes .
I rise , though , on a point of order , concerning an accusation made by Ms Goudin and I wish to correct the record of the Minutes .
No shadow has been excluded from this trialogue .
The IND / DEM Group was invited , it appointed a rapporteur 18 months ago , it did not turn up to any meetings in committee or to any hearings , and it did not turn up to any trialogues .
Ms Goudin knows very well that she was only appointed two weeks ago to take over from the shadow rapporteur , who did not turn up .
I will defend the work of our rapporteur , shadows and the committee because we take our issues seriously , we do a serious job and the IND / DEM Group should take its work seriously as well .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
A renewed EU tourism policy : towards a stronger partnership for European tourism ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on a renewed EU tourism policy : towards a stronger partnership for European tourism .

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report I am presenting , and that I had the pleasure of putting together with the cooperation of a number of colleagues , in fact follows on from a report already adopted by this House - the one by Mr Queiró - through which Parliament sought to make a contribution to European tourism policy .
The inspiration behind this report is the need to devise a different , and I hope more practical , approach to European Union policy on tourism , which is currently restricted by the provisions of the Treaty .
The Member States have not conferred much responsibility for tourism on the European institutions under the existing Treaty , and I must say that not even the treaty we are about to approve - and which I hope the Union will adopt next month in Lisbon - will increase the EU 's formal powers over tourism to any great extent .
At the same time , however , the existing Treaties do enable the Union to implement a large number of policies which have a considerable impact on tourism and on the possibility of increasing it or maintaining Europe 's competitiveness as a world leader .
The purpose of this report , therefore , is to set out various possibilities .
The list drawn up by us in this House , with everyone 's assistance , is merely an indicative list , which I hope can be further expanded .
It is a list of opportunities for using the EU 's full range of existing powers to benefit tourism .

Let me give just two examples : the tourist is a traveller , so by definition many of our transport policies can be seen , or re-read , in terms of and in favour of tourism ; the tourist is a consumer , so many of the EU 's consumer protection measures can be re-read in terms of tourist requirements .
More broadly , however , tourists - especially those arriving in Europe from third countries - are people who cross borders , just as other people cross borders for various reasons .
The European Union 's visa policy , its immigration policy , should be carefully revised in order to be able to attract the maximum possible number of tourists .
Many of the contracts signed by tourists nowadays are concluded directly , using web-based technology , and do not afford them full protection .
The EU can thus do a lot for tourists by protecting such contracts or introducing types of contracts which do afford protection .
I will spare you the details .
In sum , we all acknowledge that tourism is one of Europe 's most promising industries , and I think we can say that - above all for reasons of cohesion - it is worth standing by our main aim of developing the tourist economy ; this means making the most of resources such as cultural and environmental resources , which can be done by utilising the Union 's formal powers to the full .
The intention behind this report is therefore to encourage the Commission and the Council to envisage a set of initiatives belonging formally to other fields of competence - I repeat , consumer protection , transport safety , guarantees for certain tourism-related contracts , immigration policy , coordinated promotion campaigns beyond Europe 's borders , and so on - to put together a set of initiatives , a package of tourism initiatives .
I firmly believe that these could constitute a real contribution by the European institutions to preserving and developing a sector that , as we all know , plays a major part and will play an ever greater part in the future of the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the Committee Chairman , Mr Costa , on his report .
The report makes clear the great extent to which tourism is influenced by different Community policies , but above all , it shows how important this sector is for Europe as a whole .
Tourism is an expression of Europe 's lifestyle and prosperity but it is also a key economic sector with substantial potential for growth and employment .
In fact , tourism already accounts directly and indirectly for more than 10 % of gross domestic product in the European Union and provides around 12 % of jobs .
However , it is not just Europe that is seeking to benefit from the extraordinary economic prospects afforded by the development of tourism .
We have to equip ourselves with the capacities that will enable us to flourish in competition with other traditional and new tourism markets .
Here , Europe can build on the competitive advantages which already make it a highly attractive destination .
We have an unparalleled heritage , a unique geographical concentration of attractive and culturally diverse sites , and we rightly have a reputation for a high level of service .
These are trump cards that we must play as we seek to develop Europe as a tourism product in future .
Quite simply , our destinations must be the best and the most attractive , forming an offer that makes Europeans and non-Europeans want to spend their holidays here , again and again .
This means that the criteria which have to be met in other sectors of our economy have to be met in tourism as well : we need European tourism to be a product that is innovative and provides an optimum choice for consumers , that meets the highest quality standards and that is as environmentally friendly as possible .
In short , it must be a product which is an expression of our European values and strengths .
Let me give you some examples of how we are promoting cooperation and keeping this competitive edge in the tourism sector .
Last month , we had the European Tourism Forum in Portugal , an annual event bringing together all actors in this sector , and it is an excellent opportunity for cooperation and for showcasing Europe .
On that occasion , I had the honour of presenting the ' European Destination of Excellence ' award to 10 European destinations nominated as the Best Emerging European Rural Destinations of Excellence .
This pilot project is helping to raise the profile of all Europe 's destinations outside Europe and draw attention to the diversity and quality of tourism in Europe .
I would like to remind everyone that this type of project was explicitly called for in Parliament 's previous report initiated by Mr Queiró .
I would like to thank the European Parliament and Mr Costa in particular for the generous support given to this successful initiative .
I am pleased to say that far more countries are now participating in the second round of the competition .
We can also tell you at this stage that the web portal for ' destination Europe ' has been a success and provides a sound basis with potential for expansion .
We are currently exploring other ways of improving Europe 's image as a tourist destination and are hoping for your support here .
In conclusion , let me emphasise that increasing sustainability in tourism is a key aspect of our policy .
I am convinced that if we integrate sustainability aspects into all areas of our tourism industry , this will enable us to protect those competitive advantages which already make Europe the world 's most attractive tourist destination .
The Commission unveiled its new ' Agenda for a sustainable and competitive European tourism ' last month .
The components of that ' Agenda ' constitute a response to the calls set out in this and the previous report from Parliament .
I think that here too , we can look forward to continued good cooperation in future .
It is my hope that the ' Agenda ' will be adopted by all tourism industry stakeholders and , indeed , by tourists themselves , and given that all of us in this Chamber are frequent travellers , that includes us as well .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of the tourism sector is particularly significant .
Directly and indirectly , it generates more than 10 % of the GDP of the European Union and employs roughly 12 % of the workforce .
Although this does not fall within the competence of the European Union , there are a number of measures and actions which may contribute to an upward trend in the sector and its sustainable development .
Many of these are already mentioned in the report , and at this point I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
The challenges facing tourism call for a coherent policy response at EU level : a comprehensive and competitive framework for action , with specific quantitative and qualitative targets .
In the new planning period , and given the targets which have been set under the revised Lisbon strategy , cooperation and synergy are necessary at all levels - European , national , regional and local - to enable the tourism sector to contribute to achieving these targets .
It is also necessary to coordinate the policies and actions which have direct or indirect impact on the tourism sector .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasise that on the question of what kind of tourism sector we want in the European Union , we have already given our answer .
We want a viable sector which will develop according to the principles of sustainability , will offer high-quality tourist products and services , and will not exclude anyone .
If we all act together , at all levels , we can now achieve this aim .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tourism is extremely important to the EU .
It certainly has major effects on economic growth and job creation in Europe .
Beyond these aspects , it also encourages integration , dialogue between different peoples and knowledge of each other 's cultures , and thus helps in the development of a sense of European citizenship .
Consequently , in the absence of a common tourism policy , issues in this industry , which covers several areas and involves a wide range of services and professions , must be taken into account at European level .
The report submitted to us today brings this need to light .
I must therefore congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work , and more specifically for supporting some of the priorities stated by the Committee on Culture and Education .
Europe 's diversity and richness mean that it is still the world 's most popular tourist destination .
We must rethink our policies and update them to take more account of culture in order to retain this position .
Likewise , we must highlight the need to preserve Europe 's natural and cultural heritage and promote traditional culture , in particular popular and artistic crafts , trades and skills which are in the process of disappearing , and encourage initiatives to enhance and promote this heritage .
In this context , among other measures we must support the creation of a European Cultural Heritage label , which I feel sure will increase our fellow citizens ' sense of belonging to a common cultural space and identity .
It is also essential to encourage development of new technology which plays such a major role in selling tourist products , promoting cultural commodities and events , and managing and conserving sites , and will continue to do so .
Finally , in association with all tourism players at all levels , we must promote sustainable and high-quality tourism which is competitive , environmentally-friendly , responsible , and above all accessible to everyone .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is rightly stated in the report under discussion - and I must here congratulate the rapporteur - that the tourism sector is at the crosswords of numerous European Union policies and has a substantial impact on growth and employment and also on social and territorial cohesion .
It is therefore essential to realise certain aspects of tourism policy , following the definition of the guiding principles in Parliament 's resolution of 8 September 2005 for which I was the rapporteur .
The first aspect concerns simplifying and harmonising the tourist visa application procedures for entry into the Member States , with a view to reducing their costs and facilitating access to the European Union for tourists from third countries .
However , we feel it is right , if not essential , to maintain the security rules required in order to combat terrorism , organised crime and illegal immigration .
We also see a need to modernise the system for collecting statistical information , including the Satellite Accounts , as it is only with up-to-date and trustworthy data that the public authorities and industry can take the key strategic decisions which will allow Europe to maintain its current leading position .
I also have a point to make on the rather more contentious issue of a possible harmonisation of quality standards for tourist accommodation in Europe .
The multiplicity of classification schemes for hotels must be combined with the issue of protecting the rights and expectations of tourists when making their choices .
Will it be possible to establish , in the European Union , minimum standards for safety and quality which guarantee the reliability and transparency of information provided to these consumers ?
This is certainly desirable but we feel that it will only be possible on a voluntary basis and by inviting all the stakeholders to take part in this work .
The Commission may , if it so wishes , assume a fundamental driving role in this .
There is not enough time to mention other equally important aspects of this report , including accessible tourism for tourists with reduced mobility , passenger rights or the external promotion of European destinations and the development of sustainable policies .
However , it has been adequately demonstrated , and I will end on this point , that the European Parliament has done its work and we hope that the other public bodies , in partnership with the private sector , will reinforce their spirit of cooperation and respond effectively to the challenges of developing a renewed and sustainable EU tourism policy .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the new EU tourism policy proposed by the European Commission and discussed in the Costa report deserves my full support .
This is due both to the main objectives set out following the relaunch of the Lisbon Strategy - improvement of competitiveness , creation of more and better jobs , sustainable development - and also due to the instruments through which the Commission proposes to achieve these objectives : coordination within the Commission and within national authorities , cooperation between the different stakeholders and establishment of specific supporting actions .
The rapporteur , Paolo Costa , who I congratulate on the quality of his report and also on his readiness to accept the proposed amendments , has drawn attention to certain aspects and concerns omitted from the Commission communication .
He has put forward possible opportunities and solutions for a future renewed EU tourism policy , particularly on the visa granting policy , harmonisation of quality standards , improvement of visibility and understanding of labels by tourists , consumer protection , accessibility of tourism for tourists with reduced mobility , guarantee of passenger rights , and promotion of destinations within the European Union .
We feel it is absolutely right that account should be taken of these aspects and the solutions proposed .
Mr Costa 's draft report has in turn been enriched and improved by a number of amendments , many tabled by colleagues from my Group .
I myself , in order to reinforce the terms of the Commission 's proposals and take account of the rapporteur 's proposals , tabled various amendments further to the positions that I defended in the Queiró report .
These included : the need to duly consider the accessibility handicap affecting regions with specific natural or geographical characteristics , such as the outermost regions ; the need for the renewed EU tourism policy to make European tourism sustainable in economic , social , territorial , environmental and cultural terms ; the promotion of Europe as a tourist destination or a collection of attractive tourist destinations ; the need to coordinate the policies with a direct or indirect impact on tourism ; closer cooperation among the stakeholders in the sector - the European Commission and the Member States , the regions , local authorities and tourism services - and better use of existing European financial instruments .
I therefore particularly call on my Group to support this report and I urge the Commission and the Council to take due account of the suggestions and recommendations of the European Parliament .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , tourism certainly accounts for a very large slice of our economies but , to a certain extent , it also represents the continued construction of the European identity and our cohesion policy .
It often contributes , of course , to maintaining activity in the most isolated areas , and is often the main resource in our outermost regions .
This comprehensive report sets out the main points on which the EU can now provide genuine added value in order to optimise this resource intelligently so that it is beneficial to all , to those working in the tourist industry , to the tourists themselves , and in short to Europeans , with long-term conservation of our landscapes and ecosystems .
Personally , since I come from a region lucky enough to have three European neighbours , I am particularly sensitive to border tourism and I hope that , through the partnerships , this type of tourism will help build a genuine living space both for European citizens and beyond the EU 's internal borders .
However , to open up to a larger extent to non-EU tourism , we must implement a coordinated policy to grant tourist visas .
I would also like the EU to adopt statistical tools and a cross-sector approach in terms of Community financing in order to bring about the well-known leverage effects on innovation , jobs , an improved offer and quality of service .
I hope we can create European quality labels in accordance with ecological and social criteria , and quite simply enhance information and protection for European consumers .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , when Thomas Cook opened his first travel agency in 1841 , I am sure he did not anticipate that 166 years later , tourism would account directly for approximately 5 % of the income of European countries .
I should add that , if the links with other sectors are taken into account , tourism currently generates over 11 % of GDP and approximately 25 million jobs .
I should therefore like to thank Mr Costa for his report on such a dynamic sector of the economy .
We are all aware that tourism is not directly covered by Union regulations .
Nonetheless , the Union 's role as a coordinator and promoter makes a significant contribution to presenting Europe as a very attractive and diverse tourist destination .
It has a bearing on tourism within the Union , on incoming tourism from countries outside the Union and on outward journeys to the latter .
These issues are of great importance to the new Member States , including Poland .
Only now are many people starting to discover how attractive places that were previously behind the Iron Curtain can be as tourist destinations .
In this context , national , regional and local authorities have an important role to play in encouraging tourism .
Tourism also encompasses so-called Green Tourism , tourism in search of Europe 's cultural heritage , health tourism , pilgrimages , and eco-tourism seeking natural beauty .
I am glad the problems for disabled and older tourists have been taken into account , though perhaps more attention could have been devoted to them .
The Cohesion Fund should be used wisely to support the development of infrastructure , in particular transport infrastructure .
The European Regional Development Fund may also be used to support the development of ICT , including the Internet , and to promote cross-border cooperation to benefit tourism in its broadest sense .
In addition , the European Social Fund should be used to finance training programmes in this sector .
In conclusion , I should like to say that standards are the key to success in this sector .
Nobody is satisfied with mediocre quality .
A tourist who is disappointed with the standard of transport or of a hotel or a tourist who has a poor experience in a restaurant will never return to the destination concerned again .
He or she will only be taken in once .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I would like to express my thanks to Paolo Costa .
I especially welcome those aspects of the report which underline the importance of social and ecological sustainability .
A carefully preserved natural and cultural landscape is the best magnet to attract tourists to a destination country .
The acceptance of tourism by the citizens of the host country - in other words , the people who live and work there - is a key prerequisite in ensuring that tourists feel that they are genuinely welcome guests .
A high level of training and overall satisfaction among employees in the tourism industry is what is needed to guarantee satisfied guests .
Mobility is a prerequisite for tourism , and ' soft ' forms - public transport , cycling or walking - will promote growth without destroying the essential bases of a healthy and , of course , sustainable tourism industry .
This comprehensive report contains a number of ideas which should be more than pious wishes .
I trust that these ecological and social principles will be embedded in the ' European Agenda 21 for Tourism ' that has been announced .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , the tourism industry , especially in countries such as Cyprus , Spain , Greece and others , is a sector of major economic importance , and yet the European Commission does not have a word to say about those who work in it .
This is an industry which is perhaps the first to apply flexible hours for employees , and where seasonal layoffs are the order of the day .
It is also a sector where the employment of foreign nationals raises two key issues : firstly , their exploitation , and secondly , their use as blackmail by large hotel chains to drive down the wages or benefits paid to local workers .
Apart from this , the European Commission simply confirms the fact , without making any substantial comment , that the cause of job creation in this sector is the high level of part-time employment and the flexible employment terms .
The concept of long-term employment seems , then , to be nothing but pie in the sky .
( HU ) Madam President , I would like to draw attention to the opportunities implied by healthcare tourism .
It is important that we make use of all the available programmes to support such healthcare tourism , including the second Community healthcare action programme .
I would like to stress that we must involve the insurance sector more in supporting healthcare tourism , and together we must find a way for cross-border cooperation with this funding .
The question is whether we will be able to make such services part of the common market .
We are talking about services that not only account for a proportion of economic growth but also help European citizens so that everyone can benefit from the opportunities offered by healthcare tourism and , within this , the opportunities offered by the common market .
Indeed , it is true that , to do this , we will need , or would need , a slightly better-defined quality system , so I very much support Mr Costa 's initiative , which has undeniably formulated a way to make progress in this direction .
It would be good for our European tourism if those arriving from outside , from third countries , knew what they were getting from the services and what they were paying for .
Briefly , in summary , I therefore think that when we talk about this sector , we need to look at tourism in a much more multi-faceted way , and we must also investigate what these services can bring us from the perspective of the common market .
Thank you very much .

Madam President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Costa , who is chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and who began by pointing out that the Treaties allow policies that impact on tourism .
It is therefore very appropriate that we are considering this issue .
Equally , as Mr Arnaoutakis reminded us a few moments ago , at least 12 % of jobs in the EU depend on tourism .
The EU is much more , nowadays , than just a common market for goods and capital .
It is a common market for people .
EU citizens , as we know , are travelling more than ever , not least as tourists .
Many , perhaps most , have very good experiences , but it is the minority - the few who have less happy experiences - that give some aspects of the tourism industry a poor name .
I draw colleagues ' attention in particular to paragraphs 24 and 25 , which call for a set of comprehensive guidelines for hotels that are sensitive to the needs of consumers .
Those guidelines should take into account the demands of families with children .
Not all hotels may be able to respond to these , but the industry really needs to make itself as family-friendly as possible .
Equally , a system of classification must take into account the needs of the elderly and the disabled .
The Transport Committee has argued for this in the case of airlines , and it is right to require that hotels , too , should not discriminate against this social group .
Nor should they be able to make moral judgments on who qualifies as a couple , and who does not .
The report is also right to point out , as it does in paragraph 48 , which suggests a charter of rights and obligations for tourists , that tourists should themselves behave properly and respect hotels and the tourism business .
This is a good report , it is a ' good news ' story and it sends a message that Parliament is acting sensibly in the interests of the consumers .
I hope that message reaches the people of Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , some extremely interesting ideas emerge from Paolo Costa 's truly excellent report .
I should just like to make a few brief remarks , based on the profound changes in demand caused mainly by globalisation , by the increasingly large presence of tourists from third countries on our soil and by increased life expectancy .
All of this means that we need to draw up a European Union tourism policy which is appropriate for this day and age ; we must also review its strategic objectives .
Mr Queiró highlighted the need for a classification of hotel facilities .
I fully agree with him , and I would add that European quality and safety standards should also be established for tourist products .
We must respond to our citizens ' new requirements as beneficiaries and consumers of tourism services .
From this point of view , I would just cite two examples from among the many novel ideas contained in the Costa report : an ' Access for all ' label that would guarantee accessible facilities for tourists with reduced mobility , and the European tourist programme for retired people .
Allow me to make one concluding remark about training : we should also think about specific individual qualifications for workers involved in tourism for retired people and for the disabled .
( PT ) While we accept and value many of the aspects covered by this report , we must intervene in this debate to stress , firstly , that tourist activity and high-quality tourism require the professions involved in this sector to be governed by legal regimes which protect labour rights and promote quality jobs and worker qualification .
In our opinion this implies , among other aspects , appropriate vocational training , improvement of working conditions , promotion of stable contractual arrangements and fair and dignified levels of pay .
Secondly , we would stress that tourism can contribute to territorial cohesion , economic development and regional employment which is why a cross-sector approach must be adopted in the Community policies and funds for this area , in particular by setting up a specific Community programme to complement the actions of the Member States .
These points form the content of some of the proposals that we have tabled and which we hope will be supported by this Parliament .
( PL ) Madam President , we do not often deal with tourism in this House and I am therefore particularly grateful to Mr Costa , the rapporteur .
I should like to congratulate him on a job well done .
In my view , the most positive features of this report are the sustainable approach to tourism along with the need to increase European cohesion and quality of life .
I also welcome the emphasis on the importance of access to tourist services .
Visa policy is mentioned in the report too .
I consider this to be a crucial matter , and we should pay great attention to monitoring the issue of visas and the operation of border crossings on the territory of the new Schengen countries .
Russia and Ukraine have expressed concerns regarding the issue of visas to drivers , including coach drivers , and to couriers .
Indeed , only yesterday Mr Barroso received the head of the Association of International Road Carriers of Ukraine , who voiced their concerns .
I am familiar with the situation and referred the matter to Mr Frattini a month ago .
So far no reply has been forthcoming .
I consider this to be an important matter .
It is essential for Parliament and the Commission to focus on monitoring implementation of visa policy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 29 November 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) The deadlock surrounding the Constitutional Treaty has had a knock-on effect in the tourism sector which , according to the approach under discussion , should become a Community policy .
The individual Member States have in recent years pursued tourism strategies that have , in general , led to overall growth in this sector within the 27 countries ' individual socio-economic settings .
The number of tourists has risen , investment has been injected and staffing requirements have grown , with manifestly positive effects on employment .
What has been lacking until now is a clear , comprehensive plan on the part of the Community institutions .
Competition between countries is increasing and substantial new offers are clearly becoming available in various parts of the world .
Under these circumstances Europe must show that it is up to scratch : in other words , it must rise to the serious challenges looming on the horizon and overcome them .
in writing . - ( HU ) Globalisation , demographic changes and increased transport are contributing significantly to the rapid growth in tourism , which has great potential for growth and employment .
Tourism currently contributes approximately 4 % to the EU 's GDP , and indirectly more than 10 % , and accounts for about 12 % of all jobs .
Tourism encourages people to understand each other better , it promotes the formation of European identity and , through relationships among social , economic and cultural groups , it encourages dialogue between cultures .
Establishing a model for European tourism is of primary importance for the Union , since it must be built on values linked to the quality and sustainability of tourism objectives and to equal access for all .
Simplification of the rules , harmonisation of policies that concern tourism , and extending the use of the European financial instruments available must be actively promoted .
The development of tourism must be sustainable ; in other words , it must respect local communities and environmental protection .
In order to do this , we need a support framework and an effective structure involving all the interested regional and local parties , within which partnership and effective leadership will become easier .
For the measures implemented in order to achieve the goals , we must bear in mind the fundamental principles of subsidiarity , which define the division of responsibility among the individual parties concerned .
in writing . - ( SK ) From the point of view of sustainable , integrated regional and local development , tourism has considerable impact on the economic , social and territorial cohesion of the EU-27 .
It also plays an important role in increasing employment in less-developed European regions , thus helping to iron out regional disparities .
Also , even though it has not yet been possible to develop a consistent cross-policy approach to tourism at EU level , we cannot allow Europe to lose its market share in this sector .
The Commission , together with the Member States and regional councils , should encourage and financially support new forms of tourism , such as eco-tourism , agricultural tourism , social and health tourism .
I view this as one of the tools for ensuring sustainable development of the regions , with emphasis on protection of natural and cultural heritage and its preservation for future generations .
Tourism must be better supported by information campaigns .
SMEs , primarily tourism business start-ups and those offering new tourism products or developing economic activity in new localities or tourist regions , must have better access to information and be able to make use of available European funding programmes through the Structural Funds .
I also want to emphasise the need to exchange experience gained through tourism projects already put into practice , which offer an opportunity to learn from incorrect approaches used in unsuccessful projects and to avoid similar errors in other European regions .
in writing . - ( DE ) Developments in recent years have shown that European tourism , like any other economic sector , is strongly influenced by wider global conditions .
In order to respond to these challenges successfully , more intensive coordination of national policies is essential .
Entirely in line with the subsidiarity principle , Member States must utilise the opportunities available at EU level in order to augment their existing national policies .
In this way , the EU can make an effective contribution to curbing burgeoning bureaucracy and dismantling obstacles within the tourism sector by means of harmonisation .
Our aim must be to make efficient use of available resources and utilise all the opportunities to create synergies in order to boost the EU 's global competitiveness and create more jobs .
An important step , in this context , would be to simplify visa procedures and reduce the costs for tourist visas in all the EU countries .
I also urge the EU to adopt uniform quality standards for hotel accommodation in Europe in order to enhance transparency and , at the same time , to strengthen the rights of consumers .
This must not lead to any lowering of national quality standards , however , but should send out an important signal to consumers .
The EU must utilise its existing opportunities to provide active support to Member States in this context without , however , calling existing national competences into question .
Macro-financial assistance for Lebanon ( debate )
The next item is the report by Kader Arif , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a Council decision providing Community macro-financial assistance to Lebanon - C6-0290 / 2007 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament for giving its support to the Commission proposal from last August .
As the rapporteur , Mr Arif , emphasises in his report , Lebanon is in a very difficult situation both politically and economically .
Its need for funding is acute .
With this macro-financial assistance , the European Union is acting on the pledge it made at the international donor conference last January in Paris , when we agreed to give financial support to Lebanon .
As you know , the operationalisation of the financial assistance is beset by considerable uncertainties due to the political and constitutional crisis which has not yet been overcome .
Nonetheless , the Commission is keeping to its pledge to complete all the necessary internal procedures so that the assistance can come on-stream as soon as circumstances permit .
Our talks with the Lebanese authorities on the political conditions to be linked with the programme are nearing a conclusion and I can assure you that these conditions will be in full conformity with the EU-Lebanon Action Plan established within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy and with the Lebanese authorities ' medium-term economic reform programme .
We will of course be utilising all available means in order to minimise , as far as possible , the risk of fraud , corruption and financial abuse , as called for in the draft report .
I note that the rapporteur is proposing various amendments to the Commission proposal .
We will look at these amendments very carefully and give our opinion to the Council .
However , I can already tell you that we will not be raising any objections to most of the amendments on the legal provisions themselves .
The Commission is aware that , at the hearings about new financial assistance , Parliament had to react to very short deadlines .
The timetable for all the institutions involved has been tight , due to the specific nature of this financial assistance as a crisis instrument .
However , in order to ease the situation and improve cooperation with the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) , the Commission pledges in future to inform the INTA Secretariat systematically , and in advance , of any new financial assistance transactions ; this will be done by means of an information memorandum as soon as new financial assistance is in prospect .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to present this report to you today on the allocation of macro-financial assistance ( MFA ) to Lebanon .
This is testimony to the EU pledge to help the country recover from successive crises .
Lebanon is currently one of the world 's most debt-ridden countries , with a debt-to-GDP ratio of 180 % .
The impact of the civil war between 1975 and 1990 , the 2006 summer crisis with Israel , chronic political instability and an economic policy set adrift have caused a serious economic , financial and social crisis .
The reality of this situation calls for urgent action to be taken .
It transpires that funds in connection with the adoption in January 2007 of the EU-Lebanon Action Plan as part of the European Neighbourhood Policy will not be available until 2009 .
The exceptional MFA we are set to adopt will bridge that gap and will have an immediate impact on public finances and the balance of payments in Lebanon , provided it is implemented immediately .
The MFA will consist of a donation of 30 million euros and a loan of 50 million euros to help the Lebanese Government take on post-war reconstruction and continue its economic revival .
My report fully approves the need to secure this financial assistance for Lebanon .
It does , however , introduce a number of amendments to the Council 's proposal for the sake of clarity and transparency .
First and foremost , we ought to bear in mind that the assistance must be strictly complementary to the finance agreed by the Bretton Woods institutions , the Paris Club , bilateral donors and the EU under other programmes .
It must be coherent with EU external action or policies and guarantee the added value of the Community undertaking .
The Council will also need to explicitly and publicly take up Parliament 's recommendations as to the conditions and criteria attached to the assistance , in other words improved transparency and increased sustainability of public finances , application of the budgetary and macro-economic priorities defined , implementation of specific measures to prevent any risk of fraud , corruption and misuse of funds , distribution of assistance with a fair balance among post-conflict expenditure , reconstruction , excessive debt and the social needs of the population , and full compliance with international democratic and human rights standards and the fundamental principles of the rule of law .
Provision of aid for Lebanon must be accompanied by real progress on the objectives mentioned , and this must be set out in a grant agreement drawn up jointly with the Lebanese authorities .
In addition to our basic work on this text , I also wish to mention some of the difficulties encountered while the report was being drawn up , given its urgent nature .
It is for this reason that , for any future decision relating to the granting of MFA , the Commission and the Council must provide us with much more notice .
For Parliament to carry out its work satisfactorily , it must have better-quality information in good time .
In this regard , implementation of an early warning system by the Commission would ensure faster handling of the dossier by the competent committee in Parliament and avoid unnecessary delays which might have a serious negative impact on the final beneficiary of the financial aid .
The quality and coherence of our work and the quality of our cooperation with the other institutions rely heavily on this factor .
In line with previous Parliament resolutions , I wish to stress that such a substantial instrument cannot be simply regarded as exceptional .
It must have a regular legal basis and cannot be based on ad hoc Council decisions for each operation .
A framework regulation on MFA , laid down under the codecision procedure , is necessary in order to enhance transparency , accountability , monitoring and reporting systems .
We must also make rapid arrangements for interinstitutional discussions as to the most suitable legal basis for this kind of instrument .
In the case of MFA for Lebanon , one of the countries covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy and also classified as a developing country , we feel that the legal basis for this action should have been Article 179 of the EC Treaty instead of Article 308 of the EC Treaty .
It is precisely because Lebanon is a developing country that Parliament insists on not neglecting the social aspect of the reforms that the Lebanese Government might undertake .
According to the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) , nearly 24 % of Lebanese live in complete destitution , and 52 % of Lebanese are considered underprivileged .
Moreover , nearly 9 % of the population are illiterate , less than one-third of the population reach primary school level , and only 13 % of Lebanese reach university .
Despite this reality , it must be said that the social question is not currently at the centre of Lebanese political debate , and the social content of envisaged reform is extremely limited with respect to economic and financial concerns .
It is , however , in the interests of Lebanon and its partners , as I have already said , to find a fair balance between the various items of expenditure , particularly funds for education and training .
It must be borne in mind that persistent social inequalities may have serious economic and political consequences which could prolong the country 's instability .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( ES ) Madam President , Lebanon is in an extremely serious and tense situation and it is clear that a way out from the institutional crisis in that country must be found .
With this in mind , a working group from the Committee on Foreign Affairs will next week visit the country to do what this Parliament has always done : bear witness to the solidarity of our institution with the cause of peace , understanding , harmony , reconciliation and democratic consolidation in that country .
It was precisely with this aim in mind that Mr Arif produced his report on macro-financial assistance for Lebanon .
I must say to him that , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we did not want to get too bogged down in technicalities given the extremely serious and tense situation in Lebanon , as I have said , following the succession of President Lahoud .
However , we obviously did want to ensure full respect for the competence of Parliament as an arm of the budgetary authority , maximum clarity and transparency as the rapporteur was proposing , and therefore correct and effective use of the funding , thus avoiding any kind of corruption , as indicated by Commissioner Verheugen in his speech .
In this context , we believe that this macro-financial assistance falls within the spirit of the association agreement , or the association between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries , within the future framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy and , of course , within the obligations made in the agreements of the Paris III Conference on the reconstruction and recovery of Lebanon .
It also falls within the spirit of the agreements made with the international institutions .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( FI ) Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , I note with satisfaction that the responsible committee has adopted the proposals we tabled .
It was very courageous of the Committee to propose the new concept of ' the availability period of financial assistance ' and interpret it in such a way that the validity of the legal act could be prolonged simply through comitology committee procedure .
The Commission is just an executive body and cannot have the role of legislator .
Such it would become if it should decide on how long financial assistance should last .
On the Committee on Budgets I note with satisfaction that the responsible committee has adopted a positive position regarding our proposal for an amendment to the legal basis , although that would only be done in respect of future proposals on macro-financial assistance .
A more proper legal basis we feel is Article 179 of the EC Treaty and not the general Article 308 which has now been used .
We hope that the Commission and the Council will in future take account of this message from Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , the current institutional vacuum in Lebanon constitutes a major threat to the country and the region in general .
With a non-functional parliament , its members in fear of their lives , a destabilised government and a paralysed economy , Lebanon must now find a way out of this crisis .
More than ever , the EU must also remain alert in support of its neighbour and ally .
The macro-financial assistance proposed today by the EU is more welcome than ever before .
This exceptional assistance with a time limitation , aiming to rectify the budgetary situation of a country where agreed efforts to reduce the burden of debt were destroyed by the murderous conflict of the summer of 2006 , falls fully within the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
It is not , therefore , a traditional form of assistance as this budgetary support will help enhance Lebanon 's political and economic sovereignty and independence .
Assistance must , of course , be subject to an anti-fraud mechanism for greater transparency in the administration and disbursement of funds .
We must also ensure better coordination of the financial institutions working to rebuild the country .
We must , in fact , implement the neighbourhood instrument , IMF measures and FEMIP actions in a coherent fashion to guarantee effective and sustainable assistance .
As the Annapolis Conference opens up a window of hope , Lebanon remains a key factor for peace and stability in the region .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I welcome Mr Arif 's report .

It is , as you would expect from Mr Arif , a well-argued and well-balanced report .
However , I regret that , once again , the EU has to pick up the bill for Israel 's propensity , in the Middle East , to drop bombs first and worry about the consequences later .
It is true that Lebanon had financial difficulties before the conflict with Israel in the summer of 2006 , but that war was , perhaps , the straw that broke the camel 's back .
Lebanon , as Mr Arif has said , is now one of the most indebted countries in the world and , according to the UNDP , almost one in four Lebanese lives in complete destitution .
We have in Lebanon , despite the problems that it faces , a government determined to bring about economic stability .
In such a situation , it is right that we should be prepared to provide macro-financial assistance to assist in that recovery .
Mr Arif is right to argue for safeguards to ensure that we have appropriate policies for tackling corruption and to make sure that funding is not abused .
The right mechanism for doing that is through absolute transparency in the granting and spending of the money , proper monitoring of expenditure and ex-post evaluation of the measures taken .
Lebanon , as the Commissioner has indicated , has become one of the EU 's partner countries in the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The money from that policy will not be available until 2009 or 2010 , but when that funding does become available I look forward to the EU assisting in the social and economic reforms in Lebanon .
In the interim , macro-financial assistance can make a big difference in helping Lebanon tackle its indebtedness and help bring stability to its government .
I therefore welcome it .
( PL ) Madam President , we are today debating macro-financial assistance for Lebanon .
The latter is in the midst of the most serious economic and political crisis to befall it since the end of the war in 1990 .
The House has heard , from many independent experts on the problems of the Middle East , that the European Union should actively support the democratic authorities in Lebanon .
Lebanon is now at a particularly important juncture .
It is at a stage when the last ghosts of war may finally be laid to rest .
There is also a danger , however , that all the old conflicts will break out again .
We should therefore use the instruments available to us and play an active mediating role helping to resolve Lebanon 's internal conflicts .
The conflict between Israel and Lebanon caused enormous damage in a country that had just managed , with great difficulty , to rebuild its infrastructure after 20 years of war .
The conflict also had a negative impact on social relations in Lebanon .
It led to a strengthening of radical forces , thus plunging Lebanon anew into internal cross-community conflict .
Lebanon needs time to stabilise again .
It needs mediation between all parties .
The financial assistance provided by the European Union and by other countries and institutions will provide an opportunity for the Lebanon to get back on course towards reform .
Reform is bound to take time , but will result in the emergence of a country that is politically , socially and economically stable .
I welcome the Commission 's initiative and the fact that Members of the House have taken the issue of macro-financial assistance on board .
This allows us to send out a signal to the people of Lebanon assuring them that the European Union considers itself to be their partner .
I should therefore also like to thank the rapporteur for so skilfully endeavouring to involve Parliament in the decision-making process regarding assistance to Lebanon .
Finally , we must remember that rebuilding Lebanon is just as much in our interest as Europeans as it is in the interests of the people of Lebanon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 29 November 2007 .
Trade and Climate Change ( debate )
The next item is the report by Alain Lipietz , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on trade and climate change .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is quite an important report just before the Bali Conference .
We are aware that international trade is developing at twice the speed of gross world product .
This means it is causing growth in the transport industry , one of the most prolific producers of greenhouse gases .
It is also enabling the relocation of production , which can be good in terms of using workforces and applying wage regulations , but , given that it takes no account whatsoever of the cost of greenhouse gases produced by this division of labour , it may accelerate the production of greenhouse gases and climate change .
To give you just one set of figures : ships , which carry 40 times more freight than planes , produce only twice as much greenhouse gas , but we still use planes to transport our goods to optimise the production cycle .
I therefore feel that , further to the Stern Report and the four reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , we should be aware that it is worth waiting half a day or even three more days for a product to arrive at its destination , rather than destroying our climate at a price the Stern Report estimates as 5 000 billion dollars .
Beyond this comment , the report makes an attempt to open up certain avenues .
Obviously there are certain avenues relating to transport .
We are pleased with the recent vote on the addition of the aviation industry to the European quota system .
The report encourages reflection on industrial organisation to reduce the geographic scale of production chains - producing in closer proximity to the end user - and makes a number of proposals in relation to trade in environmental commodities .
What we are proposing , within the context of the WTO and the bilateral or bi-regional agreements - in other words , all the agreements we are currently negotiating - is to prioritise the assessment of the effects on climate change within the assessment made by these agreements of the environmental effects .
We also suggest prioritising a considerable reduction in all tariff and non-tariff barriers - and here we are thinking about royalties in particular - that hinder trade in own goods and services which are the ones that can reduce the production of greenhouse gases .
All this must evidently be carried out within the most multilateral context , with the WTO if possible , in the absence of any bi-regional agreements currently being negotiated by Europe .
We cannot , however , rule out the possibility that , after 2012 , in the initial post-Kyoto phase , mankind will not have reached a unanimous agreement on the fight against climate change .
In this case , Europe 's decision to lead the fight against climate change will definitely hit some of its sectors .
It will not hit all of them .
In many cases , being the leader of the fight against climate change provides a competitive edge .
In some cases , and here I am thinking specifically of the cement industry , this could pose enormous problems and could even lead to cement tourism .
In that case , when all the possibilities of multilateral agreements have been exhausted , we suggest adopting the GATT 's Article 20 , in other words , border adjustment taxes to restore fair competition .
This , ladies and gentlemen , forms the basis of my proposals .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are grateful for the initiative of the Committee on International Trade in addressing issues relating to trade and climate change .
The report by Alain Lipietz is a useful source of policy ideas and proposals .
We are pleased with this report , because it recognises the interconnectedness of the various aspects of the negotiations .
Climate change is a very serious issue which , essentially , affects all sectors , including trade .
We must endeavour to define a mutually supportive and coherent policy .
The European Union aims to facilitate trade , ensuring that it is viable and also that it contributes to other policies , such as the policy on climate change .
We welcome the fact that the report recognises the prospects for negotiation on environmental goods and services .
We believe that this represents an important contribution by trade to the climate change targets .
We hope to see progress on this issue during the current round of multilateral trade negotiations for the Doha Development Agenda .
We are pleased about the recognition of the need for the environment agreement secretariats to acquire observer status at the World Trade Organisation , which is something we tried to achieve for the current round of trade negotiations .
We are also pleased about the recognition of the contribution that can be made by our new free trade agreements to questions of climate change , through special provisions .
The links between opportunities for access to new markets , i.e. for increased trade flows , and policies on climate change , are obvious .
Environmental policies provide a strong incentive for technological innovation and promote economic performance .
Scientific and economic data show very clearly that the benefits of containing climate change outweigh the cost of reduction policies .
The adoption of further measures to combat climate change may result in significant competitive advantages for producers in countries with restrictions on carbon emissions , because - in combination with other policies - it will lead to lower consumption of valuable resources , and to environmentally friendly technological innovation , for which the market access opportunities are increasing .
In this way we shall arrive at a situation which benefits everyone , in terms both of competition and of the environment .
We must continue to seek out further opportunities to strengthen the positive contribution made by trade policy towards combating climate change .
I note that the report includes in this context the issues of export credit , progressive elimination of trade subsidies with a negative impact on the climate , and the strengthening and broadening of market access for direct foreign investments .
All these are interesting issues which we can discuss in greater detail .
We must also continue our efforts on sustainability criteria in relation to forestry products , deforestation and illegal tree felling .
To conclude , let me thank you once again for this valuable contribution to the discussion on climate change at a very important time , when we are only days away from the start of the Bali Conference on climate change , which we hope will provide the motivation for negotiations on an international post-2012 agreement .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( SV ) Madam President , it is high time that world trade faced up to its climate responsibility .
Since 1990 , world trade has grown exponentially .
What is the result of this from a climate point of view ?
Obviously , increases in transport and emissions .
Is it reasonable , for example , that the EU 's livestock farmers should import millions of tonnes of soya from Brazil for the European meat industry , or that fish should be caught in Norway , shipped out to China for filleting and cleaning and then back to Europe for preservation ?
No , of course not !
Our excellent opinion gives us an opportunity to take concrete measures to deal with this .
We demand that transport should bear its environmental cost .
We want to disseminate green technology to the developing countries , for example , by making fundamental changes to patent and intellectual property rights .
We want to abolish subsidies to dirty energy production .
We want to have compulsory environmental certification of biofuels and we want all trade agreements to be assessed from a climate perspective .
These are just a few examples from this excellent report .
By achieving these things , we can ensure that world trade becomes part of the solution and not part of the problem .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Madam President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the connection between two of the themes discussed by the report before us are extremely topical .
The connection between certain forms of trade and climate change is ever more obvious .
It is indisputable that intensive international trade gives rise to numerous harmful consequences , including an increase in carbon dioxide emissions , while reducing plant habitats which absorb greenhouse gases .
Despite all this , I am convinced that free trade is not in itself identical to environmental damage .
The spread of trade and the international division of labour does increase production efficiency , over and above the negative effects .
This can result in us consuming fewer energy sources in total .
Allow me , as the rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , to highlight three thoughts in this vein from the opinion prepared by our Committee .
Firstly , it is essential that the commercial barriers to environmentally friendly technologies are removed as quickly as possible .
Such action will require the European Union to take an active role in the international climate change negotiations .
Secondly , we must strive for the price of products in future to reflect harmful consequences that are not immediately noticeable , including impact on climate change .
Thirdly and finally , we feel that discussions of suitable depth on the relationship between trade and climate change are of primary interest to the Community .
Rather more so since Europe can play a leading role in the export of green products and services to the world .
Ladies and gentlemen , as is also apparent from the above points , the members of the Committee on Industry are unanimous in their opinion that both removing barriers to trade and action against climate change can only be brought about with the broadest possible international collaboration .
The discussions within the Committee have confirmed for us that , with regard to climate change , trade is not only the problem but also part of the solution . Thank you very much , Madam President .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union must take a leading position - as to a large extent it has succeeded in doing - in the adoption of environmentally friendly policies .
In this respect , your own contribution , Mr Dimas , has been substantial .
The adaptation of all sectoral strategies to sustainable development models is , in any case , a primary regulatory target .
The strengthening of international trade is considered to contribute to world economic development and indeed to benefit not only the developed but also the developing countries .
The rapidly increasing volume of cross-border trade flows , however , is a challenge to climate policy .
The limits of the mutually supportive or antagonistic relationship between the world trading system and policies on climate change are the subject of the report we are discussing .
Unfortunately , an imbalance can be seen in the report between the commercial and the environmental component .
The rapid development of international trade ought to be treated exclusively as a factor causing environmental stress .
Furthermore , the adoption of climate policies is not , in itself , enough ; there is a need for a coherent overall plan reflecting environmentally friendly preferences in the policies on transport , trade , industry , energy and agriculture .
In any case , the Union 's effort alone is not enough to combat climate change .
The Union 's world lead in establishing models of environmental and social protection must be continued and promoted in its trade relations with countries outside the EU .
Ladies and gentlemen , the motion for a resolution contains some key points .
The Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats has decided that a final vote in favour of the motion should be dependent on the outcome of the votes on these points .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , when it comes to climate change , trade is often seen as part of the problem , and it is true that some trade simply cannot be justified .
Sending Scottish prawns to Thailand to be peeled and returned to Scotland is just nonsense , and a waste of energy .
However , as Mr Lipietz 's well-argued report demonstrates , trade can also be part of the solution .
I will take just three brief examples .
Firstly , the setting of high energy-efficiency standards in Europe for household goods such as fridges , dishwashers , microwave ovens and so on can not only lead to a reduction in CO2 emissions here , but also create the conditions for higher standards elsewhere .
For example , a single factory in China produces 80 % of the world 's microwave ovens .
It is unlikely to want to produce to one standard for Europe and another for elsewhere in the world , or even , for that matter , for its domestic market .
A second example mentioned by the Committee on Industry is green goods or , to use their proper name , environmental goods and services .
If we eliminate the tariffs on environmental goods and services , we can encourage trade in products that help third countries reduce their carbon footprint , such as the export of energy-efficient generators , wave technology and solar panels .
Let us again take the example of China .
China is currently increasing its electricity-generating capacity every year by the equivalent of the UK 's total capacity .
Clearly , encouraging China to use the latest and most efficient technology could play an important part in allowing it to continue its growth without experiencing a proportionate increase in its carbon footprint .
A third and final area would be to empower consumers to make informed choices on what products they buy , through the provision of clear information on the carbon footprint of each product .
However , we must be careful to ensure that the information is properly calculated and presented .
The ' food miles ' labels currently used by some UK supermarkets are unsatisfactory and can give misleading information .
Flowers from Kenya , for example , have a much smaller carbon footprint than flowers grown in hothouses in Holland , but a glance at the label would lead one to a different conclusion .
Madam President , as I take the floor on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in this debate on the impact of world trade on climate change , I should like to draw attention to the following matters .
Firstly , as a world leader in efforts to combat climate change , the European Union is calling for a reduction of between 25 % and 40 % in global greenhouse gas emissions by the year 2020 .
It should be borne in mind , however , that if the European Union achieves these emission reductions mainly as a result of its own action , with little contribution by other countries , the European Union 's economic development might be threatened .
Secondly , economic entities that are subject to various restrictions in Europe as part of the effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions can no longer compete with entities operating in countries where no such restrictions apply .
Many sectors and types of production have ceased to exist in Europe due to unfair competition from producers in South-West Asia and South America .
Thirdly , following the introduction of restrictions relating to excessive greenhouse gas emissions on the territory of the European Union , we have witnessed the relocation of manufacturing outside Europe , where no such restrictions exist .
As a result , many jobs in Europe will be lost forever .
Fourthly , if no agreement on limiting greenhouse gas emissions is reached at global level , and the European Union is determined to move forward on its own , compensatory taxes should be imposed at the Union 's border .
This should apply in particular in those sectors in which competition is already seriously affected as manufacturing costs have not taken account of environmental costs .
Whenever possible , the so-called climatic dimension of trade exchange must also be taken into account in bilateral trade exchange agreements between the European Union and third countries .
The same arrangements should apply to ventures supported by the European Investment Bank .
In the case of support by different types of undertakings , these arrangements should also be implemented by national agencies charged with guaranteeing export credits and direct investment .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , Al Gore claims that the debate on global warming is over and that it has been proved beyond doubt that human activity is responsible for this .
I suggested recently in committee that the sun 's enormous influence on the earth 's climate over millions of years could not be ignored in this debate , and that the sequence of long ice ages , interspersed with short interglacial periods , was the most likely explanation .
I received a very hostile reception .
However , the chairman , Mr Markov , insisted that it was not appropriate to urge excision of a view that happened to conflict with current orthodoxy .
Let us remember that , when Galileo declared in the 17th century that the earth revolved around the sun , he was threatened with torture by the Catholic Church for daring to contradict the accepted fact that the earth was at the centre of the universe .
It took the church until 1992 to agree that Galileo had been right .
The only CO2 at issue in the global warming debate is the trivial amount produced by burning fossil fuels .
That comparatively small amount is the only modern and unusual addition to the vast quantities constantly being produced by all living things and all decaying organic matter , and through volcanic activity .
Before we risk ruining the world 's economies with carbon emission taxes and the like , please let us reopen the debate and make absolutely sure who is right .
( DE ) Madam President , honourable colleagues , as we deal with this draft report , we should concentrate on the real issue , namely trade and climate change .
Unfortunately , in his first draft , the rapporteur did not manage to produce positive economic and socially compatible proposals as to how we can tackle this problem .
In my view , there is far too much confusion , both by the rapporteur and in the report itself , between the issue of trade and the issue of transport .
It is not world trade that is the problem , nor the worldwide division of labour ; and nor is the problem the fact that thanks to trade , regions that have been or are still poor are now experiencing economic growth .
No , our problem , surely , is that transport is not efficient and ecologically friendly enough .
Our problem , surely , is that due to poverty or low levels of prosperity in some regions of the world , many people and countries cannot afford the climate protection that is necessary and makes ecological and economic sense .
It is only by integrating these regions into world trade that we will achieve a situation in which these people can afford environmental and climate protection .
If you face a daily struggle for survival , you are not going to be thinking about environmental or climate protection .
It is only through well-functioning world trade that we will be able to sell our modern technologies around the world and thus make a contribution to protecting the climate .
That is why , in my view , it is more trade , not less trade , that is the proper response to the problems of trade and climate change .
I am therefore most grateful to my colleague Georgios Papastamkos for being able to introduce numerous important themes into the committee debate , and I am most grateful that the ALDE Group has tabled various amendments for tomorrow 's plenary that move in this direction .
I would like to conclude with a request .
In this report , we unfortunately have several points where we have discredited our social market economy .
We should find a way to remove these outbursts against our economic system , which has brought prosperity and social security to so many people .
I would be grateful if the groups could show some creativity here so that our Group can also vote for this report .
( PT ) I must start by congratulating the rapporteur on his detailed work on such a complex issue as the relationship between trade and climate change .
Europe has been a global leader in the fight against the worsening of climate change .
However , in order to be credible and achieve the proposed objectives , it must reinforce the coherence of its various policies on this issue .
In particular , a European trade policy , one of the oldest common policies of the Union , must not and cannot be forgotten .
This balance between environment and trade is not easy to achieve and is not being sufficiently achieved , particularly within the World Trade Organization .
In the European Union , meeting the climate change objectives requires an effective effort to reduce carbon emissions which will in turn impact on the conditions of production and the respective costs of an increasing number of productive sectors .
It is time to ask ourselves whether , in a world of global competition and faced with the problem of the planet 's survival , it makes sense for this effort to combat climate change to be , more than anything , a European effort ?
Is it acceptable for the emissions of so many sectors to be moved away from European soil to areas of the globe which are environmentally less protected ?
Can environmental violation be a legitimate source of competitiveness ?
Is it acceptable for different environmental compliance rules to exist for the main tradable goods at world level depending on the area of the globe where they are produced ?
I think not with regard to all these questions .
We need to find a balance between the environment , including climate change , and trade which will guarantee a collective , proportional and equitable effort , without excluding anyone , particularly not the main global trade partners .
A new balance between the development of the vast impoverished areas of the globe and the planet 's survival must be quickly found through dialogue , mutual respect and determination faced with converging objectives .
The effort must be global and we can only hope that , in December in Bali , this process will begin in a serious and committed manner .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that commercial transactions at European and global level have increased significantly in recent years .
While this development encourages the economic development of nations , it has a significant impact on climate change .
I am therefore expressing , on my own account , my concern about this particular problem .
We need to decide how trade policy can contribute positively towards solving the problem of climate change .
The target we have set for a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 is quite ambitious .
I hope we will win this bet , because the cost of losing will be enormous .
Here I would like to underline the Commissioner 's contribution and congratulate him on all his initiatives and efforts in this direction .
Greater support and a greater effort are needed in the transition to means of transport which are more environmentally-friendly ; the promotion of industry which is more climate-friendly ; the development of new technologies and the creation of financial disincentives for activities with a negative impact on the climate ; effective cooperation between the United Nations , the World Trade Organisation and the European Union ; and ongoing consultation and the participation of civil society and non-governmental organisations operating in the environmental sector .
The European Parliament has an important role to play .
I hope the results of the Bali Conference , in December , will send the optimistic messages which we are all hoping for .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 29 November 2007 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) It is vital to mainstream climate policy for the fight against climate change to be productive .
The report being considered is a valuable one indeed and inspires a very necessary discussion : trade policy must form a part of climate policy because growing trade is resulting in more greenhouse gases .
On the other hand , trade policy is very specifically effective as a form of climate policy and may , therefore , be part of the solution .
First of all , trade policy has great value in the promotion of environmental technologies .
International trade is one of the most effective tools for the transfer of technology transfer .
The role of the World Trade Organization is an important one , because it is essential to remove tariffs on green goods and improve the rules on intellectual property .
On the other hand , it is intolerable that the WTO still endorses distorting subsidies on fossil fuels , for example , thus obstructing the path to green technology .
For no very good reason the report makes much of the success of Kyoto .
Kyoto is full of loopholes , which are in fact aggravating the situation .
Unilateral actions distort competition and lead to carbon leakage .
Moving emissions from one place to another is not cutting them .
Besides , solidarity towards people in developing countries is not to cause their environment to be contaminated .
Kyoto leads to environmental exploitation .
Climate change is a global phenomenon through and through and calls for global solutions .
A global emissions trading scheme with the compulsory commitment of all the industrialised countries and rising economies is therefore absolutely essential .
I completely sympathise with the concern expressed in the report about the fate of forests with the increase in trade .
The EU needs to pay special attention to the risk posed by biofuels to forest sinks .
The targets for renewable energy sources set by the Commission must not be allowed to accelerate climate change either .
Referendum in Venezuela ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the referendum in Venezuela .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the National Electoral Council has announced that a popular referendum on the proposal for constitutional reform made by the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the National Assembly will be held on 2 December 2007 .
On that day , the people of Venezuela will have the opportunity to exercise their democratic right of decision on the proposed changes that would shape important aspects of the political , institutional , economic and social life of that country .
The Commission is closely following the ongoing constitutional reform process in Venezuela , as well as in other countries in the region .
It stresses the importance it attaches to the fact that each new constitution or constitutional reform should reinforce democracy and the rule of law .
It also believes that each constitution should be based on a broad popular consensus and adequately reflect the plurality and diversity of each nation .
Constitutions should unite people and not divide them .
The Commission is following with interest the intensive debate on constitutional reform in Venezuela .
It has observed that some sectors of Venezuelan society are in favour of the proposed changes , but also takes note of the strong opposition to the reform expressed by other sectors .
Those sectors are voicing concerns , notably on aspects of the reform which they consider would - if the reform were approved - entail an increased concentration of powers in the hands of the President , a weakening of democratic control mechanisms and of the existing institutions and a threat to democratic pluralism .
Others consider that what is proposed goes beyond a mere reform and implies modification of the fundamental structure of the state .
The Commission is aware of the situation and is paying due attention to it .
While it considers that it is the people of Venezuela who should themselves pronounce on the reform proposal , it also stresses the importance it attaches to the campaign on the reform being conducted in an open manner and in a spirit of mutual respect .
It also expresses the hope that the referendum will take place in a peaceful atmosphere and in a transparent manner .
In that context , it is worth noting that the recent electoral observation mission sent by the European Union to the last presidential election in Venezuela considered that the electoral process in general complied with international standards and national legislation and underlined the peaceful environment in which the elections were held .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , the American continent as a whole is the closest to Europe in terms of values , ideals , vision of the world and individuals , their dignity and their rights .
What we call the West to my mind clearly includes Latin America .
In recent years there have been some positive trends in Latin America as a whole , bringing it ever closer to Europe : pluralist elections and democratic consolidation , growth with more balanced and open economic policies , regional integration processes and very important agreements with the European Union .
However , there are exceptions in this positive panorama : in addition to the traditional one of Cuba , that of Venezuela is now emerging .
This country is going through a process of increasing authoritarianism in which freedoms are being restricted , the opposition is being harassed and fear is being created among the people who even suspect that their vote is no longer secret .
In this House we regret the closure last May of Radio Caracas Televisión .
On Sunday a constitutional referendum will hurriedly be held which aims to introduce an authoritarian and exclusive regime and which proposes to establish what is being termed ' Socialism for the 21st century ' .
An until recently very close associate of President Chávez has even termed the process a ' coup ' .
I regret that an election observation mission from the European Union has not been officially invited .
What is more , this referendum is being held in a climate of violence and tension which has even cost the lives of students who also reject the plan .
In recent years , physical and legal insecurity , kidnaps and land occupations have also increased .
As a result , for example , many of my Galician compatriots have left the country at the average rate of one thousand people per year since President Chávez came to power .
Emboldened by high oil prices , President Chávez is looking for followers and allies in other countries , he is making a lot of noise in international forums and he is intervening in the sovereign affairs of his neighbours .
As President Uribe has said , President Chávez wants to set the continent alight .
His attitude is a problem for the democratic stability of Venezuela and for harmony and integration processes in Latin America as a whole .
He is also disrupting the relations which have been expanding in the last decade between countries on that continent and the European Union .
Bearing in mind the next Lima Summit , the attitude of President Chávez represents a serious challenge which must be carefully considered by the European Union and its Member States .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , the first thing we have to do in this Parliament , in line with its own tradition of respect and non-interference , is not inflame the situation further , either in continents or third countries , as a result of our own words .
Mr Millán Mon is right to say that Latin America has developed very positively in recent years , both politically - as the vast majority of its countries are democratic - and economically , and also , albeit more modestly , in social terms .
Europe has contributed extensively to this development , through its companies , its investments and particularly its development aid which is the highest in that continent .
In this general context , I would not say that there is an exception , but rather that there is a particular situation in Venezuela due to the personality , which is also very particular and very much his own , of President Chávez .
However , it must not be forgotten - especially not in a democratic institution such as this one - that President Chávez has been re-elected three times with large majorities and without any justified suspicions of electoral fraud .
Under these circumstances - that is to say , we are not talking about a dictatorship - we must tread carefully , try to increase dialogue by extending the hand of friendship and also encourage this country , which admittedly is fractured and divided , to engage in internal dialogue , consensus and reconciliation .
We must do this in the belief that a country cannot be transformed with a majority of just 60 % or 40 % and that the rules of the game cannot be changed without a broad consensus involving at least 70 % or 80 % , as has occurred in other countries around us and in our old continent , in the European Union .
Admittedly , the internal situation is very worrying for the reasons that I have set out : the drift or the suspicion of a drift towards authoritarianism ; the concentration of power ; the successive loss of the division of powers , and also the reduction in freedom of expression using an instrument barely known in Europe which is termed ' en cadena ' .
This allows the President or one of his ministers to commandeer , at any time , all the television channels and all the radio transmitters so that the President 's messages can be broadcast .
These do not just last a minute or two .
In fact , in exceptional cases , they can go on for several hours a day .
In a country where few newspapers are read and where television and radio are the main media , this is a problematic situation .
However , I insist - and I will end on this point - that , faced with this referendum , we must be cautious , offer dialogue , hold out the hand of friendship and try to mediate between the two opposing sides in Venezuela .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Venezuela is a country of exceptional natural beauty and is very rich in natural resources .
It has some of the world 's largest deposits of oil , coal , iron and gold .
Despite its natural riches , the majority of Venezuelans have remained very poor , with far too many living in conditions of appalling poverty .
Only a small minority belonging to a rich elite have benefited from the country 's riches .
Under those conditions of gross social inequality , it is no wonder that populist politicians like Hugo Chávez have emerged as saviours of the poor .
It is also no wonder that Mr Chávez 's nationalisation programme was welcomed by most Venezuelans .
They saw Hugo Chávez as someone who was going to lift them out of the misery of poverty and deprivation .
The same thinking applies to the forthcoming constitutional reform referendum .
I am sure that referendum will secure the necessary popular approval , and it is too late now for public opinion to be changed .
Therefore , what we will in essence have after 2 December is the emergence of another Fidel Castro .
It seems that , just as one totalitarian leader is fading away in Cuba , another is being born in Venezuela .
However , in diagnosing that sad reality , we should , perhaps , also ask whether we in the West are in any way to blame for how things are turning out in Venezuela .
We must do this not just so that we can be morally and politically correct academically , but also so that we can , in practice , prevent similar occurrences in the future .
Sadly , it is apparent that , in our dealings , with Venezuela over the last few years , we have made numerous grave mistakes .
Hugo Chávez got to where he is today partly because we have helped him through our foreign policy omissions and commissions .
Therefore , in contemplating our strategy on how to deal with him in the future , let us start by saying ' sorry ' to the Venezuelan people .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) I am speaking as Chairman of the Delegation for relations with the countries of the Andean Community .
As such , I have been visiting Venezuela one or more times a year .
Since I started going to this country , in other words since the military coup against President Chávez , I have been hearing the Venezuelan media screaming against the President , against the dictatorship .
In the hotels I used , even though they had three , four or even five stars , you were not allowed to watch public television , and anyway it is not always possible to do so as it is normally broadcast in a snowy format .
The generals behind the coup still stroll around the largest square in Caracas and President Chávez , legally elected , re-elected and re-elected again , has never lifted a finger against them .
Venezuela is one of the countries trying to deal , as peacefully as possible , with the conflicts which are commonplace all over Latin America .
I am not wholly enamoured with all the changes that President Chávez has tried to make to the Bolivarian Constitution .
Having said that , as Mr Matsakis stated , it is the people of Venezuela who will decide .
We can certainly make excuses for the way in which we gave the impression that we supported the military coup .
It is true that this has helped radicalise the regime in Venezuela .
I feel , however , that , first and foremost and above all , we ought to respect the decision of the Venezuelan people .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I would ask the European right to stop meddling in Venezuela .
The European right does not like Cuba because it says that there are no elections , and yet it does not like Venezuela because there are .
In fact , Venezuela is one of the countries in Latin America that has held the most elections , all supervised by the Organization of American States , by the European Union and by foundations as prestigious as the Carter Center .
Ladies and gentlemen of the right , what you do not like is the system .
Stop meddling and respect a sovereign people who are freely exercising their will and who will keep doing so .
We should not anticipate events .
Have we not agreed in the European Union , as Commissioner Dimas has said , that the recent presidential elections were held totally fairly ?
We must wait and see and respect what the people of Venezuela say without any kind of interference , ladies and gentlemen of the right .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 1848 Karl Marx proclaimed Socialism for the 19th century , and it was a disaster .
In 1917 Lenin , with the Russian Revolution , proclaimed Socialism for the 20th century , and it was a disaster .
Various Members of this House emerged from that disaster to join us in freedom .
The problem with Socialism for the 21st century , as proclaimed by President Chávez in Venezuela , is that this century is only just beginning and we do not know what will happen .
However , we can imagine that , as in the 19th and 20th centuries , it will also be a disaster .
As a matter of fact , we see it resulting in violence .
It is not the elections that concern us ; it is the brutal violence perpetrated by the authorities against the students protesting in Venezuela because they are not recognised as having the right to demonstrate .
Some of these students have died in recent days on the streets of Caracas and other cities .
It is the threats to freedom of expression that concern independent and free journalists throughout Latin America and in particular in Venezuela and which led to the closure of Radio Caracas Televisión .
This is the line that concerns us , and we are right to be concerned as , in the constitutional reform proposed by President Chávez , words such as ' decentralisation ' , ' private initiative ' , ' freedom of competition ' and ' social justice ' have given way to words such as ' Socialism ' , ' Socialist ' , ' imposition of the Socialist State ' , ' elimination of the independence of the Central Bank ' and ' people 's power ' .
It is well-known throughout the world that , when someone uses the expression ' people 's power ' , power will be taken away from the people and democracy will be destroyed .
This has happened everywhere that the expression ' people 's power ' has been used .
' Bolivarian Armed Forces ' , ' communes ' , this is the kind of line that should concern us , that has sown instability and violence in recent months and years on the streets of Caracas and that also represents a threat to regional stability if what has recently happened in relations between Venezuela and Colombia should continue .
That is why it is essential that we closely monitor events in Venezuela in solidarity with the democratic parties and civil society fighting for regional stability and firmly defending democracy , but also with great cohesion in the European Union 's diplomacy .
( SL ) Today we signed the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights , thereby expressing our commitment to respect for human dignity , democratic values and the rule of law .
What has been the basis for the successful growth of the European Union internally is also our starting point for developing relations with our partners throughout the world .
The European Union as a whole wants closer and stable cooperation with the countries of Latin America and its regional interconnections .
In view of the specific nature and genuine interests of the countries of Latin America we believe that it is possible to build strategic and long-term relations only in this manner and with those countries with which we can share the same fundamental values and principles .
Political development in Venezuela has recently deviated from the abovementioned course .
It is thereby undermining the dynamics and scope of future cooperation between Latin America and the European Union and the dynamics of integration within Latin America itself .
The referendum on the constitution is polarising Venezuela because the new proposals concentrate political power and will not lead to an open , ideological and democratic society .
We believe in social society , not socialist society , because that dismisses those who think differently .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PT ) Unbelievable !
The European Parliament has put on the agenda a Commission statement on the constitutional reform planned for 2 December in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela when what should be on the agenda is a debate on the current attempt to deny all the people of the EU Member States the right to be consulted , by way of a referendum , on the so-called ' constitutional ' , ' mini ' , ' simplified ' , ' reform ' or now ' Lisbon ' Treaty .
In essence , putting this debate on the agenda is an attempt to respond to those who support and promote an unacceptable and extremely serious policy of interference in and attempted destabilisation of a sovereign state , particularly when this is a process that only the Venezuelan people can decide , by giving their opinion through a referendum ( ! ) on the amendment of their country 's Constitution .
Without doubt the Venezuelan Government and people are an example which worries the major financial and economic interests established in the European Union : an example of the assertion of national sovereignty and independence ; an example of the realisation of a plan for patriotic emancipation and development ; an example of international and anti-imperialist solidarity ; an example of what it is worth fighting for and that it is possible to have a fairer , more democratic and peaceful country and world .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting closed at 00.05 . )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report - 2006 ( debate )
The first item is the presentation of the Court of Auditors ' annual report for 2006 .
President of the Court of Auditors . - ( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be able to take part today in your debate on the annual reports of the Court of Auditors for the 2006 financial year .
On 12 November I presented the annual reports to the Committee on Budgetary Control of the European Parliament , and the following day I presented them to the Economic and Financial Affairs Council .
Let me begin with a brief review of the key messages contained in the annual reports for 2006 .
My first point concerns the reliability of the final annual accounts for 2006 .
The consolidated financial statements for the 2006 financial year provide a true picture of the assets and liabilities and the financial position of the Communities and the results of their operations in that year with the exception of an overstating , in the statement of assets and liabilities , of accounts payable and of the amount of pre-financing .
The Commission has made further progress in the implementation of accrual accounting , although some weaknesses are still observable .
The Court noted that the Commission has made considerable efforts to eliminate defects in the system of risk management for EU finances .
Some changes are already yielding visible benefits in areas such as the agricultural budget .
I shall move on now to legality and regularity .
The Court has once more delivered an unconditional favourable opinion on transactions underlying revenue and commitments as well as payments for administrative expenditure and expenditure under the pre-accession strategy , with the exception of expenditure under the Sapard programme .
In addition , there was a minimal error rate for payments managed and controlled directly by Commission delegations in respect of external actions .
The Court , however , has once again delivered an unfavourable opinion on the legality and regularity of the bulk of EU expenditure transactions .
This applies primarily to expenditure under the common agricultural policy that is not subject to the integrated administration and control system - IACS for short - and to expenditure on structural measures and internal policies and to a considerable proportion of expenditure on external actions .
In these areas payments to final beneficiaries are still affected by material error rates , albeit at varying levels .
The Court 's observations on the areas of the budget that are subject to shared management are as follows : in the realm of agriculture , to which a budget of EUR 49.8 billion was allocated in 2006 , the Court noted a sharp decline in the estimated overall error rate , although the rate is still slightly above the materiality threshold .
If properly applied , IACS , which covers some 70 % of agricultural expenditure , can effectively reduce the risk of illegal and irregular expenditure payments .
Financial corrections to agricultural payments , such as those deriving from the Commission 's annual clearance decisions in the framework of the balancing procedure , relate to large sums , which the Member States have to repay to the Community budget as corrections or financial penalties because of their failure to establish adequate control systems .
These recoveries to the Community budget continue to be funded by national taxpayers and not by the beneficiaries who have obtained Community resources by irregular means .
Besides highlighting problem areas by citing illustrative cases , the Court also considers it has a duty to flag up developments which may be important for political decision-makers to know about .
For example , the Court pointed out that , while the single-payment system facilitates application and payment procedures , it also has side-effects , such as entitlements being allocated to landlords who have never farmed .
While this may be legally permissible , it has perceptibly shifted the focus of EU aid from farm proprietors to landowners .
The new recipients of agricultural subsidies include railway companies , riding stables , stud farms , golf and leisure clubs and local authorities .
Moreover , the legal provisions governing the single-payment system have given Member States wide scope in the allocation of entitlements , which has resulted in unequal treatment of beneficiaries .
With regard to structural measures , to which a total of EUR 32.4 billion was allocated in 2006 , the situation prevailing in previous years has not changed .
The Court observed a material rate of error , which it estimated to be at least 12 % of the aggregate amount of reimbursements to beneficiaries .
The most common errors involved applications for the reimbursement of ineligible expenditure and failure to carry out a tendering procedure .
In addition , documentation substantiating overheads and personnel costs was often missing .
In the view of the Court , the Commission should set a good example in its handling of the expenditure it administers directly , that is to say expenditure on the Union 's internal policies and external actions .
Although improvements are discernible , the internal policies administered by the Commission , on which nine billion euros was spent in 2006 , were once again subject to a material rate of error .
The main reason for this was the payment of reimbursements to beneficiaries who had submitted declarations overstating project costs .
The causes of the errors in the underlying transactions include negligence , insufficient knowledge of rules that are often complex , and applicants ' wilful attempts to defraud the EU budget .
In addition , for agricultural expenditure not covered by the IACS and expenditure on structural measures and on internal policies , checks on requests for payment , which are largely based on the information provided by beneficiaries , are in many cases inadequate in terms of frequency and coverage and are often short on quality too .
In past years the Commission has taken action to enhance the recovery system and to improve the protection of the Union 's financial interests .
Because of the complexity of its procedures , however , the Commission is still not being reliably informed of the various amounts and recipients of unduly paid funds and of their financial impact on the EU budget .
In fact , only six Member States responded to last November 's request from the Commission for a report on the recovery of irregular payments .
In its single-audit model , the Court recommended the establishment of an efficient framework for all internal control systems relating to EU funds .
All such systems should be based on common principles and standards ; they should take account of inherent risks as well as striking the right balance between the cost of controls and the benefits they bring .
One of the main innovations of recent times is the obligation imposed on Member States to present annual surveys of their audit and control findings .
There are also the voluntary initiatives launched by some national audit bodies to issue national declarations and produce audit reports on the management of EU funds in their respective countries .
The Court takes the view that the national declarations and the national auditing efforts could help to raise awareness in the Member States of the importance of internal control of EU funds .
In its opinion No 6 / 2007 , the Court stated that such national procedures were a means of focusing and demonstrating national accountability for the use of EU funds .
Moreover , they can serve to identify rectifiable defects and examples of good practice as well as enhancing transparency and accountability in the realm of financial management .
The Court is also continuing to play an active part in fostering cooperation with the Supreme Audit Institutions in the Member States and is the lead body in a new working group dealing with common auditing standards and comparable auditing criteria designed for the EU context .
This brings me to the conclusions .
In spite of considerable efforts on the part of the Commission to eliminate the weaknesses in the system of risk management for EU funds , the Court has once again delivered an unfavourable opinion on the legality and regularity of transactions in most areas of the budget .
The greatest improvements were observed in relation to the common agricultural policy .
The high error rate in the underlying transactions is due in part to the fact that complicated legal requirements and provisions and unclear eligibility criteria sometimes cause beneficiaries to overstate their costs when claiming reimbursement , but it is also partly due to persistent defects in the realm of internal control .
The basic prerequisite for effective management of budgetary funds is the existence of reliable internal control systems at every administrative level in all Member States and recipient countries .
In my opinion , the people of Europe have a right to proper administration and control of EU funds throughout the Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission welcomes the Court 's report and the comments from President Weber .
Overall , the Court 's Annual Report for 2006 gives a more positive assessment than its 2005 edition .
Thanks to the Court 's system of traffic lights , it is now possible to measure progress in detail .
The Court 's report sets out , from one spending area to another , where our systems are considered satisfactory and where the errors found are below the Court 's materiality threshold of 2 % .
Comparing this with previous years , the Commission is pleased that in total the Court has now given its green light to over 40 % of total payments , compared to roughly a third last year and only 6 % two years ago .
That is real progress towards our common goal of getting a positive Statement of Assurance ( DAS ) .
The Court also reports improvements in internal policies , such as research programmes , and external actions .
The Court said that our 2006 accounts are true and fair in all material respects , except for certain small overstatements , comprising 0.13 % of operating expenditure .
The Court recognises that the Commission has made considerable efforts to address the weaknesses in the management of the risks to EU funds .
Overall , though , there is , again , a negative DAS concerning the legality and regularity of transactions .
While we are moving in the right direction , I would therefore like to focus on the major stumbling block on our road to a positive DAS .
The big remaining challenge is to ensure that structural policies are properly implemented .
For spending on structural policies - EUR 32.4 billion in 2006 - the situation remains similar to previous years , and the Court has again identified the material level of error .
The most frequent errors were claims for ineligible expenditure and failure to carry out tender procedures , as well as a lack of evidence to support the calculation of the overheads or the staff costs involved .
The Court goes on to say that it is reasonably confident that at least 12 % of structural and cohesion fund payments in 2006 should not have been reimbursed .
We agree that there are real problems in this area .
The Commission 's own synthesis report for 2006 stated that it did not have confidence in the systems for managing Structural Funds in parts of Italy , Latvia , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
Reserves were expressed by the directors-general in their annual activity reports .
The Court looked at a sample of 19 regions in 2006 , and found none to be fully effective .
The Court found various control systems to be ineffective in England , France , Germany , Greece , Italy , Poland , Portugal , Scotland , Slovenia and Spain , and for the Interreg project between Austria and Hungary .
We believe things will improve under the new legislation , but this will not reduce the continuing high risk for payments made to the 2000-2006 programmes , where the situation remains critical up to their closure in 2009-2010 .
We need to act together on this state of affairs .
I have written to the Council President , the Member States and the European Parliament , setting out the additional efforts the Commission will make .
At the Ecofin meeting earlier this month , I also called on Member States to fulfil their responsibility to provide annual summaries of audit and declarations by 15 February 2008 .
That was the deal we reached with Parliament and the Council when adopting the revised Financial Regulation .
The annual summary has to be more than just another reporting exercise without added value .
It must provide real analytical information for the Commission to use in giving assurance to the Court and Parliament about the state of controls in each Member State .
The 2006 discharge hearing that the Committee on Budgetary Control has organised for 18 December 2007 for the main Structural Fund Commissioners will be attended by representatives of the national budgetary control committees .
The Commission welcomes that innovation and hopes it will help mobilise commitment at national level to improve the management of EU funds .
We need to follow a policy of warn , solve or suspend .
The Commission has stated its intention to suspend Structural Fund payments where the Commission cannot obtain the necessary assurance that Member State systems are working well .
That may lead the Commission to take a few unpopular decisions , but it has reached the conclusion that progress will be too slow if we do not display a sense of urgency .
Before concluding , let me say a few words about how the media covered this year 's report .
Over the last two weeks , the Commission has been asked by journalists to comment on two main points .
First , it has been asked to comment on the Court 's findings that golf clubs and other bodies not formally associated with farming received EU subsidies last year .
An otherwise serious newspaper ran the headline ' EU aid for poor misspent on golf clubs ' .
It managed to get three facts wrong in only eight words .
Let me clarify .
Firstly , farm subsidies are not aid for the poor ; secondly , the aid in question was not spent on golf clubs , but as subsidies for eligible agricultural activities - in these cases on adjoining land owned by different owners .
It follows that , thirdly , the money was not misspent , but was in fact both legal and regular expenditure , which the Court is not questioning .
Rather , the Court has drawn attention to a policy issue and to the end result of an agreed policy : the introduction of the single-payment scheme .
We welcome such discussions and , as honourable Members will be aware , this Commission has worked hard to achieve full transparency on the beneficiaries of EU funds , which it believes is leading to better-informed policy discussions , such as the common agricultural policy health checks launched by my colleague , Marian Fischer Boel , earlier this month .
The same approach lies behind the Commission 's initiative of sending the supreme audit institutions in all Member States a complete list of all the payments made to recipients in that Member State .
Regrettably , in some media reports , this golf club issue has entirely overshadowed the Court 's statement that agriculture is an area in which the Commission and the Member States have made most progress , and for which the Court came very close to giving an overall green light .
That is why I felt a need to clarify this today .
The second issue is that 12 % of Structural Funds , according to the Court , should not have been reimbursed .
Most journalists have picked up on the Court seeing this as a problem when almost EUR 4 billion was paid out last year .
This point also needs explaining .
There is no clear picture as to whether the funds were lost or stolen , and whether the errors are systemic or one-off errors .
It therefore falls to the Commission to explain the 12 % .
In this speech I have given some explanations , and pointed to some of the problems we face and the action we intend to take .
My colleagues , Commissioners Hübner and Špidla , will elaborate further in their Committee on Budgetary Control hearings next month .
As a final remark , I wish to stress that , despite some of the media coverage , we believe the Court report does in fact help us to focus on the real issues .
The Commission is working hard to ensure that improvements are made on these key points .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , I am pleased that you are attending this debate , underlining the importance which the Parliament attaches to the auditing of its accounts , and that Vice-President Kallas and President Weber are also here , but where is the Council ?

Where is the speaker who can tell us what the Council is doing with all the suggestions and comments that the President of the Court of Auditors , Vice-President Kallas and I myself have been putting to the Council ?
Thank you , Mr President , for attending this debate .
( Applause from certain quarters )
I would like to begin by thanking the Court of Auditors for its excellent work , especially chapter 2 of its report , which is very well presented .
You are getting better at this job all the time and are helping not only the Parliament , but also the man in the street , to realise what it costs to run the European Union .
Farmers should be congratulated because now that we are reducing direct payments to them they have managed to improve their management of the money they receive significantly .
However , such praise cannot be heaped on structural funds .
It is now three years since this Parliament said that the Council , the great absentee , should be involved in order to account for how it spends the greater part of the budget which it controls .
One thing is clear : it is now obligatory , under the new Financial Regulation , for Member States to submit their summary national management declarations .
It is not an option , it is mandatory .
They have to do this before mid-February next year ; and as we know - and here we agree with Mr Kallas - the Member States are unwilling to do so : it seems as though they are not required to present accounts .
If they have an obligation , they should be the first ones to set an example .
You said that only six Member States are accounting for how they recover funds .
That is scandalous , it deserves a headline : only six Member States are telling us what they are doing about recovering funds which they have misused .
That really is a scandal .
To sum up , I would like to tell you that this Parliament will continue its work ; may you continue with yours .
You and Mr Kallas have our full support in continuing to strive towards the goal of a positive DAS , and we take our share of the blame for all those particularly burdensome procedures ; we are to blame there because sometimes we ask for the impossible .
We offer our collaboration in order to simplify procedures as far as possible .
Thank you , Mr Weber , for your magnificent report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the situation as regards the Union 's financial management is mixed .
I welcome the efforts made by the Commission as regards agriculture . The Court reports a marked overall reduction in errors in agricultural expenditure .
That should be welcomed as a major success .
On the other hand , there is little positive said about the Structural Funds .
The Court is of the opinion that control systems in the Member States are generally ineffective or moderately effective .
That is why Parliament 's call for national management declarations as an instrument to improve national accountability is more relevant than ever .
I am also very disappointed that the internal control system within the Commission is still not all it should be , seven years after the reform .
There are significant weaknesses , and I welcome the Court 's solid analysis in chapter two of its annual report .
Let us look to the future .
The Court has proposed interinstitutional discussions on the concept of ' tolerable risk of error ' . I welcome that initiative .
Parliament and the Commission have already , in different ways , given some follow-up to this proposal .
When will the Council - which is not present today - give its view on this ?
The Reform Treaty states that : ' The regulations shall lay down the control and audit obligations of the Member States in the implementation of the budget and the resulting responsibilities . '
Parliament will carefully follow the implementation of that new rule .
As regards the Union 's audit arrangements , I am not going to repeat what I said in Luxembourg on 18 October 2007 .
I just want to stress that Parliament is very interested in the outcome of the ongoing peer review at the Court .
I congratulate Mr Weber , and in particular Mr Engwirda , for having been able to start that exercise .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the Court of Auditors for its new system of reporting to the European Parliament .
For years we have been asking whether the errors in the various chapters might not be quantified rather precisely .
For years the Court said that it was not possible and now , happily , we see for the first time that the Court of Auditors too can change its mind ; it now uses a ' traffic light ' system of reporting - red , yellow and green .
We welcome that very much and hope that in years to come the system will be refined further so that we can see where things have been improved .
On the matter of improvements - Mr Kallas has made the point already - the Commission can of course be proud , because three years ago only 6 % of expenditure was deemed to have been legal .
Now the figure is 40 % and the Commission came close to giving agriculture the green light .
That is progress .
The big question is , does the man in the street think enough progress has been made ?
Well , I can tell you , the answer is no .
It beggars belief that the Statement of Assurance still is not positive after so many years , and it is a reason for great concern .
An even greater problem is the Structural Funds ; 12 % is of course far too high .
It would be good if in future reports the Court of Auditors could explain exactly where this 12 % comes from .
From incorrect form-filling ?
Are these real errors ?
When I hear , out in the field , how hard it is to obtain money from the Structural Funds , I find it scarcely credible that the controls are not adequate , because more and more I am hearing people say ' someone else can have my share - it is far too complicated being involved with the Funds ' .
At least that is what I am hearing in some of the Dutch provinces .
Now as we start the discharge procedure for the Commission , I think what matters most is this : what has the Commission done in response to Parliament 's earlier recommendations in its resolutions on discharge ?
Because does the Treaty not say that the Commission must take all appropriate steps to act on these discharge resolutions as far as possible ?
To my mind there are two things in them that need to be spelled out more clearly - not just in a resolution but in the Treaty too in the section on the multiannual budget , regarding the declarations by Member States .
Other people have also made reference to this ; two Parliament resolutions state that the commissioners must sign off the declarations submitted annually in whatever form by the directors-general .
To Parliament this means that the responsibility lies not with the Commission as a collegiate body , but that commissioners are individually responsible for their budgets .
I would be glad to hear more about this .
Lastly , the new Treaty says that the Commission and Member States are jointly responsible .
In the light of these Member States ' declarations it would be interesting to know how the Commission is preparing to implement the new Treaty now and in the future .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Members of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in 2006 the European budget was about EUR 106 billion .
Admittedly , that is only 1 % of the gross national product of the 27 Member States , but it is still a tidy sum .
It is money coughed up by you and me and all taxpayers and so it has to be subjected to proper scrutiny .
That is one of the European Parliament 's core responsibilities .
Now for the thirteenth time in a row we see that the Court of Auditors refuses to guarantee the total legality and regularity of this expenditure .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is no minor occurrence .
It is cause for some indignation .
It is a serious warning to the Commission but also to the Member State governments that they need to do something .
Karel Pinxten , the Belgian Member of the Court of Auditors , wrote about it in De Tijd and Echo de la Bourse , saying that if an internal or external auditor of a listed company with assets the size of the EU budget refused to sign off the accounts in this way it would send shockwaves through the financial markets .
He is only too right , and we cannot just let this rest .
What are the sticking points ?
Agriculture , still the most important budget heading , at about EUR 50 billion .
The improvement on that is unquestionable , thanks chiefly to operation of the Integrated Administration and Control System .
But let us be clear on this , ladies and gentlemen , some Member States , notably Greece , are refusing to be part of the system .
So this money is being managed by the Member State administrations and I think we should definitely show Greece the red card here .
We should repeat our call for the payment of agricultural monies to Greece to be suspended until such time as Greece comes into line .

The second problem concerning agriculture is the payment - Mr Weber alluded to it and Mr Kallas picked up on it - of agriculture monies to golf clubs , railway companies , stud farms and landowners who are manifestly not real farmers and are pocketing money from the agriculture budget .
And these are usually members of the aristocracy or royalty .
There is a little game of ' oh yes it is , oh no it isn 't ' going on here : Mr Weber says it is true , Mr Kallas says it is not .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control held a hearing at which Mrs Fischer Boel , the Agriculture Commissioner , said that all this was an exaggeration and played down the whole thing .
I would now like to hear Mr Kallas and Mr Weber giving us answers as to the truth of the matter .
Can the Court of Auditors substantiate its claims ?
Does it stand by them ?
The second large budget heading is still the Structural Funds .
Twelve per cent of these monies ought not really to have been paid , according to the Court of Auditors ' report .
That is not good enough .
We have to do something about that .
Hence our call to Member States , to the Member State governments , Mr President , because part of the responsibility is theirs .
80 % of the European funds is managed by them .
So I repeat here the insistence of Parliament , of the plenary , that they must sign a declaration to the effect that European monies have been properly spent , and so fulfil their political responsibilities .
Denmark , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom have done so .
Where are the other Member State governments ?
Where is Belgium , France , Germany ?
Should they not also discharge their political responsibilities ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , once again it is that time of the year when the Court of Auditors gives a negative opinion on the legality and relevance of the previous year 's expenditure .
In the spring it will be time for Parliament to grant discharge in respect of the parties concerned , despite the negative report .
At least that has been the practice in recent years , except for one year when there was an election .
I would like to draw your attention to Diagrams V and VI in the Annex to the Court of Auditors ' report , which are for calculating Member States ' net contributions .
Member States ' tariffs , including those charged on goods shipped to other Member States , have been included under traditional own resources .
This gives a misleading picture of the actual net contribution made by some Member States , particularly the Netherlands and Belgium , especially when the unreasonably large 25 % tariff commission is taken into account .
It is also hard to accept a method of calculation , which apparently originates with the Commission , which does not include administrative expenditure in the Union 's expenditure in this context .
The audit numbers purely and simply do not tell the whole truth on the use of resources , therefore : they also comprise political elements .
It is a positive sign that the country which has not applied the monitoring and administration system for agricultural expenditure properly is mentioned by name , i.e. Greece . The examples of the misuse of agricultural payments the President of the Court of Auditors cited in his presentation speech need to be corrected .
The problems were not just about golf clubs , Commissioner Kallas .
A good example of the positive influence the auditors ' recommendations has had is the attention given to the remuneration paid to Members ' assistants .
The revised rules are plainly far too strict , but better that than permitting neglect .
( Applause )
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , so for the thirteenth year running the Court of Auditors has rejected the implementation of the EU budget .
Why has that happened ?
Are the politicians , bureaucrats and citizens of the EU notorious fraudsters ?
Of course not !
The problem is that the EU wants to regulate in detail what happens in a region with 23 countries and half a billion inhabitants .
It is this that opens the door to fraud , abuse and error .
The entire organisation needs to be reformed from the bottom up .
There are two ways to go .
Firstly , we must move from perverse detailed regulation to systems in which poor Member States get aid without detailed stipulations on how it is to be used .
Secondly , we must ensure that the guilty are identified .
This in turn requires maximum transparency , that whistleblowers should be treated as heroes , not traitors , and that journalists should be welcome to scrutinise the EU 's stewardship .
None of these three requirements are in fact met .
A relevant example is the fate of journalist Hans-Martin Tillack .
He detected fraud in Eurostat but was himself charged with offences by OLAF .
He lost his case in the Belgian court system and in the European Court of Justice , but now he has been cleared by the European Court of Human Rights .
The EU 's role in this sad story shows how far we have to go if we want to change its nature as a bureaucratic establishment .
Is there the will to do that ?
I doubt it .
( DE ) Mr despotic President , the rule of law , democracy and control based on the principle of equality would be a bulwark against despotism , yet these are the very things that are lacking here .
This annual report from the European Court of Auditors may , however , be of some help and may yet put some things right .
Once again I refer specifically to the facts which , under your responsibility , Mr Weber , have thankfully been placed on record at long last in points 10.9 to 10.12 inclusive .
They are a slap on the wrist for the European Parliament .
In that part of its report the Court observes that Parliament 's control of Members ' expenditure is extremely inadequate and sets out a catalogue of omissions .
What are the practical implications ?
It means , Mr President , Mr Secretary-General of this House , that undesirable individuals are singled out , Mr Herbert Bösch , that a cowardly report is made to OLAF and then , after years of investigation , it emerges that there was nothing at all - no fraud , absolutely nothing .
But here , where there really was something to be found - and you said yourself , Mr Weber , that only 22 % of all expenditure was properly processed - nobody looked .
And that is despotic behaviour .
People in this House , including the President and the Secretary-General , Mr Rømer , know that at least EUR 80 million in Members ' expenditure is not covered by the proper supporting documentation .
Why is that not investigated ?
Why are appropriate steps not taken ?
Why are various deadlines continually extended ?
The things that are happening here - and let me reiterate my thanks to the Court of Auditors for putting their finger on them - lead to a despotic system and to this body here that cannot seriously be described as a parliament .
And then those who are responsible take to their heels .
This cannot go on .
I make the following appeal to Parliament and to you in the Court of Auditors : please investigate these cases in detail and find a solution .
It is a fact that a great deal of real fraud lies below the surface .

( DE ) Mr President , I have learned to put up with a lot from Mr Martin in this House , but I must protest against the description ' cowardly report ' .
I would be very grateful if the record could be put straight on this point , for I believe Mr Martin is the last one who has the right to make such accusations .

Mr President , I was going to end my speech by saying that the discharge report provides a wonderful source for anti-European propaganda , but since that is what Mr Hans-Peter Martin has just said I will instead start by saying it , and that I am glad Mr Bösch intervened .

I would like to make three points .
The first is a general point , which is to congratulate the Court of Auditors on its report .
Since it is a better report than last year 's report we should also congratulate the Commission .
I like the system of traffic lights .
For simple MEPs like myself it gives quite a good picture of what is going well and what is not going well .
Nevertheless , we in the European Parliament , as always , have three possibilities .
The first is to approve and give discharge to the Commission , the second is to delay , and the third is to reject .
We must bear that in mind at the start of every debate .
My second point concerns the policies , and firstly the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
My congratulations on that .
The only problem there seems to be with Greece , as many have noted .
The golf course problem , as has already been said , is not really a problem .
It has been over-exaggerated by the media .
I am not saying this solely because I used to play for the Finnish national golf team , and have no direct vested interest !
The other area is structural policies , where there is an estimated 12 % error .
That can be improved upon .
There are also the so-called ' RALs ' or restes à liquider , which amount to EUR 130 billion .
The Commission must work hard on that area .
My third and final point is that the discharge procedure provides an easy target for anti-EU propaganda , as we have just witnessed , and also that there is indeed some bad news in this report , which is that not everything is in order and that there is room for improvement .
However , the good news is that there has already been improvement .
We have reliable accounts and we have achieved improvements on the CAP .
Also , the Commission should be congratulated for getting a green light on its administration .
I would therefore call for a critical , but constructive , debate on the discharge procedure with the distant hope of there being a positive DAS in 2009 .
( DA ) Mr President , I would also like to begin by thanking the Court of Auditors for an excellent report and a good presentation here today .
It is clear that it is an incredibly useful instrument in our work to ensure that EU citizens ' money is managed well and in a legitimate and appropriate manner .
Unfortunately , the report 's general conclusion is unsatisfactory .
It is clear that when it has not been possible to provide a positive audit statement for 13 years in a row , there is cause for deep , deep criticism .
Unfortunately , it indicates that there is no control over taxpayers ' money , and unfortunately it indicates that here in Parliament , together with the Commission and the Member States , we have a major task ahead of us .
We need to do things better .
Things must be done better .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control the annual procedure is now underway - that is , we are consulting the relevant commissioners and thoroughly reviewing the documents that are now available to us .
Only when we have completed this process will we be able to say to what extent we can give what is technically known as a ' discharge ' - in other words , the extent to which we approve the accounts and the implementation of the budgets for 2006 .
There are some arguments in favour of doing this : there has been progress in some areas .
However , unfortunately there are also some very , very serious criticisms , and consequently some very serious arguments against approving the accounts for 2006 .
Allow me to begin with the positive aspects .
Fortunately , it has been the case that in the agricultural sector things are going very well , as has been mentioned by other Members , and as both the Court of Auditors and Mr Kallas mentioned in their contributions .
The system referred to as an ' integrated financial control system ' has proved to be effective .
It must be said that in the areas where it has been implemented there has been good financial control .
We can look citizens in the eye and say that the money they have paid in taxes has been managed well and appropriately .
In the case of Greece , where this system has not been implemented properly , I believe that the Commission has acted responsibly by saying that it will suspend payments .
This is both good and positive .
In the research sector too there is good reason to be positive .
It is almost a textbook example .
Over the last year , we have certainly highlighted some criticisms , which Commissioner Potočnik has subsequently taken into account , and naturally this is the way in which we will work .
It is certainly a very good thing we are not here to be populist , as some members would like to be .
We are not here to run errands for the EU 's opponents ; we are here to highlight the points that are worthy of criticism and come up with good and constructive proposals for solutions .
That said , there are huge problems relating to the Structural Funds .
We have not been given an explanation of the 12 % that you mentioned , Mr Kallas .
It is possible that there is an explanation .
We hope that there is .
However , we have not received such an explanation .
Unfortunately , we can also see that it is of course unsatisfactory that the control systems are being labelled as ineffective in all cases investigated by the Court of Auditors .
In addition , we must say that there is also a lack of control in connection with foreign policy concerning the EUR 1 billion that is being used jointly with other institutions in international trust funds .
In conclusion , I will say that there has to be some very clear answers .
If we are to recommend discharge , there must be some very good explanations .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Kallas , ladies and gentlemen , we Greens commend the work of the Court of Auditors .
We need the information it provides , but we regret that many areas of activity have seen no improvement for years , because these findings bring the European Union into disrepute .
We have no wish to be fobbed off any longer ; what we want is efficiency at long last .
Mr Kallas cut a fairly conciliatory figure today , but when the content of the Court of Auditors ' report became public , he called it too harsh and also attacked the Member States .
That was not a wise move on the part of the Commission , for it bears political responsibility , and we expect the Commission to exercise that responsibility and to ensure that improvements finally materialise .
We Greens have serious doubts as to whether we can grant discharge for the 2006 budget , and what we have just heard may well have political consequences for certain Commissioners too .
That is why we urge the Commission to change its budgetary practices and start making significant improvements .
Mr President , we have a baker 's dozen !
We have now reached 13 years of unapproved accounts .
It is not new auditors that are required , but a new payments system .
It never ceases to amaze me how many politicians in this House , and the one in Westminster , are prepared in good conscience not only to continue to tolerate the parlous state of the EU accounts , but to continue to increase the amount of taxpayers ' money given to the EU .
As usual , we get the same round of excuses for incompetence and turning a blind eye , the principal one being to put the blame on the Member States , but that just will not wash .
How can the European Commission hand over money to the Member States without seeing paperwork confirming how and where it is spent ?
I cannot imagine any other professional organisation allowing this to happen , and for so long .
If Member States are not prepared to provide the necessary paperwork - i.e. receipts and cheques - then the financial tap should be turned off .
In fact , the tap should be turned off at both ends .
If the EU is not prepared to put its house in order , then the politicians at Westminster should stop pouring taxpayers ' money into the EU bucket , which still seems to have more holes than a colander !
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , we have already tolerated a highly alarming and unacceptable situation for 13 years .
The Commission and the Member States manage taxpayers ' money badly and illegally .
The European Court of Auditors ' Report clearly shows that the Commission and the Member States proceed negligently and are not thoroughly familiar with the rules of budgetary expenditure .
Now there are also suspicions of attempts to misuse money from the Union 's budget .
Completely contrary to Commission regulations and the laws of individual states , public tender procedures are not carried out , claims are made for payment of ineligible expenditure , recipients are unable to support the legitimacy of overheads or staff costs , while controls are also faltering .
Ladies and gentlemen , if the citizens whose money we are so shamelessly squandering managed their own firms and households like this , the European Union would be full of socially excluded , homeless people .
Now I am asking the Commission and the Council to pull themselves together and start to regard taxpayers ' money as if it were their own .
This is the only way we can strengthen trust in the European integration process .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Weber , ladies and gentlemen , reports from audit offices are always interesting and important .
That applies especially to Europe , for the prudent and efficient use of European funds is always the subject of particularly close public attention .
The report rightly focuses most sharply on the use of funds in the Member States .
A great deal certainly remains to be done there with regard to the structural funds in particular .
This , however , should not take our eyes off the expenditure practice of our own institutions , especially the Commission and the Council .
It is in the realm of directly managed expenditure that there is most room for improvement on the part of the Commission .
The Commission , in short , is not only the guardian of the treaties ; it must also be a paragon of sound financial management .
When I look at the shift in agricultural policy , beginning with subsidies and extending to the promotion of landscape conservation , I do wonder whether the aim here is perhaps to subsidise equestrian-sports clubs and golf clubs .
Such an aim is out of tune with the real purpose of agricultural support .
Buildings policy continues to give the Court of Auditors plenty to think about , whether it be the extension to the seat of the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg or the Council and Parliament buildings in Brussels .
The Court of Justice rightly pursues a consistent approach of exposing uncomfortable truths , particularly in cases where tendering procedures have been flawed or non-existent .
It surely cannot be right that the Court of Justice has to foot the bill but is not involved in formulating the contract and putting it out to tender .
Let me take this opportunity in passing to remind the Commission of its answer to my written question of 2 August on this matter .
It simply creates a bad general impression if the local authority of every little municipality in the EU has to issue an EU-wide call for tenders before it can award any contract worth more than EUR 200 000 , whereas the European institutions themselves can casually dispense with tendering procedures for contracts worth millions .
Our citizens cannot understand that .
I would also like to address the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , for each of them must also present the report we have requested .
May I also ask the Council to ensure that increases in operational expenditure on the common foreign and security policy are not slipped in under the heading of administrative expenditure .

( PT ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating the Court of Auditors , especially its president , Hubert Weber , who is coming to the end of his term of office and with whom we , the Socialists in the Committee on Budgetary Control , have enjoyed excellent cooperation .
I want to thank him very much for his work and I especially want to highlight the work the Court has done on many specific issues , such as in helping to clarify European Union policy on export refunds .
I would like to say I am very concerned about the European Union external aid budget .
A large proportion of the EUR 5 billion we spent in 2006 , around EUR 1 billion , was spent by multilateral funds .
In addition to this a lot of other funding was spent by certain international organisations funded by the European Commission - I would like to know on what basis and whether this was authorised , legitimate and transparent .
Although we already asked for detailed figures and clarifications last year , the Commission continues to flout the Financial Regulation and has still not provided us with a report on how European money is being spent in many Middle Eastern countries .
At the same time , the European Commission refuses to listen to us when we say that the European Agency for Reconstruction has been an essential mechanism for ensuring the visibility of the European presence in the Western Balkans , ensuring European political leadership and ensuring sound and effective financial management .
It now wants to close it down even though it is currently the only available instrument for carrying out work that we believe to be effective in situations that are anything but transparent .
This is unacceptable and I would like to say , particularly to Vice-President Kallas , that he cannot simply turn his back on this , and that in the discharge procedure we are going to closely scrutinise everything in this budget , including all the organisations which are not using funds in a transparent way .
( PL ) Mr President , the auditing and control of EU funds in the Member States is a basic requisite for efficient and transparent management of Community budget resources .
The Commission 's latest proposals are worrying , however , since they may seriously affect beneficiaries of EU funds .
The Commission wishes to make the procedures stricter and impose penalties for tender irregularities , often without objective reasons .
I am referring to the document entitled ' Structural Funds : Guidelines on the principles , criteria and indicative scales to be applied by Commission departments in determining financial corrections ' .
The EU proposal for penalties is particularly threatening to local and regional authorities .
We cannot have a situation in which , as Members have already pointed out , the EU funds golf courses in the 15 old Member States while elaborating a system of sanctions and penalties that hit the less developed European countries , including Poland .
( DE ) Mr President , President and members of the Court of Auditors , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we wish to convey our sincere appreciation to the Court of Auditors for a better-compiled report , and we ask you to keep pursuing this path .
We have not yet reached the bounds of the possible , for the more comprehensible your reports are , the more they help us and the more they help the Commission to act on all your findings .
So please continue along these lines .
We are very satisfied with what we have received so far .
We also congratulate the Commission .
What has been achieved in the realm of agriculture is truly a milestone , and it shows that years of hard work do actually yield improvements .
Now we come to the structural funds .
The fact is that we have to get things right in this area too and at least come close to the standard achieved in agriculture .
We are prepared to engage in the necessary discussions .
We are not seeking the impossible .
That is why we speak of a tolerable risk .
We are aware of the Commission 's problems , but we are also aware that the only way for us to progress is by supporting the Commission .
You therefore have the support of this Parliament and its Committee on Budgetary Control , Commissioner Kallas , for the structural-fund guidelines .
We warmly encourage you to make tangible progress in this matter .
We must move forward .
Sadly , we have no one from the Council to address .
We shall , however , take the Council to task on the next best occasion .
We cannot go on like this .
We cannot meet here next year and draw the same conclusions .
We have been making ourselves a laughing stock for long enough .
Lastly , a few words on the parliamentary budget : what the Members of Parliament expect of others , they naturally demand of themselves too .
I wish to thank the Court of Auditors for enabling us to carry forward the parliamentary budget for 2006 as far as the Members ' assistance allowance is concerned .
In the meantime , the problem of supporting documents for the assistance allowance that was noted in 2006 has been regulated and resolved for all but six Members .
That is a message , President Pöttering , that we must also convey to European taxpayers .
We have an interest in resolving the old cases and shall do so together with the parliamentary administration .
We shall find a solution , and the solution will be no different from what we expect of others .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to highlight the very positive attitude and valuable work of the Court of Auditors and in particular to draw attention to the figures which we have received as regards the 2006 annual report .
There is an improvement in the use of Community funds .
This year , the Court has positively assessed the way in which 40 % of funds have been spent , in comparison with 30 % last year .
The positive development of which we can be sure , even though funds are far from being fully used , is that progress is being made every year .
Years ago the Court gave the green light to only 6 % of total expenditure .
It is therefore interesting to note that most of the problems encountered are largely to do with irregularities rather than fraud .
The most frequent types of errors are missing documents , failure to respect eligibility criteria , inaccurate declarations and failure to comply with procedures .
Complying with the formalities is obviously a problem .
The new Financial Regulation is a step forward towards simpler and more transparent governance .
Mandatory disclosure in respect of funds administered directly by national and regional authorities , which account for some 80 % of the Community budget , is of particular importance .
Much remains to be done to streamline the formalities with a view to simplifying the provisions governing the release of funds .
That would make it possible substantially to reduce irregularities , especially on the part of small beneficiaries , many of whom lack the facilities required to carry out the necessary procedures .
Lastly , a key point of the European financial control system continues to be the issue of recoveries .
If recovery work is to be made easier , more detailed information and data need to be made available to the Court of Auditors , Parliament and the Commission and more binding legislative instruments , such as guarantee and performance bond systems , need to be introduced .
Although the results set out in the annual report of the Court of Auditors show some improvement , I would conclude by saying that simplifying procedures and improving cooperation by states during the control stage continue to be major challenges .

Mr President , firstly I want to thank Mr Weber and the Court of Auditors for the report they have produced this year , which I have read with great interest .
I have often made the point that it is regrettable that the auditors do not adequately name and shame in the areas where improvement is urgently needed .
If they were to do that , it would give the Members of this House the information they need to more accurately direct their efforts towards achieving a positive déclaration d 'assurance , or ' DAS ' .
Despite this , it is perfectly clear that by far the largest single issue to be tackled is the fact that 80 % or more of the transactions of the European Union are carried out under joint management agreements within the Member States , and usually by agencies .
By this I do not mean the fact that 80 % are carried out by agencies , but the fact that those agencies have a distinct lack of accountability for the monies which they handle on behalf of the European Union .
It is to the great credit of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control that they recognised this weakness and forced the inclusion of Article 44 of the Interinstitutional Agreement in 2006 .
That article , I would remind you , made it a requirement for the Member States to submit self-certification for the monies and transactions they have handled .
That was a positive step , but , to date , little , if any , real progress has been made towards meeting that goal .
It is therefore reasonable to assume that , even if progress is made right now , it will be something like 2012 before we have any chance of achieving a positive DAS , making it 18 years that we have failed to get a positive DAS .
The Council and the Commission have to understand that this is not acceptable .
They have to understand that this annual failure to achieve a positive DAS is extremely damaging to this House .
The time is coming for the elected Members of this House to exert more pressure on both the Council and the Commission to attach greater urgency to this essential task .
I , for one , have never voted for discharge of the accounts . I will continue to refuse to do so until I see more urgency being attached by both the Council and the Commission .
President of the Court of Auditors . - ( DE ) Mr President , allow me first of all to offer my sincere thanks for the many kind words that have been spoken about the Court of Auditors , its report and its presentation .
I attach great importance to these comments , and I shall gladly pass them on in Luxembourg .
I believe they will also be a very strong motivating factor for our staff .
I was also pleased by the very frequent references to the new beneficiaries of the common agricultural policy .
Nevertheless , I think I have the opportunity to put some things straight , as indeed Mr Staes directly asked me to do .
I must begin with a little background information .
The single-payment system is essentially something that was welcomed from the outset by the Court of Auditors .
It simplifies matters considerably , and we are seeing the effects of that .
In conjunction with IACS , it has resulted in a sharp reduction in the frequency of errors .
But whenever new rules are created , of course , there is always the possibility that they will not be observed .
We should also look at this whole area and not focus exclusively on a single phenomenon , such as non-compliance with the ten-months rule and the resulting heavy financial losses .
We must also bear in mind , of course , that the rules have been formulated very broadly and that a great deal is left to the Member States ' discretion .
That has given rise to certain phenomena .
To be sure , there are what have been termed the side-effects , which may have less serious financial implications but which have perhaps attracted more public attention .
It must also be noted that the general concept of agricultural activity has been very broadly defined .
It is sufficient today to manage an area of land in accordance with good agricultural and environmental practice .
It is enough simply to mow the lawn and claim a subsidy .
We seek to highlight that point in order to query it .
We have a total of 700 cases , and so I cannot say at the present time whether all of these cases are legally relevant , for each of them will have to be examined on its merits .
It goes without saying that , if the support received by a golf club also covered the area of the golf course itself , such a situation would certainly not be lawful .
As I said , however , we must deal with these things on a case-by-case basis , and the Commission is invited to do likewise .
I also pointed out , however , that there were other effects to consider .
The introduction of a dynamic model means that a redistribution will take place from land managers - farmers - to landlords .
I am very pleased that we have also been called upon to comment on the implications of policies .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for their comments .
The main issue , which is that of better governance of the Structural Funds , will be discussed in detail during the hearings in the Committee on Budgetary Control on 18 December .
These will be followed by extensive hearings concerning overall governance and internal control systems in January .
Thank you again for your comments .
The Commission will be ready to answer all your questions in more detail during the hearings .
That concludes this item .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Appointment of 7 members of the Court of Auditors ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate of seven reports from Mrs Ayala Sender , of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposed nomination of David Bostock , Michel Cretin , Maarten B. Engwirda , Henri Grethen , Harald Noack , Ioannis Sarmas and Hubert Weber as Members of the Court of Auditors .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , as you all know , the members of the Court of Auditors are nominated by the Council , for a six-year mandate , following consultation with Parliament .
It is the Committee on Budgetary Control which is responsible for preparing the opinion of the Parliament .
The Court is currently composed of 27 members , from the Member States of the Union , and we are now preparing to renew the mandate of four candidates : David Bostock , for the United Kingdom ; Maarten B. Engwirda , for the Netherlands ; Ioannis Sarmas , for Greece ; and Hubert Weber , for Austria ; and to propose three new members , Michel Cretin , for France ; Henri Grethen , for Luxembourg ; and Harald Noack , for Germany .
During the procedure in the Committee on Budgetary Control , all candidates were approved but not all of them unanimously .
However , we shall see that , subject to a few clarifications , in principle my final proposal is that , if there are no further comments , all these nominations should be approved .
Following the personal interviews of the three new candidates , I would like to emphasise the good showing made by Mr Cretin , the French candidate , who will bring to the Court his considerable experience in international auditing , both in connection with the UN and NATO .
The Committee on Budgetary Control considered this experience to be a huge plus .
During the personal interviews of the four Members whose mandate is up for renewal , the most important topic was their opinion on the self-assessment process embarked upon by the Court of Auditors , which is due to terminate at the end of 2008 , as well as the contribution of each candidate to the current debate about the need to reform the way in which the Court is organised , especially since enlargement , given that it currently has a Board of 27 members , and also with a view to enhancing its effectiveness and modernisation .
In this context , I would like to say that Mr Sarmas was particularly impressive and he was supported unanimously by the Committee , I imagine because he was particularly cooperative during the approval process .
On the other hand , the understanding reached between Mr Engwirda and the Government of the Netherlands was not entirely transparent and this aroused some suspicions in the Committee .

As for Mr Weber , currently President of the Court of Auditors , I would like to clear up one point , before the vote , which is of particular concern to me and which arose after the confirmation hearing in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and so I think that this forum offers an excellent opportunity to clarify it .
Mr President , with this in mind , I would like to ask you to allow Mr Weber to speak when I have finished in order to clarify the following matter .
On 13 November 2007 , following the presentation of the Annual Report of the Court of which Mr Weber is President , various statements were made on BBC News by a former Commission chief accountant claiming that 80 % of the Community budget was still suspect .
Immediately following this was a quote from Mr Weber , saying that that analysis constituted the more orthodox approach but that the quite different statement by Mr Kallas was also valid .

I would like to hear the truth and for Mr Weber to confirm whether these statements are his and , if not , I would like him to publish a denial and to send a copy to this House , so as to prevent the damage caused to public opinion by this type of contradiction , amongst the general public .
Returning to the content of my report , I would like to register my frustration at the fact that the Council - whose absence at this sitting , I repeat , is regrettable - has once again ignored the criteria laid down by Parliament in its resolution of 1992 , with a view to achieving greater transparency .
Basically , the Council has ignored , in two cases , the recommendation not to exceed two mandates , in other words 12 years ' service , at the Court of Auditors .
Worse , however , is its disregard of the recommendation of this Parliament about the need to strike a better balance at the Court between men and women .
Whereas to date there are 5 women out of a total of 27 Members , it is now proposed that they be reduced to four .
In this connection I feel once and for all that the Council should adopt special measures .
In this connection too we demand that the Council recognise that good relations between Parliament and the Court of Auditors are essential if the control system is to function properly .
We should therefore receive the Council proposal , with its proposed nominations , in due time and be able to cooperate more closely with Members in the period prior to the decision .
Even more importantly , we would remind the Council of the need to respect the opinion of the European Parliament in order to avoid a repetition of what happened in 2004 , following a negative opinion in respect of one of its proposed Members which was totally ignored by the Council .
With the future of the Court in mind , I would like to mention the concern , widely felt among Members of the European Parliament , about the efficacy of such an important body when it is governed by a Board of up to 27 members .
We therefore await with some impatience the conclusion of the Court 's self-assessment exercise and in fact in my report I recommend that the Parliament should study it carefully at the end of 2008 when it is submitted , and that it should take up a position on the various options .
Meanwhile , however , improvements can be made and so I invite the Court of Auditors to use all means at its disposal to rationalise and simplify its work , in particular by using the options available under the current Treaty : for example the possibility of adopting reports by a majority and not always by consensus , and also the possibility of establishing panels , responsible for specific reports which do not therefore have to be processed by the entire Board .
Accordingly I recommend that , in adopting the proposal to approve the nominations of Members , with the provisos mentioned , the Parliament should express the wish that , at any rate , we should receive clarification on what I proposed previously .
Thank you , Mrs Ayala .
As Mr Weber is not in the room , I hope that your appeal will be relayed to him by one of his colleagues so that Mr Weber can answer your concerns .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( BG ) Today we are going to vote the nominations for seven new members of the Court of Auditors .
The European Parliament and the MEPs have always attached great importance to this institution .
Being a MEP from Bulgaria and a representative of a new Member State , I find the proper functioning of the Court of Auditors and its effective cooperation with the MEPs to be of great importance for the financial health of the whole European Union .
In the course of the hearings of the nominees at the Budgetary Control Committee , we had the opportunity to see their professional competences , their personal knowledge and their individual motivation .
Of course , we could only regret the fact that there was no woman or young person among the nominees but the European Parliament has no powers over the Member States and the selection they make at the national level .
Our responsibility as MEPs is to assess the nominations and I believe that those we have heard at the Budgetary Control Committee are worthy of being elected to the Court of Auditors .
The majority , which the seven nominations carried during the Committee voting , is a testimony to the high appreciation we gave to each of these nominees .
Their political and professional independence was among the fundamental criteria that guided our assessment of the nominations .
The Group of EPP-ED in the European Parliament will support all nominations in its expectations for good and fruitful cooperation with the members of the European Court of Auditors .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the proposals for the appointment of seven members of the Court of Auditors and can only reiterate how important the work of the Court of Auditors is in protecting the financial interests of the EU and the Member States .
The Court of Auditors plays a key role in the pursuit of this aim and has established an excellent reputation .
It performs its task fearlessly , fairly , professionally and independently , but of course it always has to rely on individuals , for it is people who make any institution tick .
And since its members are proposed by the Member States , it is actually to the latter that my remarks are primarily addressed .
On considering these nominees , some might object to their relatively high ages .
For these particular positions , however , I regard personal and professional experience as crucial factors , and auditors simply do not possess these attributes in sufficient measure at the age of 25 , 30 or 35 .
The more warranted criticism , in my view , relates to the percentage of women , which is very low .
The quality of candidates , however , must also take precedence over their sex .
I attach great importance to the development of team spirit and esprit de corps and to the quest for close ties with national audit offices .
There should be cooperation , but not dependence .
As you know , the question whether the Court of Auditors has too many members has been hotly debated in recent times .
The decision has now been taken by virtue of the Reform Treaty .
There remains some concern - and it is a legitimate concern - as to whether a Court with 27 members can still operate at maximum efficiency .
The number and the profile of the members must be right .
Above all , particularly in this domain , professional competence must not be subordinated to political considerations .
Thinking ahead to future restructuring plans , which there will surely be , I would like to cite the example of the Federal Audit Office in the country I come from , which has a large number of members - I believe there are more than 50 - but in which each member heads a department and is fully involved in audit operations as well as enjoying full judicial independence .
Whatever the future holds for the Federal Audit Office , it is and will remain our main ally in the task of budgetary scrutiny .
I think we should ask whether Mr Weber would like to say a few words to comment on or react to the appeal made by the rapporteur for this debate , Mrs Ayala .
Mr Weber , would you like to say a few words ?
President of the Court of Auditors . - ( DE ) Mr President , I had already left the chamber when this question was asked .
Needless to say , I should like to clarify the matter .
It was alleged that , in a BBC interview , I had sided with Mrs Andreasen .
I can tell you that I certainly did give an interview to the BBC , but the name Andreasen was not even mentioned in it .
Two of my staff who are here can testify to that .
Another particularly important point is that I am supposed to have said that 80 % of expenditure had got the red light , if I may express it in these simple terms .
I actually said the exact opposite .
The interviewer , who is free , of course , in the way he chooses to present things , asked me whether I had a problem with Mr Kallas 's statement to the effect that 40 % of expenditure had been given the green light .
I replied that I had no problem with it .
I say this to make it clear that there is no difference between Mr Kallas 's perception and my own .
One can always argue about percentages .
This one might even be higher than 40 % , but I must reaffirm that the figure 80 did not pass my lips .
I did not make any reference to Mrs Andreasen , because the issue is between the Commission and Mrs Andreasen , and the Court has no wish to interfere in that .
Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to respond .
Thank you for your clarification , which answers the rapporteur 's concerns .
The joint debate is now closed .
The vote will take place this morning at 11 a.m.
Law applicable to contractual obligations ( Rome I ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Dumitrescu , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the law applicable to contractual obligations ( Rome 1 ) .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am delighted that the negotiations have produced such an excellent outcome .
We support the compromise that is currently on the table .
If you give your approval , ladies and gentlemen , we will be bringing the curtain down on two years of discussions that have clearly shown just how important this subject is for the European judicial area and the internal market .
I would particularly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Dumitrescu , whose efficient approach has been so helpful in achieving a successful outcome here , and also the shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups .
2007 has , I believe , been an important year for the Community harmonisation of private international law in the field of civil and commercial obligations .
The Brussels I Regulation on jurisdiction , which covers both contracts and torts / delicts , will now be supplemented by the Rome II Regulation on the law applicable to torts / delicts , which resulted in the first conciliation procedure in the ' justice and security ' sector in May this year , and by the Rome I Regulation .
The compromise found for Article 5 represents a step forward for consumers .
The article is also compatible with the Brussels I Regulation , under which a consumer may not be prosecuted before courts other than those of his country of residence .
I would also confirm that the Commission has undertaken to submit to the co-legislator , as part of the report on the application of the Rome I Regulation , studies on two important issues on which the compromise was unable to harmonise rules at Community level : the assignment of claims and insurance contracts .
Here , appropriate measures are to be taken later , if they prove necessary .
The general report will also cover Article 5 on consumer contracts , and particularly whether it is consistent with the rules of private international law applicable to consumer contracts .
I would point out , however , that the report will not deal with substantive consumer law .
As regards insurance contracts , both the Commission and the Council have felt it necessary to issue a statement spelling out that the inclusion of special rules in the Rome I Regulation must not delay work on the Solvency II proposal .
Parliament may also support this statement if it wishes .
To highlight its right of initiative in the area of external competences , the Commission has , as you know , issued a second statement , on recital 16b .
I would point out that we intend to propose a horizontal mechanism allowing the Member States to conclude bilateral agreements with third countries in areas where there are Community responsibilities .
The Commission has nevertheless accepted recital 16b to avoid preventing agreement at first reading .
Lastly , I would like to point out that we share Parliament 's views on the importance of alternative methods for resolving disputes concerning contracts concluded over the internet .
This is why we have actively promoted the development of such methods , through the mediation directive and by setting up a European network to help consumers wishing to bring extra-judicial proceedings in another Member State .
I therefore hope that Parliament will today confirm the agreement negotiated with the Council so as to enable the Council to adopt Parliament 's amendments at its meeting next week on 6 and 7 December 2007 .

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are about to vote on a second private international law instrument , the future regulation on the law applicable to contractual obligations , which is that rare thing in Community law : a document on a purely legal issue .
Despite its technical nature , however , this regulation is hugely relevant for Europe 's citizens .
Contractual law lies at the heart of all economic and social life , and in the Single Market contracts increasingly tend to be between actors resident in different Member States .
This is why this instrument , which lays down uniform rules on the law applicable , is so important .
The solutions ultimately adopted in the amendments we have put before you for the vote are the result of cordial , ambitious and innovative cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs Mr Gauzès , Mrs Wallis and Mrs Frassoni , and with the Portuguese Presidency and the political group coordinators in the Committee on Legal Affairs , Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Lehne .

I also owe an enormous debt of gratitude to Mrs Maria Berger , who preceded me as rapporteur .
At the beginning the problems seemed insurmountable , particularly for an MEP from one of the newest Member States .
I must point out that in seeking to replace the Rome Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations , the European Commission claimed , perhaps rather naively , to be trying to communitise an existing instrument , whereas it was actually making radical changes .
This led to widespread criticism that the Commission had failed in its duty to carry out an impact assessment .
Before I look at Article 5 , which was the biggest problem we had to solve , I will briefly describe the main points we have achieved .
The crux of this regulation lies not in Article 5 , but in Article 3 , which sets out the basic principle that the parties are independent , and Article 4 , which contains the rules on the law applicable in cases where the parties have not chosen which should apply .
The Council has followed the approach adopted by the Legal Affairs Committee here .
It has to be said that Parliament and the Council took the lead in this codecision procedure by extending the scope of the future regulation to include insurance and carriage of goods contracts and by clarifying the rules on overriding mandatory provisions and mandatory rules .
Returning now to the contentious question of Article 5 , it has to be said that Parliament won an outright victory here , reflecting the close and friendly cooperation between the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs .
The problem was that the Commission proposal departed from the Rome Convention by saying that , apart from certain exceptions , it is the law of the consumer that should apply to contracts between consumers and professionals .
The problem with this version of Article 5 proposed by the Commission was that traders , particularly electronic traders , would have had to draw up terms and conditions tailor-made for each EU Member State .
This would have been impossible for small and medium-sized businesses , which do not have the same resources as the big multinationals , and the result would have been an enormous barrier for SMEs wanting to conduct e-commerce within the Single Market .
The rapporteur is all too aware that SMEs are the driving-force behind Europe 's economy and create jobs and innovation .
The smaller Member States were also worried that they would be excluded from the e-commerce market .
The solution adopted in the end was to return to a simplified version of Article 5 of the Rome Convention .
The new Article 5 sets out the principle that the law of the consumer should apply , but allows the parties to choose the law applicable .
In practice , given that most contracts between consumers and professionals are standard , take-it-or-leave-it contracts , this means that traders will make their law applicable .
However , since Article 5 provides that the choice of law is subject to the mandatory rules of the consumer 's country of residence , it offers a solution that is very much in consumers ' favour .
The new Article 5 that we are proposing therefore provides a win-win solution in which the consumer is guaranteed maximum protection and SMEs will be free to offer their goods and services on the internet on the basis of contracts governed by their own law .
Lastly , I must draw your attention to a short recital which provides that the Community may , in future , adopt standard terms and conditions for electronic contracts between consumers and professionals .
The final major step forward is the inclusion of insurance contracts , which has been the subject of lengthy negotiations between the Member States - Commissioner Frattini referred to this - and the inclusion of contracts for the carriage of goods .
The last thing I absolutely have to mention is that the UK , which had initially decided not to be involved in the adoption of the regulation following its reservations about the Rome Convention , has now apparently decided to take part after all , in the light of the wording produced by the negotiations .
We therefore commend this text to the House . In our view it constitutes a very positive result for consumers and businesses , and is an eloquent demonstration of the highly effective contribution that Parliament can make in the codecision procedure , even on very tricky issues such as this .
The Council President has assured us that if the amendments in the first group on the voting list are adopted , we will have agreement at first reading .
That would be an outstanding and unexpected success for Parliament and the Presidency , and as the rapporteur from a new Member State , Romania , I am delighted to have played my small part .
As I reach the end of my term of office as a Romanian MEP , I have to say that I am also very proud .
I would like to take this opportunity , Mr Dumitrescu , to wish you every success and happiness in your pursuits when you eventually leave the seat which you have occupied with such dignity all these months .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE-DE Group is content with the outcome of this process .
This is primarily due to the fact that the rapporteur , by dint of consummate bargaining skill , great patience and dogged persistence , managed to negotiate and seal a compromise which the entire Committee on Legal Affairs was ultimately able to endorse .
May I therefore express my very special thanks to our rapporteur .
It was clearly evident from the outcome that patience had been the best policy .
Rather than take snap decisions at a single reading , it was right to opt for further negotiations with the Council and the Commission , because this was precisely the sort of matter that lent itself to treatment at one reading with a view to resolving all the complex issues rather than burning the midnight oil two years hence at meetings of the Conciliation Committee , which would have had to discuss the same problems we are examining today .
As I see it , Article 5 is the core of this regulation , and we are delighted that we have managed to alter the substance of Article 5 to reflect the original intention of the Rome Convention , namely to balance the interests of consumers with those of providers .
Had the Commission 's proposal been approved , we know that it would have had quite serious repercussions on e-commerce and on small and medium-sized businesses , and this would have impacted adversely on the supply of goods and services to consumers .
We have constantly criticised the fact that the Commission , in spite of the Interinstitutional Agreement of December 2003 , has failed to carry out an impact assessment in this case .
We confidently assume , however , that this is the last such omission and that the same mistake will not be repeated in future legislative proposals from the Commission .
Lastly , I merely wish to observe that the whole debate about consumer contracts , about the country-of-destination principle and the country-of-origin principle and about the relationship between providers or suppliers and consumers has only reinforced Parliament 's repeated message that , in the long run , we need an optional instrument for the law of contract governing cross-border trade , and we are pleased that this requirement is set out in the recitals of the motion for a resolution before us .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe that this is a good example of the proper functioning of the European institutions .
Despite our institutional complexity , the Parliament , the Commission and the Council are all working well on this matter and I hope that , with a satisfactory vote at this Parliamentary session , we can achieve a resolution at first reading , without any further delay .
I am grateful to Mr Frattini for facilitating the outcome and to the rapporteur for all his hard work in arriving at this agreement .
As has been said more than once , the focus of our discussions here has been Article 5 , which relates to the protection of consumer rights .
In contractual matters , the consumer is not in a situation of equality ; normally he is at a disadvantage .
To give a simple example , take a person who has to sign a car rental contract at an airport : the consumer is not able to read the content of the contract , he is unaware of the law to which the contract is subject and , unless he has legal protection he is completely in the hands of the person offering the contract .
This proposal for a regulation aims , without sacrificing the principles governing choice of the applicable law , to secure a system of protection for the consumer and this is now reflected in the formula - suggested by the Council - whereby the choice of law may not entail for the consumer the loss of the protection provided under the inalienable contractual provisions of the law which , in the absence of choice , would have been applicable under paragraph 1 .
Generally speaking , the main problem here in the European Union is the lack of harmonisation of substantive law .
These formulae applying the law of conflict are merely subsidiary formulae and we hope that the Commission will pursue its legislative drive by proposing texts offering the consumer material protection which is uniform throughout the European Union , thereby removing the need to resort to these complicated conflict-of-law provisions .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this document before us is of great significance from an economic , social and political point of view , and its main objective was to harmonise the content of the Brussels I Regulation and the legislative work connected with Rome II , creating appropriate balance between the two .
A good compromise solution has emerged , as we have also heard from the remarks by our fellow Members , and this is indeed due to the fact that there has been exemplary cooperation between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
The Union has taken as its objective the creation of an area based on freedom , security and the rule of law , and this requires the compromise solutions we see here , and it signifies serious progress for consumers .
A consumer may only be brought for court proceedings in his home country , so this kind of solution for contractual law , which is so important for economic life , points the way forward whatever happens .
Thank you very much .
( PL ) Mr President , may I begin by thanking the rapporteur for his contribution to the drafting of a regulation that is so important for the future of the European Union .
We must remember that the Rome Convention is the only legal instrument in the field of international private law at Community level that is currently in the form of an international treaty .
The Convention needs amending to take account of the current and future needs of the European Union 's internal market .
For that reason too , the proposed regulation is politically highly sensitive , especially in terms of the protection of consumers and the possibilities for small and medium-sized enterprises to offer products and services via the internet .
The report before us strikes a compromise between providing possibilities for consumer protection and facilitating the activities of small and medium-sized enterprises on the EU common market .
It also broaches the important issue of the standardisation of clauses in contracts covering transactions conducted via the internet .
I agree that the European Commission had to take appropriate action in this field .
It has done so , and I welcome the compromise that has been reached .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur once again and to support adoption of the regulation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and resumed at 11 a.m. ) .

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
( DE ) Mr President , at yesterday 's late-night sitting , Mrs McCarthy had a weapon here in Parliament .
I should like to ask who gave permission for a weapon to be brought into the chamber .
That is a good question .
I will refer the matter to the relevant authorities and they will let you know .
1 .
Electro-medical equipment used in veterinary medicine ( vote )
- Report : Arlene McCarthy
2 .
Units of measurement ( vote )
- Report : Arlene McCarthy
- Before the vote
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission confirms that it will continue monitoring the developments relating to this Directive and its implementation , and that it will consider , in the light of the results of that monitoring , applying follow-up measures .
3 .
Amendment of Directive 2003 / 54 / EC as regards Estonia ( vote )
- Report : Angelika Niebler
4 .
Agreement between the EC and Egypt on scientific and technological cooperation ( vote )
- Report : Angelika Niebler
5 .
Proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 ( Financial Regulation ) ( vote )
- Report : Jo Leinen
6 .
Macro-financial assistance for Lebanon ( vote )
- Report : Kader Arif
7 .
European supervision order in pre-trial procedures ( vote )
- Report : Ioannis Varvitsiotis
8 .
Combating racism and xenophobia ( vote )
- Report : Martine Roure
- Before the vote

( FR ) Mr President , I would just like to say that the European Parliament has once again demonstrated its maturity and sense of responsibility , and I would point out to the Council , which is not here , that it should follow our example : we have produced a text which has the unanimous approval of practically the whole of our committee , and this is something we can be proud of .
My thanks go to all my fellow committee members .
9 .
Treatment of questions referred for a preliminary ruling concerning the area of freedom , security and justice ( vote )
- Report : Diana Wallis
10 .
Immunity and privileges of Renato Brunetta ( vote )
- Report : Aloyzas Sakalas
11 .
Coordination of certain of the Member States ' provisions on television broadcasting ( vote )
- Report : Ruth Hieronymi
12 .
Community code relating to medicinal products for human use ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Françoise Grossetête
Vice-President of the Commission . - Commission Statement
The Commission is preparing a legislative proposal , which is on its 2008 legislative programme , to amend the Community drug-monitoring system for medicinal products for human use .
There will be a radical overhaul of Title IX ( ' Pharmacovigilance ' ) of Directive 2001 / 83 / EC .
In this proposal , the Commission undertakes to propose recourse to the regulatory procedure referred to in Articles 5 and 7 of Decision 1999 / 468 / EC for the adoption of final public-health protection measures in respect of marketing authorisations which may be necessitated as a result of evaluation of pharmacovigilance data ( measures provided for in the new proposal to amend or replace the fourth subparagraph of Article 107 ( 2 ) of Directive 2001 / 83 / EC ) .
In its future proposals , the Commission also intends to maintain the existing situation whereby , under Article 107 , the Commission may request Member States to take temporary measures immediately where urgent action to protect public health is necessary , without recourse to any committee procedure ; it will continue recourse to the management procedure referred to in Articles 4 and 7 of Decision 1999 / 468 / EC for the adoption of any other decision of an individual nature in relation to marketing authorisations for medicinal products .
13 .
Amendment of Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety on the Community 's railways ( vote )
- Report : Paolo Costa
14 .
Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency ( vote )
- Report : Paolo Costa
15 .
Control of the acquisition and possession of weapons ( vote )
- Report : Gisela Kallenbach
- Before the vote
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regard it as a remarkable success that this compromise between the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , the Council and the Commission has enabled us to achieve a result at first reading on the sensitive issue of the acquisition and possession of firearms .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to everyone involved .
- After the vote
Mr President , Mr Rübig has accused me twice now of bringing a firearm into the Chamber .
I want to clarify that this was agreed to by the security services , and the presidency was aware of it .
Up until this vote it was not a firearm .
Now that the House has voted that it is a firearm , I am prepared to hand it over to the authorities !
I think the only weapon we have here is the strength of our convictions .
16 .
Law applicable to contractual obligations ( Rome I ) ( vote )
- Report : Cristian Dumitrescu
- Before the vote on Article 5 , Amendment 77

rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I had already asked for the floor , but you called Mrs McCarthy instead , which I quite understand , since it should be ladies first .
Having said that , we are taking a vote , and I would ask you to start with Article 5 and Amendment 77 .
I propose that we should reject the GUE Group 's amendment so that we can vote on a package from the compromise we reached with all the other political groups .
In this way , thanks to the Council 's and Commission 's decision , we can hope to have approval at first reading .
Thank you .

That is absolutely fine , Mr Dimitrescu , since that is exactly what I was going to suggest .
17 .
Genetically modified food and feed ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Karin Scheele
18 .
Regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding ( vote )
- Report : Jo Leinen
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , thanks to the truly effective and committed way in which the Portuguese Presidency has conducted the negotiations on this difficult issue , we are able to adopt this resolution today at first reading .
All of the compromise amendments are in Block 1 , which means that all other amendments fall .
This regulation will finally enable European political parties to take part in European elections .
That might be considered perfectly normal , but it was not normal before .
My hope is that this new regulation really will enable the ten families of political parties to inject fresh dynamism into the next European elections in 2009 .
Thank you to everyone who has been working with me on this legislation .
( Applause )
19 .
Residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Robert Sturdy
- Before the vote
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission wishes to thank the European Parliament for its constructive support and welcomes the good compromise reached .
As part of that compromise , the Commission has agreed to make the following statement :
' The standard time limits for the regulatory procedure with scrutiny are laid down in Article 5a ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of Decision 1999 / 468 / EC .
Derogation from paragraphs 3 and 4 may be provided in duly substantiated exceptional cases .
The objective of curtailment of time limits under the regulatory procedure with scrutiny included in the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 396 / 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission is to complete the process from application for a maximum residue level to adoption within less than one year .
These adaptations are necessary to ensure consistency with the proposed one-year deadline for authorisation of plant protection products included in the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market .
The European Commission will examine the appropriateness of curtailment of time limits under the regulatory procedure with scrutiny after two years ' experience with the authorisation procedure in the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market , taking into account experience gained in the application of these procedures in the European Parliament and the Council . '
20 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( David Bostock ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
21 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Michel Cretin ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
22 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Maarten B. Engwirda ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
23 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Henri Grethen ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
24 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Harald Noack ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
25 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Ioannis Sarmas ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
26 .
Appointment of a Member of the Court of Auditors ( Hubert Weber ) ( vote )
- Report : Inés Ayala Sender
27 .
Proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution
28 .
Situation in Georgia ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution
- Before the vote on paragraph 9
( FR ) Mr President , in paragraph 9 I would like to replace :
' welcomes the readiness of the Georgian authorities to allow international observers to monitor the elections ' by ' welcomes the call of the Georgian authorities for international observers to monitor the elections ' .
This makes the text a closer reflection of what is actually happening .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on Amendment 4
Mr President , at the end of the text proposed for insertion after paragraph 10 , which is in the voting list under Amendment 4 , the words ' on Russia 's own approach ' are unspecific .
Is that approach good or bad ?
I therefore propose that this be defined by inserting the single word ' deplorable ' , which would give ' Russia 's own deplorable approach ... ' .
I would ask Members to support that clarification .
Mr Landsbergis , can you just clarify whether you are talking about paragraph 10 or Amendment 4 ?
Mr President , according to the voting list it should come after paragraph 14 .
It is paragraph 14a , which is Amendment 4 by Mr Gahler and others .
That is clear now , thank you .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on recital D
( FR ) Mr President , again to make things clearer , I would like to add the word police before security forces , so the text would read :
' whereas six days of opposition rallies erupted in violence when police security forces ' etc .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on recital G
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , again for the sake of clarity , and because an inquiry is currently being conducted , I would like to delete the reference to 90 % , so we would delete
' up to 90 % ' and replace it with ' part ' , so it will read ' with part of the station 's ... ' , etc .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on recital H
( FR ) Mr President , the Georgian Constitution contains the terms ' referendum ' and ' plebiscite ' , which are not the same thing .
I therefore propose that we replace the term ' referendum ' with ' plebiscite ' , to bring this into line with the Georgian Constitution .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- After the vote on recital J
Mr President , since there were also social reasons for the recent events , we should at least have a neutral reference to these .
My oral amendment would therefore read : ' whereas Georgia 's economic and social reforms should raise the standard of living of the wider population ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
29 .
Approval by the European Parliament of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ( vote )
- Report : Jo Leinen
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , with this resolution we are paving the way for the solemn proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental rights by all three institutions in Strasbourg on 12 December .
May I draw your attention to an important amendment , namely Amendment No 3 , which I support and which calls on Britain and Poland to redouble their efforts to rethink and reverse their decision to opt out .
When it comes to fundamental rights and freedoms , the EU must be able to speak with one voice , both at home and abroad .
Amendment No 3 is therefore very important .
30 .
Common principles on flexicurity ( vote )
- Report : Ole Christensen
- Before the vote
( EL ) Mr President , I would simply like to point out that there are some serious problems with the Greek translation of this text , specifically as regards recitals 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , Article 20 , etc . , for which the English version of the text is considered authoritative .

You are right , Mr Lambrinidis , flexibility should not go as far as linguistic errors .
31 .
A renewed EU tourism policy : towards a stronger partnership for European tourism ( vote )
- Report : Paolo Costa
32 .
Trade and Climate Change ( vote )
- Report : Alain Lipietz
- Before the vote on paragraph 4
Mr President , very briefly , the PPE-DE Group has made paragraph 4 a fundamental issue in this report .
We would have voted in favour of it , but not if they get a big consensus for the report .
We are suggesting abstentions .
I request that members of the PSE Group abstain on that paragraph .
The House has taken note of this .
- Before the vote on Amendment 18
In order to find a consensus , we are suggesting that where the text reads ' it would be appropriate to revise the rules on trade defence measures ' , the word ' revise ' be deleted and replaced with the word ' evaluate ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
33 .
Advancing African agriculture - Proposal for agricultural development and food security in Africa
- Report : Luisa Morgantini
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote , see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( NL ) Mr President , the Leinen report is yet further evidence of the pernicious system of self-service which this European Union is developing in all political parties .
To my mind it is typical that even European election campaigns are now funded by the taxpayer , campaigns waged , naturally , on behalf of Europhile parties , because as we know , the bar is set deliberately high and Eurosceptics in fact find it impossible to meet the criteria for funding .
This is the umpteenth case of tax theft , dressed up and peddled in this House as democratisation .
The people who are now helping themselves , helping themselves to money from the Community pot , are the same people who have refused outright to hold a democratic referendum in France and the Netherlands and formerly in Denmark and are still refusing one now .
They are the same people who say that our citizens cannot have their say on whether or not Turkey should join the EU .
For God 's sake let them shut up about democratisation and stop disguising their voracious appetite for money as a desire to help society .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Roure report for a number of basic reasons .
One of them is that Member States are perfectly well able to enact statutory safeguards against racism , in other words EU action in this area is fundamentally at odds with the subsidiarity principle .
The Framework Directive is also an attack on freedom of expression .
Whilst it is acceptable to combat racism - and by racism I mean the specific incitement to or the use of violence - it is not acceptable to confuse this concept with legitimate public debate , such as opposition to mass immigration , opposition to Islamisation or the defence of national identity .
( FR ) Mr President , like all my colleagues I voted for Mrs Roure 's report on combating racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law .
I did so because I approve of the line it takes , but also because the rapporteur and the Committee on Civil Liberties have given us a report which aims to protect freedom of thought , research and expression .
Any decision of this type involves a risk : the risk of giving a political authority the right to tell people what they can and cannot lawfully think , say and write .
In my country we have seen some inappropriate legislation : Mr Gollnisch , for instance , wanted school curricula to include flattering references to France 's colonial work .
More cunningly , laws whose intention was very clear , like Mrs Taubira 's , have been misinterpreted or misused to bring unwarranted prosecutions against historical works whose objectivity , intellectual rigour and academic excellence in general had been universally welcomed by historians .
The opinion we have adopted appears likely to prevent such abuses , first of all because it formally recognises freedom of expression as a fundamental right , and secondly because the framework decision does not aim to punish comments , analyses or opinions , but incitements to hatred , which is something completely different .
Let us hope that all the Member States and political groupings can adopt the same balanced and wise approach as our rapporteur .


( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Leinen report on the financing of European political parties because it is not acceptable for European funds to be channelled into existing European political associations , thereby discriminating against groups which do not feel the need to organise themselves at European level .
And it is very cynical to portray the European financing of European election campaigns and all manner of European political foundations as a strengthening of European democracy .
Because it so happens , as Mr Claeys said just now , that the parties concerned are precisely the ones that have always chorused that we must brush aside the French and Dutch no-vote on the European Constitution and just get on with the ratification process .
These parties have also been very quiet on the question of a referendum on Turkish accession .
Yet that would represent a strengthening of European democracy .
But financing , clearly , is only appropriate for those parties which are politically correct in their thinking on Europe .
For that reason we should vote against it .

( NL ) Mr President , because I have comprehensively criticised the first Leinen report just now , I would like simply to echo the sentiments of my friend Philip Claeys who has in fact replied adequately to the somewhat strange comments by Mr Bourlanges .
The notions of racism on the one hand and legitimate public debate on the other are becoming utterly confused .
This is apparent from the comments of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism when it said that Islamophobia was a new form of discrimination and that the answer to the Danish cartoons was a blasphemy law .
That is very dangerous , once we know that normal public debate on Islam and Islamisation can be interpreted as incitement to hatred of Muslims .
For all these various reasons we regard the whole debate as unacceptable and we voted against both the Leinen and Roure reports .

( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Leinen report because the rules on the financing of European parties , which I already regard as unacceptable per se , are being broadened .
In order to qualify , not only numerical but also ideological criteria are to be applied , and that means that parties which row against the tide will have no chance .
The established parties and groups decide who gets funding .
There is not even any provision for appealing against such decisions .
We must also be aware of the creeping decision-making , the typical salami tactics being used here .
The principle of financing for European parties was cautiously mooted a few years ago .
It was expressly decided at that time that money should not be used to bankroll election campaigns .
And now ?
Election campaigns will indeed be funded .
And on top of that money will be channelled into all sorts of political foundations .
In these circumstances you will understand , Mr President , that I voted against this self-service formula .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted today for adoption of the resolution on the situation in Georgia .
I wish to voice my deep concern at the recent events in Tbilisi and the violence on the part of the security forces .
The situation in the region calls for dialogue with all parties , including leaders of the opposition .
The international community , of which the European Union and the Russian Federation are part , must make every effort to ensure that the forthcoming election in Georgia is conducted democratically , with respect for human rights and freedom of the media .
I was surprised , however , to see that Members of the UEN Group wished to delete a phrase in paragraph C referring to the release of people considered political prisoners .
Mr President , I believe you did not get my name quite right at the beginning , hence the longer introduction .
I was not sure whether I had already been given the floor .
( CS ) I do not share the enthusiasm for this text which generally prevails here .
In my opinion , God 's Ten Commandments , communicated to the world by Moses a long time ago , must hold good in the area of human rights .
Obviously , the contents of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights also hold good .
The highest value for us has to be placed on the freedom of the individual , which must be restricted only to preserve the freedom of others .
In particular , certain provisions concerning social rights are not clearly defined here and can be difficult to interpret .
This relates primarily to anti-discrimination provisions , but also to such rights as the self-evident right of the elderly to participate in social and cultural life .
I believe that self-evident truths should not be dealt with by legislative means .
The provision that relates to employees ' rights poses problems rather than clear principles .
In my opinion , the European Union is not just a pool of hired labourers .
Therefore , when it does not sufficiently emphasise protection of private property and the rights of owners and businesses , the Charter is functioning in an unbalanced way .
I have come to the conclusion that the existence of this Charter will not essentially enrich our lives .
( GA ) Mr President , I am voting in favour of this report because I firmly believe that the Reform Treaty , or the Treaty of Lisbon , confers legal status on the Charter of Fundamental Rights with its 54 individual rights , including the right to life , the prohibition of torture , equality before the law , respect for family life , and the right to justice .
I believe that most people in Ireland support this Charter , as does the Government , bearing in mind that the European Constitution was approved a couple of years ago .
We shall be required to hold a referendum in Ireland , Mr President , on the European reform , that is to say on the Treaty of Lisbon , and if it is to succeed , we shall have to mount a clear , transparent , visible , and professional campaign .
I think that an Irish vote in favour will depend crucially on the action taken in Europe to ensure that human rights are fully respected in the Treaty .
Mr President , Article 3 ( d ) of the European Charter of Fundamental Human Rights allows therapeutic cloning by banning only reproductive cloning .
This is contrary to the United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning of 8 March 2005 , which recognises the necessity of banning all forms of human cloning .
Cloning , for whatever reason , destroys human embryonic persons .
I could not vote for this .
I would have liked to have supported Article 26 on the rights of the integration of persons with disabilities .
( NL ) I do no want there to be any misunderstanding here , Mr President .
The fact that I voted no to the Leinen report on fundamental rights must certainly not be taken to mean that I am against Europeans being given more fundamental rights and freedoms , on the contrary .
Both inside and outside this Chamber I have frequently spoken out in defence of freedom of expression and against laws that muzzle people .
The point is that this report is not about fundamental freedoms .
Europeans , happily , are already armed with very fundamental rights and very fundamental freedoms with which to counter abuses in their own countries and at European Union level .
I voted against because making this Charter binding is actually a very big step towards a federal Europe .
I am in favour of Europe as a confederation of free nations and consequently I voted against this report on fundamental rights , without , of course , being opposed to fundamental basic rights per se .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , seven hours underground in a cell in the Belgian Palais de Justice , thanks to the Mayor of Brussels and the silence of the competent authorities , gave me plenty of time to think about fundamental rights .
I am pointing the finger , and it is for that reason that the Lega Nord voted against the Charter of Fundamental Rights , at the lack of attention that has been paid to the dangers inherent in Article 10 .
As regards freedom of religion , no question , but freedom of observance , without limits ?
Those limits that are in the Constitution of my country , Italy : limits of public decency , security and law and order .
Is the European Union aware that cannibalism is an ongoing problem ?
Does it know what voodoo rites are ?
I believe our Flemish colleagues were right to point out , in very clear terms , the ambiguity of the texts that the European Union puts out , for instance against Islamophobia .
There is never any talk , however , of Christianophobia , of anti-white racism .
These are real problems and the European Union should also be mindful of these risks and dangers and protect its own citizens , its culture and its traditions , the identity of the European peoples , if we want a Europe of peoples and not a Europe that becomes a melting pot , in which fundamental rights are not really protected .
We are the proof of that , we who have been thrown in jail for defending our ideas and the rights of European citizens , while Europe watched on in silence .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also voted against the report on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , not because I am against those rights , but to highlight an ambiguity , a danger inherent in the wording of those rights , in particular - as Mr Borghezio has already pointed out - in Article 10 , where there are no limits on the freedom of religious worship , practice and observance .
Because there is no limit , satanic practices , voodoo rites , rites contrary to public order , contrary to public morality , contrary to other rights could very well be allowed and practised .
The Court of Justice in Luxembourg , were it to interpret the text literally , would have no choice but to rule in favour of any action brought by those practising such rites , something that would run counter not just to age-old traditions but also to common sense .
Mr President , the PPE-DE Group has decided to vote in favour of the Lipietz report on trade and climate change at this mini-plenary session .
The report has merit and addresses many of the concerns we all share .
However , we have decided to vote against some of the amendments to paragraphs , because we believe that global warming must be addressed through sustainable measures which do not have an adverse effect on economic growth or the long-term prospects of Europe 's social model .
As a political group , we are very sensitive to the issue of climate change .
The European Union has taken the lead in proposing far-reaching solutions on how to tackle climate change .
We believe that Europe 's proposals have become the benchmark for any future discussion , and that they are compatible with our economic model .
We believe that global trade has been beneficial to the world economy , but at the same time we acknowledge that more needs to be done , especially in the transport sector , to reduce harmful emissions .
However , world trade as such should not be distorted .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this report because at last it allows Member States , and in particular the United Kingdom , to carry on using imperial measurements .
Personally I prefer the metric system , but there are some areas where the very nature of the work being undertaken necessitates using imperial measurements .
I do not refer to the selling of vegetables , but to work like the renovation of historic and heritage modes of transport , and in particular heritage railways .
I would point out that in the UK not everybody sticks to imperial measurements .
The great game of rugby league went metric years ago .
in writing . - It is clear now that , despite the worst attempts of some to denigrate the European Union on the basis of measurements , the EU is able to deal with issues in a practical manner .
The use of imperial measurements alongside metric ones has been with UK citizens for some time .
Although schools now refer to a metric system and many have grown up with these measurements , the principle for many others to use imperial measurements remains .
This is welcome and should calm many who were confused by previous press reports to the contrary .
in writing . - Lebanon is now one of the most indebted countries in the world and the granting by the EU of macroeconomic financial assistance is wholly justified .
However , conditions must be put in place to ensure that EU finances are properly accounted for and fraud and mismanagement treated with zero tolerance .
It is worth noting that , once again , it is the EU that is picking up the tab for Israeli attacks on a neighbouring country .
in writing . - ( PT ) We must ensure that justice in Europe does not remain restricted within national borders that have already physically disappeared between the Member States .
It is essential to guarantee equal treatment for all EU citizens , regardless of their nationality or country of residence .
A suspect who is not resident in the trial state must not be treated differently from a suspect who is resident in that state .
Non-custodial supervision measures cannot currently be transposed or transferred between Member States , as there is no mutual recognition of these measures .
This calls into question the judicial protection of individual rights .
I therefore support this proposal for a framework decision on the European supervision order in pre-trial procedures , which should allow the mutual recognition of pre-trial supervision measures , enabling suspects to return to their Member State of residence during the investigation stage .
This reduces the scope for arrests ( especially in the case of less serious offences ) while encouraging more efficient legal cooperation .
in writing . - ( PT ) As with previous processes , this Council framework decision on the European supervision order in pre-trial procedures between Member States , which the European Parliament report has just approved , is part of an attempt to strengthen and complete a ' common European area of justice ' following the path traced by the Tampere and Hague programmes in pursuit of a ' Europe without ( internal ) Borders ' .
Among other aspects , the proposal for a framework decision and the report advocate extending the use of the European arrest warrant to cover all offences ( without setting a threshold ) .
These and other planned measures aim to extend the scope for harmonisation of criminal law in the different EU Member States , strengthen the federalist nature of the European Union , and advance and draw strength from the ' Reform ' Treaty , which removes from states new areas of jurisdiction in legal and home affairs .
in writing . - ( FR ) After more than five years of negotiations the Council has finally reached agreement on the framework decision on combating certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law .
While we might welcome this breakthrough , we must also regret that it has come at the cost of minimum protection .
As Mrs Roure 's report points out , the framework decision establishes only a minimum level of harmonisation , and its effectiveness and scope have been severely limited by the many derogations it includes .
Despite the European Parliament 's efforts , when consulted on this text , to give it greater force , the framework decision lacks ambition and will not be enough to tackle the problems we face : combating racism and ensuring that our universal values are shared .
This framework decision must be seen as a first step in the process of getting to grips with racism and xenophobia at European level and maximum harmonisation in this field .
Despite these shortcomings , I voted for the adoption of this report in the plenary because it is vitally important for the European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , to send out a strong political message in support of fundamental rights .
in writing . - ( FR ) I support the minority opinion officially expressed by Mr Dillen .
The framework directive on the criminalisation of ' certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia ' is liberticidal European legislation which does as much to harm freedom of thought and expression as the Gayssot and Taubira legislation in France .
No political speech defending national identities , expressing pride in national history or opposing the spread of migration and the universal danger to freedom posed by the relentless Islamisation of our continent will now escape the wrath of the thought-police .
Once again Europe is not taking its own people 's side , because those who drafted this directive and the MEPs who have just adopted it have already made up their minds who are the alleged criminals and who are the supposed victims .
As for the harmonisation of criminal law , at a time when weapons of war are being fired on police in the French suburbs , when our continent is still under threat of terrorist carnage , and when hardened criminals are taking advantage of the abolition of borders to carry out horrific crimes in one country after another , we have more urgent things to do than to make intellectual and judicial dictators out of those who support all things foreign and enforced multiculturalism .
in writing . - ( FR ) The purpose of Mrs Roure 's report is to combat racism .
This is a very laudable goal , but it is unfortunately being used as an excuse to apply a policy which discriminates against nationals of our Member States , who are becoming second-class citizens in their own countries .
Two tragic events last Sunday illustrate this .
The murder of a young French woman , Anne-Lorraine Schmitt , by a convicted rapist of Turkish origin , did not hit the headlines , unlike the deaths on the same day of two ' youths ' , Moushin and Larami , who were speeding on an unlicensed mini-bike without crash-helmets and collided with a police car .
The accident was widely covered on the television news , and the French President met the parents of the two teenagers .
So , if you want the State 's sympathy , do you have to burn and ransack a town , as hundreds of thugs did , claiming to be avenging the death of their ' mates ' Moushin and Larami ?
Why are innocent victims entitled to less consideration than delinquents ?
It is high time to put an end to these aberrations : the authorities ' soft approach , the insane immigration policy of the last 30 years , and the supposed anti-racism which in France is more like out-and-out anti-French racism .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Union is not just a Single Market , it is above all a union of peoples who share the same values , in particular protection for individual fundamental rights .
The adoption of the framework decision on combating certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law was therefore urgently needed .
Europe is taking action to combat racism and discrimination , and this is why an instrument is needed which guarantees the same level of protection in all Member States against racist and xenophobic acts .
We have to strike a fair balance by ensuring an equivalent level of punishment for words and actions that incite violence and hatred , while at the same time guaranteeing the right to freedom of expression .
So , for instance , we respect national traditions when it comes to condemning revisionism .
However , I regret the fact that the scope of this proposal has been reduced by the requirement for unanimity in the Council , and I would urge the Member States to go further , together with the European Parliament , when this text is re-examined .
in writing . - ( SV ) Mrs Roure 's report gave rise to much head-scratching .
Of course I wholeheartedly endorse the ambition to fight on several fronts against racism and xenophobia wherever it might arise .
There are good grounds for discussing legislation at EU level .
Ideas , both good and bad , move rapidly across borders and between people .
Judicial protection is patchy in Europe .
At the same time , we have reason to be cautious when it comes to harmonising criminal law , not least in an area which has constitutional implications .
Sweden has a generous attitude to freedom of expression , press freedom and freedom of religion .
Some parts of Europe do not have the same attitude , for obvious reasons .
The Council Decision , which was painstakingly negotiated into being by the German Presidency , guarantees a minimum level of protection .
Mrs Roure 's report sought to go further and contained a number of very unclear considerations .
In the end , therefore , I voted to reject the report .
Of course freedom of expression cannot be absolute .
Saying that , however , does not make it clear that all restrictions must be particularly well motivated .
in writing . - ( FR ) The text adopted today is an important step for the audiovisual media sector and also for Europe 's citizens .
It is the result of lengthy negotiations in which the European Parliament has played a major role .
It makes considerable improvements to the European Commission 's original proposal , in particular by extending the scope of the directive to the new media and through practical measures for promoting European audiovisual productions .
These points ensure that the traditional and digital audiovisual media can develop competitively while still safeguarding the cultural diversity that gives Europe its identity .
Recognising the right of access to short extracts also marks real progress for broadcasting bodies , including pan-European ones , provided that this right is exercised reasonably .
Lastly , we will for the first time have clear rules on product placement .
This practice already exists , but is currently developing without any regulatory framework and therefore without transparency or legal certainty .
With the proposed guarantees product placement will open up new opportunities for European audiovisual production and creation , while at the same time providing the necessary consumer protection and information .
in writing . - ( FR ) Here we are at the end of a lengthy and laborious process .
We have got as much out of the Council as it could give us .
We have reinstated what we felt was essential in the text , and to our surprise and pleasure we have to admit that almost all our new proposals have been accepted .
Of course we would have been happier if we could have reined in the private broadcasters and operators when it comes to the liberalisation of advertising .
Of course we would have preferred product placement to be prohibited .
Of course we would have preferred a firmer stance on children 's advertising .
But this was , clearly , not the position of the majority in this House or in the Council .
Because the audiovisual media services need this new legislation as soon as possible , and because we have to admit that the Council and the German Presidency provided open and , in the end , productive cooperation , we can now say that the glass is half full .
The Socialist Group therefore supports the proposal to approve the text resulting from the negotiations .
in writing . - ( PT ) The illicit manufacture and trafficking of firearms , their parts , components and ammunition have harmful effects on the security of all inhabitants of the EU .
In addition , tracing firearms is of the greatest importance in the fight against organised crime .
It is essential to take the measures necessary to prevent , combat and eradicate this type of crime .
According to World Health Organization data , interpersonal violence and suicide rank third and fourth respectively among the world 's leading causes of ill-health and premature mortality in people aged 15-44 years , with a large proportion resulting from the use of firearms .
This initiative therefore aims to adapt the Directive on the control of the acquisition and possession of weapons , and set common rules enabling Member States to monitor the acquisition and possession of firearms and their transfer to another Member State .
Although the Commission 's proposal is generally positive , it confines itself to incorporating aspects of the UN 2001 Protocol .
It is important for it also to consider the changes that the Commission 's 2000 report identified as necessary .
in writing . - I voted in favour of my group colleague Ms Kallenbach 's report on weapons , which represents a well-earned compromise .
The legitimate use of firearms plays an important role across the European Union .
Firearms contribute to various parts of the economy , be that in their manufacture or sale or in parts of the rural economy where shooting is a necessity .
Many thousands of people also take part in shooting activities in their leisure time .
Nevertheless , it is vital that there are adequate controls to prevent legitimate firearms crossing over into the field of criminality .
Today 's report finds a sensible balance which will enable those who use firearms legitimately to continue to do so , whilst thwarting those who seek to operate outwith the law .
Mr President , I am voting in favour of the adoption of Mrs Kallenbach 's report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 91 / 477 / EEC on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons - C6-0081 / 2006 - .
I agree that illicit manufacturing and trafficking of firearms , their parts and components and ammunition have harmful effects on the security of all inhabitants of the EU .
The report correctly points out that small arms are tools of violence in society because they are readily available , cheap , portable and easy to use .
It also stresses the need for inclusion in the scope of the directive of internet trade and the provision of internet platforms for trade in arms .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report and welcome the accession of the European Communities to the UN Protocol on the acquisition and possession of firearms .
The protocol will enable greater consumer protection , as it will strengthen the surveillance of the market , allow rapid traceability of arms , thanks to computerised databases , and destruction of illegal weapons and , therefore , will help to lower the illicit manufacturing and trafficking of firearms on the territories of Member States .
in writing . - ( SK ) Weapons are not conventional products .
They represent a great danger especially for children and young people , who are threatened by the spread of a culture of weapon use through the Internet .
In Europe recently there have been some very negative incidents , in which the main actors were young people using weapons .
I am glad we have not remained idle in the face of the events in Finland and in Antwerp , Belgium .
I realize that a weapons ban would mean an increase in illicit trafficking , hence this question calls for a very sensitive political approach .
The UN protocols have provided a starting point for this Directive .
Before their ratification , their obligations had to be carried into European law .
I voted in favour of the report because it introduces a viable compromise , limiting the illicit sale of weapons but also respecting the authorised interests of hunters and legal owners of sporting weapons .
The Directive will lead to improved marking of weapons and also recognises that each Member State has its own traditions and culture of weapon use .
It will ban the use of weapons by young people under 18 .
Young people will be able to take part in sporting pursuits only under the supervision of their trainers and parents .
I believe that , thanks to the responsible work of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Europe will have modern weapons legislation .
The partial harmonisation of rules in the Union will not only serve to eliminate illicit sales , but will ensure that dangerous weapons , which are a threat to innocent people , gradually disappear from our streets .
in writing . - This report on the control of the acquisition and possession of weapons should be welcomed .
Tackling gun crime and the illegal smuggling of weapons into the EU has to be a priority .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Dumitrescu report and I am delighted that thanks to Parliament 's efforts we have been able to adopt viable compromises for all the players involved .
For Luxembourg , Article 5 of the regulation is vitally important .
This article reinstates contractual freedom allowing the two parties - the consumer and the professional - to choose which national law should apply to their contract , either that of the consumer 's Member State of residence or that of the professional 's Member State .
In its proposal the Commission attempted to change this by saying that only the law of the consumer 's country of residence would apply .
This would have had devastating consequences for the smaller Member States , since businesses operating in the Single Market from these countries would have been forced to apply up to 27 different national legislations , which would have deterred SMEs in particular from undertaking commercial activities beyond their national borders .
Consumers in the smaller Member States would have seen a considerable reduction in supply , since the increase in red-tape resulting from this proposal could have persuaded operators to stop providing services for consumers living in these countries .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats voted for the report since we think it important , from the point of view of legal security and in the context of developments which have taken place in both commerce and marketing , that we should have modern common rules for the choice of law in contractual obligations .
However , we are not happy with the compromise which has emerged and therefore voted against paragraph 2 in Amendment 77 which concerns consumer contracts .
We consider that Europe needs stronger consumer protection with clear rules for both business operators and consumers .
In our view , the compromise does not resolve this matter in a satisfactory way .
Secure consumers , aware of their rights and with confidence to make cross-border purchases , are important to Europe 's economy and prosperity .
However , we share the concern expressed by small businesses over the burden imposed on those engaging in e-commerce in Europe as regards the acquisition of expertise on the consumer legislation of the various Member States .
This is an important question which remains to be resolved .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for the Karin Scheele report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1829 / 2003 on genetically modified food and feed because I believe the changes presented in the report , which aim to extend the area of application of the regulation , strengthen the role of the European Parliament in its implementation , thereby promoting better regulation .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Parliament today approved the Scheele report on genetically modified food and feed .
As is well known , there is still a lot of doubt about genetically modified food , especially with regard to its impact on human and animal health .
The precautionary principle must therefore be maintained in the absence of scientific certainty .
In addition , feeding animals with genetically modified food means that these products also enter our food chain , even though there are no scientific guarantees that this is harmless to health .
In this report , the European Parliament supports the Commission 's position on the implementing powers conferred on the Commission and places a series of conditions on existing legislation without resolving the fundamental issues .
Therefore , we cannot vote in favour .
Although the conditions may be positive , they do not resolve the fundamental issue .
in writing . - My group tabled an important amendment to the Scheele report .
We believe that the European Parliament should have full scrutiny in matters dealing with GMOs .
I consider that GMOs represent a considerable threat to health and the environment in the EU and that all decisions on such matters deserve the fullest scrutiny possible .
in writing . - ( DE ) After lengthy deliberations , we , the rapporteurs from the political groups in this House , agreed on a compromise for the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 1829 / 2003 on genetically modified food and feed as regards the implementing powers conferred on the Commission .
This compromise was reached after consultation with other bodies , including the Council .
It takes full account of the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
We succeeded on the one hand in widening the powers of Parliament compared with those envisaged in the Commission 's draft .
We also managed to correct the draft report from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and turn it into a practicable and realistic proposal .
All amendments designed to misuse the new comitology procedure to amend key elements of existing GMO legislation by the back door were rejected .
The fact is that we cannot afford to turn our backs on green genetic engineering .
On the contrary , GMOs are indispensable to our future .
In the light of the climate debate , it ought to be abundantly clear by now , even to ideologically overladen Green politicians , that we need to apply bioengineering methods to improve renewables for use in the production of biomass and energy .
We simply do not have enough arable land to grow sufficient quantities of conventional energy crops .
Moreover , we must ensure that food and energy crops do not have to compete for space .
Authorised GMOs are safe , and ideology does not fill bellies !
in writing . - ( SV ) We say ' no ' to more subsidies for political parties at EU level .
It is in the nature of democracy that political parties are built from the bottom up by a process of opinion-forming , followed by the formulation of political programmes and the launch of parties that go on to win support in general elections .
The idea of allowing the political and technocratic establishment to set up EU parties from the top down , using taxpayers ' money , is repugnant to democracy .
The result will be parties that are independent of their members , but dependent on a political elite .
Hence it is quite wrong now to boost the subsidies to EU parties through appropriations to create political foundations at European level .
EU parties already cost the taxpayers over EUR 10 million in the 2007 EU budget , and it looks as though the political foundations will get as much again in financial contributions .
This means that , in future , EU taxpayers will have to pay around 190 million Swedish kronor to the EU parties and organisations linked to them .
The funds go to EU parties which are pure paper interventions of Brussels , parties which the people have never asked for , either as citizens or as taxpayers .
It is also morally questionable that politicians in this House so glibly appropriate taxpayers ' money for their own organisations at a time when public spending in the Member States is being cut back .
in writing . - ( PT ) While attempting to impose the essence of a treaty proposal that has already been rejected , variously called ' constitutional ' , ' mini ' , ' simplified ' and ' reforming ' , the EU 's supranational institutions are continuing to promote the artificial creation of a so-called ' European public opinion . '
Moreover , we recall , this determination became something like a crusade after the French and Dutch rejected the ' European Constitution ' , and it has resorted to every available means , including the ' European political parties ' and now their political grass roots , to promote the ' formation of a European conscience . '
As the Portuguese Presidency has said , the involvement of ' all our citizens in this fascinating process of European construction ' is the ' real substance ' , the ' real cause ' , the ' real issue . '
We should therefore ask why , despite so much enthusiasm , the holding of referendums on the European Treaty is being avoided .
However , this is not what the dominant forces in the EU want .
What they now want , among other things , is Community budget funding to finance the European Parliament election campaigns of the European political parties , which could constitute clear interference in the internal political affairs and democratic functioning of each country .
in writing . - ( NL ) In countries where different peoples live together it is usual for there to be no parties that operate nationwide .
Former Austro-Hungary had a variety of social-democratic , catholic and liberal parties , each representing different population groups and each tied to its own group interests and language .
For decades , Belgium too has no longer had national parties , only Flemish and Walloon parties .
So how could the EU have ' European ' parties ?
Our party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , sees parties as grass-roots organisations , popular movements that work together to achieve their vision of how society ought to be and in pursuit of the interests of the groups that place their trust in a given party .
Parties are not part of the machinery of state and should not be set up using tax revenue .
For this reason we voted against earlier decisions on the financing of European parties and we are also against raising the level of it to 85 % .
We also regard it as unreal to promote European rather than national campaigns for future European elections .
Twenty-seven national elections take place in a variety of different situations .
They produce one parliament , with an international membership made up of groups of like-minded people .
We are all for international cooperation by like-minded people , but that does not need EU funding .
in writing . - ( EL ) The political parties at European level have different and sometimes conflicting political positions on European policies in various areas .
Any European political organisations which are linked with the political parties must therefore be independent , so that they can promote their political positions as they think fit .
The European political organisations within the scope of this regulation are to be given the task of promoting official European policies , which are often contrary to the declared positions of political parties .
This constitutes direct interference in the political action of the European political parties and the national political parties of which they are made up .
It would also amount to indirect interference in the political and electoral processes in the Member States , since it would - through the planned funding - give rise to ' favoured ' and ' non-favoured ' political parties , with subsequent repercussions on the results of the European Parliament elections .
Any regulation must therefore promote freedom of opinion and transparency , without any interdependence which would act as a constraint on the positions and activity of the European and national political parties .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which seeks to ensure that the residue level of pesticides in or on food and feed is minimal .
This is an important issue for animal and human health .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we pointed out previously , we cannot support the ' consensus ' on the EU 's principles , objectives and strategies for the delivery of humanitarian aid in third countries , which requires us to promote so-called ' humanitarian ' intervention as a ' right ' or indeed a ' duty ' , and to use ' coercive measures , including military intervention ' , as a ' last resort ' , calling into question basic principles of international law .
Unfortunately , the consequences of such a policy are very visible ( despite being concealed and omitted ) .
The policy camouflages inadmissible objectives and interests under a cloak of ' good intentions ' , as if the constant denunciation of the military aggression and occupation of Iraq by the United States and its allies were not enough , with the hundreds of thousands of deaths that have resulted , and the pillaging of the country 's enormous natural resources .
' Humanitarian intervention ' is an instrument that the major powers use to justify their intervention in situations they have so often fuelled and aggravated by years of interference in pursuit of their strategic interests and in support of the unscrupulous manoeuvres of the multinationals .
Solving the serious problems affecting millions of human beings requires respect for national sovereignty , the peaceful resolution of international conflicts and satisfaction of the urgent needs of the economically poorest countries .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favor of this resolution hoping that it will have a concrete impact on the situation in Georgia and on its decision to firmly continue the democratic reform , as well as on the process to consolidate EU actions in this country and , in general , in the Eastern neighbourhood .
As Rapporteur on the Black Sea cooperation , I would like to reiterate the importance of creating an area of political stability and actual democracy in this region .
My draft report specifies this field among other key priorities of regional cooperation , and the situation in Georgia confirms to us the imperative need to promote and consolidate cooperation in this field .
I believe three elements are essential for this purpose : to consolidate the democratic reform in Georgia , to establish good neighbourhood relations in the region and Russia 's constructive involvement in this process and , finally , the EU 's profound and more active involvement in the actual stabilization and democratization of Georgia and , in general , of the Black Sea region .
in writing . - ( PT ) Just a few points about the European Parliament resolution on the situation in Georgia .
First , although it notes the deterioration in the political situation and the repression in Georgia , this is yet another expression of EU interference , euphemistically described as support for the ' necessary political and economic reforms ' and ' Euro-Atlantic values . '
Second , and as a consequence of this , it recognises the ' political , democratic and economic progress achieved by the present Georgian President and Government ' , even though the content of the resolution says the exact opposite and fails to mention the wave of repression to which the country 's progressive circles have long been subjected .
Third , the resolution ignores the fact that it is the deterioration in the social and economic situation in Georgia and the living conditions of the majority of the population - with the fall in income and employment - that is at the root of the current social dissatisfaction and has intensified internal disparities , which those in power are seeking to use and manipulate , as they have also done in the recent past .
Finally , in response to these significant events , the EP ' urges ' President Saakasshvili and the Georgian authorities , when it has ' condemned ' others for a lot less .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Charter of Fundamental Rights approved in Nice in 2000 is a list of common European values with which all citizens can identify .
These values result from the rich cultural heritage of the different EU countries , their constitutional traditions and laws , and characterise the Union not only as an economic entity but as a community of shared values .
The European Parliament has systematically requested that the status of primary law be conferred on the Charter , making it a central point of reference for the Court of Justice and national courts , and making it legally binding .
I am therefore very satisfied finally to see this confirmed and I am pleased to note that the draft Reform Treaty retains the substance of Part II of the Treaty establishing a European Constitution .
I am sorry that the Charter has been incorporated in the form of an annex rather than into the body of the Treaty as its importance warrants .
I am also sorry that the United Kingdom and Poland have exercised their right to opt out of this commitment to fundamental rights , although recent statements by the new Polish government seem to indicate a different attitude and one that is much more in keeping with the common spirit .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is clear that this report on the Charter of Fundamental Rights is being used as a screen to resurrect the essence of the European Constitution and circumvent the sovereign will of the peoples of France and the Netherlands , who rejected it , in order to avoid holding referendums on the so-called Reform Treaty .
This is inadmissible , and we have therefore voted against .
In a way , it is hypocritical to talk of defending fundamental rights when an attempt is being made to hide the content of this treaty from the people , avoid holding an open debate to clarify the issues and prevent citizens from expressing their opinion at the ballot box in national referendums .
However , we must highlight once again that the Charter is weaker than other instruments such as the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic , the European Social Charter and the Council of Europe 's Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , which are internationally valid , more comprehensive and recognised as legitimate .
Finally , we must not forget that the main purpose of the Charter is to facilitate the neoliberal , federalist and militarist leap forward that is the aim of the so-called Reform Treaty .
in writing . - ( FR ) The fact that the European Union is once again preparing to approve the Charter of Fundamental Rights shows just how the people of Europe are being deceived .
The initial Charter was amended , particularly as regards its judicial impact , to make sure that the UK was able to sign the Constitutional Treaty in Rome .
This was a concession won by the British .
However , Protocol 7 of the future Lisbon Treaty , which arranges the opt-out for the UK and Poland , provides ' for the avoidance of doubt ' that ' the Charter does not extend the ability of the Court of Justice of the European Union ' to pass judgment on laws or regulations of these countries on the basis of the Charter , nor does it ' create justiciable rights applicable to Poland or the United Kingdom ' .
This means that the rights set out in the Charter will not be Community rights .
I will have nothing to do with such deception .
in writing . - ( SV ) All EU institutions are already bound by international law guaranteeing protection of human rights .
This emerges quite clearly from the ruling of the European Court of Justice in the Racke case .
Apart from this , all EU countries have ratified the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The Convention is binding on all the Member States and performs its function well .
On the other hand , a new text would pose a risk of legal insecurity in that the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg might make rulings which run counter to decisions taken by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , which already operates satisfactorily .
We oppose the idea of giving legally binding force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union in the version annexed to this report .
We think it wrong to give the President a mandate solemnly to proclaim the Charter before the signature of the Treaty and oppose any steps to have it published in the Official Journal of the European Union before the ratification procedure concludes with a positive outcome , if that is what happens .
Instead we call on the Member States to initiate negotiations in order to allow the EU to accede to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , so that the EU institutions will also be bound by these common human rights provisions .
in writing . - ( PT ) It would seem that the European Parliament has approved ( ? ) the ' Charter of Fundamental Rights ' ( CFR ) for the second time , seven years on from the first .
We should note here that the CFR was drafted by a so-called ' convention ' , created for the purpose , which reached a consensus based on the lowest common denominator under pressure from forces advocating the most reactionary positions , namely the British Labour government , led by Tony Blair .
The outcome of this procedure is a CFR that is much weaker on social rights than , for example , the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic or the European Social Charter , which Portugal has ratified .
For example , the defence of the right to work clearly and explicitly enshrined in the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic ( Article 58 ) and the European Social Charter ( Article 1 ) is ' adapted ' and ' modernised ' in the CFR and becomes the ' right to engage in work . '
There are other examples , as can be seen in the ' explanations prepared under the authority of the Praesidium of the Convention which drafted the Charter and updated under the responsibility of the Praesidium of the European Convention ' that drafted the ' European constitution ' .
These ' explanations ' are fundamental for interpretation of the content of the CFR but almost never accompany it .
I wonder why ?
in writing . - ( NL ) ' The peoples of Europe , in creating an ever closer union among them , are resolved to share a peaceful future based on common values . '
So reads the first sentence of the preamble to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union which the EU leaders signed in Nice on 7 December 2000 .
And this sentence at once contains the essential truth .
In our Union we have shared values and standards which are now enshrined by the Charter as rights : freedoms , equality , human dignity , solidarity , citizens ' rights and justice .
My view is that it would have been better if the EU had just signed up to the Council of Europe 's European Convention on Human Rights .
But ultimately this is an acceptable solution .
It is an express recognition of human rights in the EU .
in writing . - I welcome , and voted for , the Leinen Report on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , I abstained on the amendment which urged Poland to make every effort to apply the Charter of Fundamental Rights fully - as a British Member , I thought this might be a little hypocritical .
in writing . - ( PT ) I abstained in the vote on this proposal because the Portuguese Constitution provides better protection for Fundamental Rights and because the opinion , held by some , that Community law has primacy over Member States ' domestic law could lead to very damaging legal disputes .
in writing . - I voted today in favour of the re-adoption of the Charter in its new form so that it will become binding on the European Institutions .
My Socialist Party in Poland and Europe strongly supports the adoption of the Charter , and so do I. The Charter is a key instrument in our Union , giving rights to all citizens of the Union - individual rights as well as rights linked to citizenship .
By this Charter we are plugging a major gap .
An opt-out is not a real opt-out as the Charter remains binding on the Institutions and on Community law , even if some countries still hope that it is not going to affect domestic law .
The Court of Justice will ensure that the Charter is applied correctly .
The proclamation of the revised Charter and the reference in the new Treaty will make the European Union stronger as a common space of common values and common rights .
That is why I still hope that the Charter will apply to all 27 Member States , without exception - including in first place my home country , Poland .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am voting in favour of the adoption of Mr Leinen 's report on the approval by the European Parliament of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union .
In my view the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights ought to be adopted without reservation , and also by my own country , Poland .
In conjunction with adoption of the new reform treaty , the Charter will be a binding legal document ranking equally with the treaties .
It is important for our citizens , and it is also an incentive to control the actions of the EU institutions in areas in which the Member States have granted them the right to act .
Every citizen will be able to invoke the Charter directly and pursue his rights in courts throughout the European Union on the basis of EU law .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Charter of Fundamental Rights complicates the system for protecting fundamental rights in Europe .
It makes the system even less intelligible to citizens , and many Europeans have doubts about it .
That is why two Member States have decided on protocols safeguarding them against any unexpected effects of the Charter .
And that is why I am voting against the Leinen report .
in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish and Danish Social Democrats chose to vote in favour of Amendment 41 in the report .
There are problems on the labour market due to insecure contracts of employment and wages on which it is impossible to live .
They need to be remedied .
In some countries this is done through legally imposed minimum wages .
In other countries such questions are resolved through negotiations between the social partners .
In the Nordic countries we have chosen the latter model .
We Swedish and Danish Social Democrats consider that we should continue to be free to use our collective agreement model in order to guarantee employees decent wages .
As the amendment tabled calls for the matter to be regulated through the national systems of the Member States , we consider that this is reconcilable with the collective agreement model we choose to apply .
in writing . - The PPE-DE Group is strongly supportive of the principle of flexicurity , and of helping employees as well as employers adapt to the challenges of globalisation .
We have worked closely with other political groups as well as the PSE rapporteur to produce a report that was positive as well as balanced , and had reached substantial agreement on all major points .
However we have also made clear that we could not support the final report if two late amendments were passed .
We could not accept the last-minute amendment ( 41 ) from the GUE / NGL Group concerning a forced reduction in working hours , which would have restricted individual choice as well as remuneration ; nor could we accept their amendment 45 regarding an EU-wide minimum wage , as the Treaty confirms that this is a matter for EU Member States , is not an EU competence and has no place in this report .
We will continue to work closely with all political groups who aim to produce constructive ideas to help workers cope with the challenge of change .
But we are not impressed by any Group who prefers to grandstand for electoral purposes rather than put the real needs of people first .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against because it is unacceptable for the European Parliament to support the European Commission 's fundamental objectives on flexicurity .
By accepting that workers and employers have an interest in flexibility , the text approves the essence of the European Commission Communication , which seeks deregulation of the labour market , liberalises the right to dismiss workers without just cause , devalues collective agreements and weakens the trade unions and workers ' struggles , although the text is critical of the Communication in some respects .
There are repeated references in the text to the need for ' flexible labour markets ' , ' adaptable contractual arrangements ' , and an ' adaptable workforce . '
This leaves no room for doubt about this report 's real intention , the result of an agreement between the two main political groups in the European Parliament , the PPE and the PSE , which includes the Portuguese MEPs in the PS , PSD and the CDS / PP .
We regret that the proposals we made have been rejected , including our opposition to the inclusion of the principles of flexicurity in the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , the review of the Employment Guidelines for the period 2008-2010 and the National Reform Plans , and the use of Community funds to finance attacks on workers ' rights .
in writing . - ( SV ) The employment policies of the Member States should be determined nationally by way of a broad and democratically anchored debate based on research and national experience .
The employment policies of the various EU countries should develop out of a process of institutional competition .
We are now , happily , able to discuss the Danish model of flexicurity because the EU did not introduce a common labour market policy maybe 25 years ago .
If that had been the case , some continental countries , led by Germany , would have implemented EU legislation which would have had devastating consequences for employment and growth in Europe and would have been well nigh impossible to change .
The new Member States would have been forced to adopt the policy as part of the acquis communautaire and hence would have been compelled to start as new Member States under unreasonable conditions .
It is thanks to the fact that there is no common policy in the field that we can now set flexicurity , the Nordic model , the Anglo-Saxon model and the continental model against one another and compare them .
It is thanks to this institutional competition to find good solutions that solutions exist in the real world which we can compare .
On the basis of the above arguments , we have voted against the motion in the final vote and against all amendments tabled which contain views on what form of employment policy the Member States should pursue .
in writing . - ( FR ) The proliferation of new words is one of the symptoms of an incurable problem : a lack of talent or expertise despite the wealth of existing vocabulary .
It is also a slide towards the uniform language used by an elite which has no homeland , no faith and no laws , and its propaganda machines .
' Flexicurity ' , which is supposed to be a method of achieving prosperity throughout Europe through a balanced combination of ' flexibility ' in the economic field and ' security ' in the social field , is a new Europeanist pro-globalisation gimmick .
For the European Commission this basically just involves relaxing labour law in order to combat unemployment .
In reality , however , the main effect of this liberal concept will be to make it easier and cheaper for businesses to lay workers off in order to recruit cheaper labour .
This will draw in yet more migrants from outside Europe , but it will also present a social threat by having a domino effect , making low-paid jobs a little less secure and going on to affect the higher-paid too .
Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs tried to amend this text to mitigate the impact on employment , but this will not be enough to curb the ultra-liberal appetite of the Europeanists .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Christensen report because it adopts an appropriate and widely supported approach to combining flexibility and security in manner .
It makes it very clear that a flexible labour market can go hand in hand with job security .
The term ' flexicurity ' is often demonised , but in this report we have managed to overcome the negative connotations of what should be a guiding principle for employment policy in Europe .
Job creation is vitally important for combating unemployment in Europe , which remains too high despite the progress made in recent years .
Flexicurity gives us a realistic prospect of achieving the aims of the Lisbon Strategy .
If we are to do so , we have to find ways of facilitating access to employment and of training a skilled , flexible , mobile and motivated labour force .
Having a job is the best protection against all forms of social exclusion .
Europe must encourage the Member States to facilitate access to employment for those trying to enter or re-enter the labour market .
All legislation on employment and working conditions is a matter for the Member States , and I support the amendments which strengthen the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - I broadly welcome the thrust of the Commission 's paper on flexicurity .
With this report , Parliament makes it clear that flexicurity should improve job security and promote employment security .
No worker should be denied rights to equal treatment , to lifelong learning or to social security benefits .
in writing . - ( FR ) ' Flexicurity ' is a smokescreen masking the commoditisation of work and of workers .
This smokescreen appears to have come from Denmark .
After the Swedish model of the 1960s , the Yugoslav model of self-management of the 1970s , the everlasting Mao model , the ex-Soviet model , the Blairist and even the Zappatist model , we now have the Danish model .
It is ' Andersen-mania ' , Margaret Thatcher disguised as the little mermaid to make us think that if we give ' disposable workers ' a few allowances , some training and rapid re-integration we are making them more secure .
Denmark has more strike days than France , but never mind that .
Flexicurity has made it a paradise of flexible labour markets and happy workers ( though you have to wonder why they still go on strike ... ) .
What is the truth in all this ?
The truth is that we are trying to create ' Mindongs ' in Europe , like the Chinese ' half-farmers , half-labourers ' working under the worst possible conditions .
The whole idea is to reduce the level of protection offered by the Social Security Code and the Labour Code .
' Flexicurity ' is phariseeism applied to labour law .
The economic result - as with the reduction in social security contributions , which has failed to end the imbalance in production costs between Asia and Europe - will be illusory .
in writing . - We welcome the fact that the report goes some way to rebalancing the Commission communication in favour of the protection of workers ' rights .
While we welcome the recognition of the need to create quality jobs , resource lifelong learning , upskill and train workers on an ongoing basis , and have particular strategies to include younger workers and women , we regret that the commitments are vague and that there is an absence of concrete targets in those areas .
A dynamic and flexible economy must serve the rights and needs of workers as well as the interests of enterprise .
We reject the one-sided version of flexibility which is presented .
We oppose the report due to the fact that in the face of ongoing casualisation and abuse of atypical workers , the EU and Member States have failed to act , particularly regarding temporary agency workers .
in writing . - ( EL ) I voted against the Christensen report on flexicurity , because in the name of flexibility of labour relations it weakens the protection of regular employment and employee security .
In spite of the efforts and proposals of the European Group of the Left , the European Parliament , through the European Right / Socialist compromise which it has approved , has adopted the basic philosophy - despite certain individual changes - of the Commission 's neoliberal proposals .
In the name of competitiveness and company profit , the achievements of the trade unions are now looked upon as ' inflexibility ' and ' a burden ' .
Dismissals will become easier and will entail no cost for companies , and the cost of protecting unemployed young people will be shifted entirely onto the community .
Companies ' responsibility towards employees is replaced by society 's responsibility towards the unemployed .
Collective bargaining and the role of the trade unions are severely weakened in this new model .
The European Left , in cooperation with the trade unions , through its proposals to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and to the plenary , is pressing for the protection of all employees , regardless of the type of contract under which they are employed .
It maintains that the right to take collective action is an important part of labour law .
We call upon the Member States to promote regular employment and to secure and improve employees ' rights , with a high standard of social protection .
in writing . - ( FR ) A fundamentally important amendment to the report by Ole Christensen on common principles of flexicurity has unfortunately been rejected by the majority of the European Parliament , and I have therefore voted against the report .

Amendment 41 on the promotion of a European wage policy proposed a minimum wage of at least 50 % of the national average wage , and this seemed to me to be essential for combating the low pay that often leads to poverty .
Harmonising the minimum wage at European level could lead to vital progress in conditions of employment for Europe 's workers .
I deeply regret that this vote has sadly once again prevented social Europe from making progress towards greater fairness and cohesion .
in writing . - It is key for the labour movement across the EU that there is an established raft of basic rights which can be backed through legal means if necessary .
Given the pressures on the employment of millions of people in a modern liberalised economy , and given the effects of the pursuit of the internal market , it is essential that a proper and effective balance be created .
I supported the elements in this report which addressed those concerns for the reasons I have just announced .
in writing . - ( DE ) We voted against this report , because it is a ragbag of contradictory statements with no sign of a clear line on any major social issue .
You can read absolutely anything you like into it .
Above all , it gives the Commission a free hand to act without a proper legal basis .
Furthermore , we reject the term ' flexicurity ' as a meaningless piece of word-juggling .
in writing . - Flexicurity can only work if there is decent support given to someone who loses their job , in terms both of financial support and help to find new work .
in writing . - ( SV ) The concept of flexicurity has now unfortunately gained such a foothold in the debate that it is not possible to avoid it .
The conflict rages around whose definition should prevail .
In somewhat simplified terms , the Conservatives lay the emphasis on flexibility and the Socialists on security .
In the report on flexicurity on which we voted today in the European Parliament , it is fortunately the former definition which prevails .
It is for that reason that I was able to support the report , despite a number of less fortunate considerations .
Getting rid of the rigidity which , in particular , prevents young people and older workers from getting onto the job market must be given top priority if we are to defeat exclusion .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Commission 's proposal for a new European tourism policy presented in its Communication ' A renewed EU Tourism Policy : Towards a stronger partnership for European Tourism ' , which is the subject of this report , deserves our full support .
The report strengthens and supplements the provisions of the Commission 's proposal , improving it by :
defending the harmonisation of quality standards for tourist accommodation in Europe and supporting the setting up of a European ' umbrella ' for quality management systems ;
protecting consumers , especially in the field of electronic tourism services ( bookings and payments ) ;
in the field of accessible tourism , taking due account not only of tourists with reduced mobility , but also of the accessibility problems affecting regions with specific natural or geographical characteristics , such as the outermost regions ;
promoting sustainable tourism ( economic , social , territorial , environmental and cultural ) ;
strengthening passengers ' rights in the field of air transport ;
promoting destination ' Europe ' and European tourist destinations .
I voted in favour for these reasons .
in writing . - ( PT ) While welcoming some aspects of this report , such as the promotion of tourist accommodation quality standards , the protection of consumers , the improvement of accessibility to tourist destinations and tourism for all , we regret the rejection of our proposals , which highlighted the need :
to safeguard workers ' rights and good-quality jobs by investing in the training and development of human resources , ensuring secure employment contracts and fair and dignified wages ;
to take a transversal approach to the sector in Community policies and funding , through the creation of a specific Community programme to complement Member States ' initiatives .
to reduce the seasonal nature of demand , minimise the impact of resource use and waste , and develop a tourism available to all without any kind of discrimination .
We welcome approval of the proposals that aim :
to guarantee sustainable tourism that supports other upstream and downstream economic activities , values the landscape and our cultural , historical and environmental heritage and promotes territorial cohesion ;
to oppose the emergence of tourist facilities based on mass tourism , which would have a strong negative impact on local communities , the environment and the historical and cultural heritage .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Costa report on tourism policy .
The tourism industry plays an important role in the economies of every European nation and is absolutely vital in many rural areas such as the Scottish Highlands and Islands .
It is important that we in the EU give our full support to the development of a tourist industry which takes account of local economies , cultural and linguistic diversity , and environmental well-being .
With regard to the possibilities that new technologies offer the tourist industry , tourists are increasingly avoiding intermediaries and travel agents , and making tourist reservations , mainly for travel and accommodation , by electronic means .
Cases often arise where consumers are disappointed when they do not obtain the services for which they have paid in advance .
I was recently informed about practices at the Victoria Garden Suites Hotel in Strasbourg , when Slovak tourists were downgraded from a three-star to a two-star hotel and treated as if they were second-class citizens .
The hotel did not refund them the difference between the services they had paid for and those actually provided , although it was little enough to demand for this .
This development of the use of information technology for tourist services requires a consumer and personal data protection framework for electronic bookings .
It is important that consumers receive information that is correct , not deceptive , and that is up-to-date and unambiguous .
In the interests of consumer protection , certification of the sites that provide information and offer tourist services ( reservation and payment ) of an electronic nature would be helpful .
Nothing is worse for tourism than the dissatisfaction of European consumers , hence I have fully supported the report on ' A renewed EU tourism policy : towards a stronger partnership for European tourism ' , just as the rapporteur , Mr Costa , suggested , and I particularly identify with his focus on consumer protection .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as it contains many good ideas on how to progress our tourism policy .
However , I want to highlight the importance of industrial heritage and how this can help regenerate old industrial areas and still provide us with culture and history .
The preservation of our industrial heritage is just as important as the preservation of ancient artefacts or geographical phenomena .
I come from the region that gave birth to the Industrial Revolution , a revolution so fundamental to the lives of so many that it deserves recognition as part of our unique European culture .
Yet resources given to industrial heritage both at national and European level are small compared to other tourism sectors .
For example , the European body for Heritage and Museum Railways ' FEDECRAIL ' leads the world in the area of railway preservation and yet receives little help from the European Union
The European Union should recognise the importance of industrial heritage and prioritise this particular branch of tourism so that young people can understand the significance of our industrial past .
Surely the time is now right to recognise the potential for industrial heritage to play a major role in any future European tourism policy .
in writing . - ( DE ) I endorse the report on a new EU tourism policy .
It highlights opportunities for EU action in the realm of tourism .
Although the EU has no overall powers in this area , it can still take measures to promote tourism .
In this way , the Union can help to enhance the competitiveness of the tourism industry , which is a significant economic factor and an even more significant source of employment .
I attach particular importance to the aim of promoting sustainable tourism , in other words a form of tourism in which environmental , economic and social elements receive equal consideration .
Sustainable tourism is essential as a basis for the development and continuation of tourist activities and is a crucial factor in the preservation and enhancement of our natural and cultural heritage .
Conservation of the natural heritage plays a key role in the continuing success of this economically important industry and enables European tourist destinations to hold their own in the face of international competition .
Besides , we must not forget that the EU invariably serves as a shop window too .
In numerous areas of activity our example is being followed more and more frequently in many parts of the world .
This imposes a heavy responsibility on us .
I would therefore ask my fellow Members , particularly those who come from regions associated with tourism , to support the quest for sustainability .
in writing . - ( FR ) The new EU tourism policy must make better provision for consumer protection , which is why I am calling for the certification of internet sites offering tourist services .
Consumers must be offered a clear and transparent service which meets the relevant security standards when it comes to making reservations and payments .
Despite genuine progress in promoting ' destination Europe ' through the creation of a tourist destinations portal , I would urge the Commission and the Member States to continue their efforts to develop isolated regions with great tourist potential ( particularly the outermost regions ) , where tourism is the main sector of activity and vital for their economic and social development .
I would also urge professional bodies in the sector to agree on a harmonised accommodation rating system and to set up public-private partnerships for that purpose .
Lastly , I would urge the Commission to conduct an impact study on the consequences of seasonal tourism at regional level and in the past .
If we have a better understanding of this phenomenon we will be able to combat it more effectively .
in writing . - ( SV ) Right at the start , in recital A , the report notes that there is no legal basis for a European tourism policy .
It then goes on to speak of the important role tourism can play in promoting social integration and the importance of increased cooperation in providing facilities for tourists .
There is a great deal about the collection of statistics and common measures for quality assurance and consumer protection .
There are also considerations on the need to protect , conserve and restore the European cultural heritage .
Parliament calls on the Commission to provide the Member States with a guide to improve political coordination in the development of tourism at national , regional and local levels .
The European Parliament also wants to introduce a European Heritage label in order to increase support for those elements which are considered worth preserving ( European cultural routes and monuments are mentioned as examples ) .
In my view , and in existing legislation , tourism policy is a national matter .
The tourism industry has to develop in competition with the tourism activities of other countries , and each country must be left free to form its own policy .
I have therefore voted against this report .
in writing . - I have decided to vote in favour of the Alain Lipietz report on ' Trade and Climate Change ' at the November mini-plenary session in Brussels .
The report has merit , and it addresses many of the concerns we all share .
However , I have decided to vote against some of the amendments and paragraphs because I believe that global warming has to be addressed through sustainable measures which do not have an adverse effect on world economic growth , or the long-term prospects of Europe 's social model .
I am very sensitive to the issue of climate change .
The European Union has taken the lead in proposing far-reaching solutions on how to tackle climate change .
I believe that Europe 's proposals have become the benchmark for any future discussion , and believe they are compatible with our economic model .
I believe that global trade has been beneficial to the world economy , but at the same time I acknowledge that more needs to be done , especially in the transport sector , to reduce harmful emissions .
But world trade as such should not be distorted .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted for the Lipietz report on trade and climate change because I believe that Europe should be a world leader in the fight against climate change and , for this reason , I believe that the European Union 's trade policy must be substantially changed in order to promote a low carbon economy .
The report highlights the need to develop production , consumption and trade patterns that mitigate climate change and its economic impact .
Measures are therefore necessary to encourage local production as a means of reducing the need for transport , and to introduce common European Union standards and labelling schemes that aim to raise consumer awareness of the environmental implications of different products .
in writing . - ( SV ) We moderates succeeded today in persuading the European Parliament to vote against the proposal to introduce tariffs for goods from countries which have not signed the Kyoto Protocol .
Similarly we persuaded the European Parliament not to endorse the view that the market economy is to blame for the world 's environmental problems .
We have therefore voted in favour of the report on trade and climate change .
Trade is not in itself a threat to the environment - on the contrary .
Trade creates the prosperity we need in order to meet future environmental challenges .
It gives us the ability to make more effective use of scarce resources and lifts people out of poverty , which is the root of most of the world 's environmental problems .
Openness and trade are also the precondition for technology transfer , which will enable developing countries today to have a better environment more quickly than we could ourselves .
Transport which does not bear its environmental costs , on the other hand , is a major problem .
We moderates consider that Parliament is adopting the wrong approach in today 's vote in promoting proposals to block and limit trade .
Parliament should instead focus on forcing transport to bear its environmental costs .
The concern we all share for the environment must not become a pretext for protectionism , because protectionism is a threat to development and hence a threat to a good environment .
in writing . - Mr Lipietz 's report deals with an important issue .
If we are serious about trying to control the production of ' greenhouse ' gases we must ensure that these costs are factored in on each and every occasion .
Trade - free trade - is an important motor for the global economy and it is something we must support .
Nevertheless , we cannot continue in the long term to ship goods thousands of kilometres around the globe , with virtually identical goods travelling in the opposite direction , without ensuring the full costs are covered .
Yet this transition will need to be carefully managed if some of the poorest people in the world are not to bear the burden of the industrialised world 's profligacy in carelessly abusing the planet 's environmental resources .
Europe has a responsibility to protect those people whose livelihoods have been built , at no fault to themselves , on a failing to value the long-term viability of the planet rather than short-term profit .
in writing . - ( SV ) Junilistan thinks that the EU has an important role to play in the fight to reduce mankind 's effect on the Earth 's climate .
As one of the main players in world trade , the EU has the possibility of exerting an influence on the environmental effects of production and international transport .
There are , however , grave risks associated with this report .
We can read both in and between the lines that a policy based on these considerations will open the door to the protectionist tendencies which many interest groups and countries in the EU endorse .
Special interest always seeks to present itself as a champion of the public interest .
To support this report would therefore be very risky .
As a result we could end up with increased protectionism and hence high costs to the world 's poor and the EU 's consumers .
The EU should instead continue on its chosen path as a model and an ally to all countries in t