Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 13 June 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of 13 June 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , Friday 's Minutes correctly record my protest that the plenary did not discuss financial aid for Bulgaria and Macedonia .
The President also told me that according to her information that was the decision of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Let me make it quite clear that the Committee on External Economic Relations unanimously decided the contrary !
After all , this was an urgency , which we approved on Tuesday morning .
The committee met on Tuesday evening in Strasbourg and decided unanimously that its chairman or a representative would present an oral report ; and then suddenly , on Friday morning , we heard that there would not be a debate .
I am absolutely in favour of accelerated procedures , but to find that an important political question , involving a lot of money , is not discussed either in committee or in plenary is quite contrary to parliamentary procedure and our Rules of Procedure !
Mr Posselt , I shall find out exactly what happened and let you know .
Mr President , I want to speak on a point of procedure .
In February I put a question to the Office of the Presidency on the building work in Strasbourg .
Well , four months have gone by and I have received no reply whatsoever .
This is no way for Parliament to operate !
I demand an urgent reply to my question , and to questions from other Members who are having to wait too long in contempt of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Florio , the draft reply to your question was put before the Bureau this morning .
The Bureau considered that a fuller answer was required , so the question is still pending and due for approval on 10 July in order to give you a fuller reply .
Mr President , following on from what Mr Posselt said , let me point out that the Commission decided on financial aid for Bulgaria as early as mid-May , that the documents were available and that the Commission could have consulted us in the usual way via the Council .
That did not happen either .
As I pointed out in Strasbourg on Friday : in future different procedures should be introduced , not just at Parliament level but also in relation to the consultation procedure applied by the Commission and the Council vis à vis the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Otherwise we will not be able to carry out our important duties .
Thank you very much , Mr Schwaiger .
As I said to Mr Posselt , I shall find out what has happened and give you an answer .
( The Minutes were approved )
Welcome
Urgent political matters
The next item on the agenda is a communication by the Commission on the economic agenda of the Amsterdam European Council and the Denver Summit .
I call upon Mr Commissioner de Silguy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President Santer has asked me to report to you on the economic results of the European Council in Amsterdam and the G7 meeting held last weekend in Denver , Colorado .
There are three principal messages emerging from these two international meetings .
The euro is now an established reality , which is a good thing for Europe and a good thing for the world ; the economic climate is developing satisfactorily , and employment has become the first economic priority of the national governments .
First , the euro .
The G7 summit ratified the results of the Amsterdam Council .
The euro is here to stay .
All the evidence I need is the completion of the preparatory work associated with its introduction , and the acknowledgement of its international dimension .
The European Council in Amsterdam definitively adopted the legal framework for the euro , which , I should remind you , comprises three essential elements : the resolution on the new form of the European Monetary System ; the two Regulations creating the legal status of the euro , in other words the monetary law of Europe for the year 2000 ; and the two Regulations - one preventive , one deterrent - which together with the Amsterdam resolution make up the Pact for Stability and Growth .
This framework , which is necessary for the proper functioning of economic and monetary union , has been devised in close co-operation with this House .
It will encourage growth and employment while preventing or correcting excessive public spending deficits .
The European Council in Amsterdam also gave a specific mandate to the Commission , the Council and the European Monetary Institute on the work needed to place the international role of the euro on a clear and solid basis .
Furthermore , in Denver , the coming of the euro was internationally recognized .
The G7 , in its communiqué , emphasized for the first time that economic and monetary union , based on sound economic policies and structural reforms , would make a valuable contribution to the stability of the international monetary system .
Secondly , the economic situation .
As well as a favourable economic climate , the need for structural adjustments was confirmed in both Amsterdam and Denver .
Regarding the economic climate , the Denver summit offered an opportunity to compare the situation in Europe with that in the United States , in particular .
Over and above the traditional contrast between the American and European models , a very largely artificial contrast in my view , it became clearly apparent that the major difference between the two continents was the confidence the Americans felt in the power of their economy - a confidence which , sadly , is still lacking in Europe .
And yet the European economy today is undergoing a genuine recovery , sustained by the efforts of the Member States to meet the convergence criteria as they prepare for economic and monetary union .
The growth of the Community GDP - which was 1.6 % in 1996 - should reach 2.4 % in 1997 and 2.8 % in 1998 .
This return to a higher rate of growth should allow a net increase of two million in the number of jobs in Europe over the two years 1997 and 1998 .
Apart from the return of growth , a substantial reduction in European unemployment from its present intolerable , demoralizing level will be achieved through structural reforms - especially those affecting the employment market , education and research - and through improving the competitiveness of business .
To be effective , however , those reforms are going to have to be universal , ambitious , socially sustainable and politically presentable .
Incidentally , an interesting new fact that emerged in Denver was the link that exists between demographics , social systems and budget deficits because of the irreversible problem of the ageing population , especially in Europe .
This ageing is significant .
A single figure proves the point : the ratio of the non-working to the working population is expected to increase from 25 % to 51 % between 1995 and 2040 .
In the absence of any change in policy , this trend will result in a long-term deterioration of public finances , and pension costs could increase from 3 to 4 % of GDP between now and 2030 .
So there is no escaping the need to continue the policy of budgetary adjustment .
The budgetary framework introduced by economic and monetary union , designed to re-establish the balance of public spending in the medium term , will release room for manoeuvre .
And that can be utilized to finance welfare and pension systems .
Over and above that , however , the need for progressive structural reforms was emphasized by the G7 , especially as regards the reform of the pension systems and the role delegated to the pension funds .
That , in essence , is one of the strong messages sent out both by the European Council in Amsterdam and by the G7 meeting in Denver .
Thirdly , we come to employment and the co-ordination of economic policies .
At the initiative of President Santer , the European Council in Amsterdam adopted a resolution on growth and employment , whereby the Member States , the Commission and the Council have given a firm commitment to make employment a top priority concern of the Union and a priority aim of their economic policies .
In this context , the European Council recalls that sound macroeconomic and budgetary policies go hand-in-hand with strong , sustainable growth in terms of output and employment .
Very symbolically , the European Council put both the resolution on the implementation of the Pact for Stability and Growth and the resolution on growth and employment under a single political umbrella : ' Stability , growth and employment ' .
The European Council adopted two guiding principles to strengthen the place of employment at the heart of economic policy .
The first was the development of the economic pillar of economic and monetary union .
According to Articles 102a and 103 of the Treaty , the broad guidelines will be extended to cover competitiveness , the employment market , technological innovation , education , training and taxation , with a view to harnessing all economic policy in the interests of employment .
In practice , the Council , acting on a proposal by the Commission , will be able to issue specific recommendations on these matters to the Member States .
This is a significant advance along the lines of better co-ordination of economic policies such as this House regularly demands .
The second guiding principle is the early implementation of the ' employment ' chapter of the Amsterdam Treaty , without even waiting for it to be ratified .
In this way , the Council will be able to make recommendations on employment policy .
Finally , it will have a legal basis for making practical decisions to promote employment .
The Commission will of course take full account of these two guiding principles in preparing the broad guidelines of economic policy for 1998 .
However , in order to be able to implement these European Council recommendations without delay , the Commission means to give concrete form to this new stimulus to employment , beginning with the extraordinary meeting of the European Council in Luxembourg devoted to this subject .
This Council will decide on the concrete form to be taken by the new initiatives for employment adopted in Amsterdam .
A particular priority here will be extending the role and activities of the EIB .
Another will be the ECSC , where it has been suggested that a reserve fund should be set up to use the proceeds of the income available from 2002 to speed up research in sectors linked to the coal and steel industry .
The Commission and Council have been invited to prepare , jointly with the EIB , a report on all these matters - and on many others , too , especially the SMEs - for this special European Council .
Parliament will , of course , be involved in our work .
This new stimulus to employment that has been decided on here in Europe will go hand-inhand with similar initiatives on a global scale - that decision was taken in Denver .
For example , we have the forthcoming meeting at Kobé in November 1997 , followed by the ' employment ' G7 early in 1998 at the initiative of the British Prime Minister .
In conclusion , may I emphasize the fact that both the Amsterdam Council and the G7 summit in Denver have sent out a message of optimism to Europe , a message that will help restore its self-confidence .
The European Union faced a more difficult initial situation than its American counterpart , but Europe today is pushing ahead on the path to economic progress and structural reform .
The first encouraging results are already apparent .
The prospects for growth in Europe have not been so favourable for some years , and their effects should soon be felt in terms of competitiveness and employment .
Finally , I should add that the impending introduction of the euro , in accordance with the conditions and timetable laid down in the Treaty , will provide a further boost to the recovery of economic activity in Europe .
Commissioner , you have referred to the irreversible problem of an ageing population in Europe , and you have also referred very frequently to the need for essential reforms .
So let me ask you a few questions : do you not think that one very important reform , intellectually , would be to review the excessively narrow concept of economic criteria that are accepted at these conferences , and that it might be high time to take account of a suggestion made by the World Summit on Social Development held in Copenhagen in 1995 which called for the child-rearing tasks performed within the family to be included in economic calculations ?
Do you not think that , since family policies in all European countries are recording a reduction in family purchasing power , that the time has surely come to reform our economic programmes and take account , at long last , of the wishes of those European couples , those European women , who would like to have children but are unable to do so because of economic constraints ?
Might not the best way to revitalize the economy in Europe be a process of demographic revitalization , which is a matter of political will and intellectual reform ?
For my part , I see no incompatibility between demographic revitalization , an intellectual reform and a straightforward recognition of economic realities .
Like it or not , Mrs Seillier , we are currently in a situation where the ' baby boom ' generation still forms part of the active population , but from 2010 onwards we shall have an extremely serious demographic shortfall in Europe .
The question that faces governments today is whether they may not already be able to address the problem , in political terms , to prevent today 's working generations from facing retirement with pensions that are not sufficient to enable them to live .
The issue today , Mrs Seillier , is to pursue our endeavours in the field of economic policy that are specifically designed to bring back to our national economies sufficient budgetary room to manoeuvre to enable them to bear the increasingly heavy burden of social spending in future years .
Of course , that is no obstacle at all to efforts to develop and strengthen the role of the family , in the context of child-rearing and family policy , though as far as that is concerned , I believe that personal considerations are often more important than purely economic ones .
Mr President , I was appointed on behalf of this House as rapporteur on the demographic situation in Europe .
It is not so long ago that this report was adopted by Parliament , on which occasion much attention was rightly paid to the ability to pay pensions .
If I may , I should like to differ from the Commissioner in regard to the fact of it being impossible to fund pensions in the future .
It is much more a question of making a start at the appropriate time and of applying the correct system .
In the past I asked for this question of pensions , including supplementary pensions , private pensions and government pensions , to be placed on the agenda of the European Commission .
Subsidiarity had previously applied in this area .
My specific question to the Commission is therefore : With a view to the employment summit can this become a matter for both the Commission and the national governments ?
I entirely agree with Mrs Boogerd-Quaak : we need to act before it is too late and take precautions to deal with this matter , though I must add that the problem is made worse by the fact that an ageing population means increasing expenditure on health .
After all , it is clear that more and more elderly people are often in need of care which is proving more and more costly .
In financial terms , then , the problem is complicated by the existence of a link between an ageing population and increasing expenditure on pensions and health care .
The Commission is of course taking a close interest in this matter , which is why , in my oral presentation , I made a point of stressing this problem of ageing .
At the discussions that took place in Denver , the Commission 's contribution on this subject was particularly extensive and much appreciated .
I can also tell Mrs Boogerd-Quaak that this question is primarily of concern to the Member States because , in view of the principle of subsidiarity and as the Treaty stands , we cannot act for the Member States . But this problem does indisputably have a Community dimension - a European dimension .
For this reason , and especially as we prepare for the extraordinary meeting of the European Council in Luxembourg before the end of this year , the proposals and recommendations that the Commission will make will take careful account of your suggestion .
The Commission will take steps to ensure that these questions are perceived by the Member States in a co-ordinated way , and in particular that they exchange information on the measures implemented by each of them .
I would add that very special attention will be paid to the problem of pension funds .
Mr President , I have two short questions for the Commissioner :
The first is : at the Summit Conference in Luxembourg will the Commission contribute to discussions concerning certain additional financial items to support employment policy ?
Because from Essen we know that employment policy cannot be made effective , or at least , jobs cannot be created , by words alone .
The second question is : I heard a Minister for Economics - one of those who took part in Amsterdam - saying at a public meeting that it is conceivable that the Euro 's beginning might be postponed for a year .
I know you will deny this , but I would like to hear you repeat it emphatically .
I can answer your second question immediately .
I was there , from start to finish : I was at the Council of Finance Ministers in Luxembourg early this month , I was at the European Council and I was at the Denver summit , and I never heard anyone mention the possibility of postponing the euro .
Indeed , on each occasion I found that all the participants -European and non-European , including the Americans - were firmly committed to complying with the timetable .
And that determination was reflected in the communiqués , decisions and official comments that were issued .
Secondly , and dealing more specifically with that European Council , I should perhaps add to what I said earlier : among the initiatives adopted in Amsterdam there is one that relates specifically to extending the role of the EIB , in three ways .
Firstly , by establishing a special facility to finance projects by high-technology SMEs ; secondly by broadening the scope of the bank 's interventions to education , health , the urban environment and environmental protection ; and lastly by easing the repayment period for loans to the trans-European networks .
I also said just now that funds would be released from the ECSC reserves , especially with a view to creating a research fund for research in sectors linked to the coal and steel industry .
I can also tell you that the Council will study initiatives to look into the possibilities of creating jobs for SMEs on the basis of a new report by the Advisory Committee on Competitiveness .
Finally , the Council will also study good practice in each Member State in employment policy .
On all these matters , I believe that the mandate is sufficiently detailed and sufficiently substantial to enable to Commission to present specific proposals to the European Council - proposals capable of bringing at least a partial answer to the present problems of unemployment .
Mr President , thank you for taking up the question of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We have seen over recent decades that most jobs have come from small firms , that new enterprises can create a great many jobs and that the SLIM initiatives in particular are designed to relieve the burden on these firms and can therefore also produce greater competitiveness .
What do you think the chances are in Luxembourg of making use of the training programmes , by increasing the appropriations for this area ?
For I believe that training is the only means of really efficient job-creation .
There are two different answers to your question .
First , training is a critical requirement of SMEs .
That is undeniable , it is clear , and we are working on it .
But training is also one of the essential aspects to be implemented in the context of the ambitious Europe-wide structural policies which we must pursue in order to remedy the structural causes of unemployment .
Secondly , bearing in mind the importance of the contribution made by the SMEs in terms of employment , the emphasis placed on these enterprises goes well beyond the aspect of training alone .
In particular , the new approach being asked of the EIB - that it should release resources to enable SMEs , especially those working in leading-edge sectors which , by definition , are the ones that create jobs - should enable more resources to be made available to the SMEs .
I would add , on this point , that the Commission has already tabled a number of proposals and made a number of recommendations which are , or have been , under consideration by Parliament .
They are now in the hands of the Council , but some of them have been blocked at that level , and I deplore that .
Even so , it will not prevent us , as we prepare for the special European Council in Luxembourg , from attaching particular importance to the SMEs and to their role in the campaign against the structural causes of unemployment ; and , of course , within that framework , very special attention will be paid to questions of training .
Mr Commissioner , today you have mentioned that the economic environment is favourable to improving the economic position of the Member States .
The Italian papers have certainly emphasized the points you made about Italy from the statements you made yesterday .
And we all remember the snapshot of Italy you gave us in this Chamber a couple of months ago .
I now want to ask you two questions .
Taking advantage of your presence here today , I would like to hear from your own lips your view of the situation in Italy and your opinion of Italy 's chances of meeting the criteria .
And secondly , what is the main reason for this change in the Italian position ?
In reply to your second question , Mr Arroni , I would say that the political intent is certainly that of the Italian Government .
What I said about Italy yesterday was the result of an analysis , a finding that shows that Italy is currently achieving highly impressive advances when it comes to economic convergence .
And if Italy achieves the ambitions that its government has adopted , it will this year have achieved the greatest reduction in public indebtedness achieved by any European country in the last 15 years .
Otherwise , as the government has not yet officially disclosed its convergence programme , I could not offer any precise assessment of it in public .
Having said that , and bearing in mind the facts known to me , I did say that the objectives put forward , especially in the Italian ' Economic and financial planning document ' , are sound .
Moreover , the areas singled out by the government for budgetary reform are appropriate : pensions , social security , the civil service and the broadening of the tax base .
I also added , and this may have received less coverage in the press , that the moment of truth would come in September when the government presents specific measures designed to give concrete form to these objectives , measures which , I believe , will be included in the 1998 budget .
So it is out of the question at this stage to launch a premature examination , to make the Member States undergo a qualification test .
The examination will take place in March 1998 , based on the real results for 1997 .
What I can say today is that there is no doubt that the situation in Italy is developing along the right lines .
That is encouraging , and it suggests to me that , if countries have the necessary political will comply with the timetables and conditions set out in the Maastricht Treaty for joining the single currency , they will succeed in doing so .
Mr President , measures to get Europe back to work , that was the Commissioner 's message to us today from Amsterdam .
And we listened to it and certainly see it as a positive step .
But I would like the Commission to tell me what action it is now taking to define the basic economic policy measures the Community and the Member States should take .
If you , the Commission , and if the European Council took the recommendations by this House seriously and incorporated them in your own proposals , we might have different economic and employment policy results from those we have seen in the past following from your recommendations .
Please tell us how this can be changed , for what the EU ministers of finance proposed in the past was not enough to really get Europe back to work .
My second question , Commissioner , is as follows : I fully appreciate that you are also concerned with the international role of the euro .
But I would like to know one thing : are you also thinking of the consumer , of consumer protection ?
When will we finally have a regulation to ensure that EU consumers do not bear the costs of conversion ?
When will we finally have a regulation that also ensures that no dual pricing system will be introduced ?
First , Mrs Randzio-Plath , if you carefully study the conclusions of the European Council in Amsterdam - something I am not going to do here , though I am willing to go through them with you in person - you will find that the concerns of the European Parliament , especially those expressed in its resolutions on the Pact for Stability and Growth , have been extensively taken into consideration .
Not only that , but I personally have taken the trouble , during recent discussions , to try to persuade the Council to adopt as many as possible of the ideas put forward by Parliament .
Secondly , you ask what initiative we are going to take .
In my speech just now I spoke in general terms about the approaches that have been selected , both in terms of co-ordination of economic policy and in terms of employment policy , and what we were going to do to follow them through .
Confining myself to essentials , I think the first thing to do is to ensure that the content of Articles 102a and 103 is more oriented towards employment .
That is why the broad guidelines of economic policy are going to be widened - as you will see when we present them next year - to take more account of competitiveness , the employment market , technological innovation , education , training and taxation .
That may not be the end of it , because we shall , if appropriate , pursuant to Article 103 ( 4 ) of the Treaty , propose to the Council that it makes recommendations on these matters to the Member States .
In other words , there is a parallel between the powers of recommendation we have exercised so far in budgetary matters and those that we can extend into the economic field .
Secondly , as far as employment is concerned , I think I answered your question earlier when I said that we were going to take maximum advantage of the fact that the ' employment ' chapter of the Amsterdam Treaty will be implemented even before that Treaty has been ratified , thus providing a legal basis for more specific action .
All these points are currently the subject of in-depth examination and analysis .
I look forward to reporting back to you very soon , once the Commission 's services have made progress with this work , and I can assure you that I shall keep you closely informed of the way our ideas are developing on this matter .
Regarding the consumer aspect , we organized a round table discussion on 15 May which enabled us to identify a number of specific , practical problems including dual pricing or labelling , the date of issue of the banknotes , how long dual circulation should continue , etc .
Following that round table , we organized and are now holding a number of workshops with consumers , banks and businesses , subject by subject .
My objective would be to arrange two general meetings on these issues - one in autumn and the other in March - to see what solutions we can find to these problems , bearing in mind that it would be preferable to avoid resorting to regulation if possible .
Our European Union already suffers from paralysis brought about by excessive regulation , and I would prefer it to err on the side of dynamism and consensus .
At this stage , then , our work is geared to a quest for consensus , the objective being of course to enable us , when we make public the decision on the list of countries joining the euro in late April or early May 1998 , at the same time to give specific answers to consumers on the specific questions they ask .
What I can promise you now is that these practical matters are one of the essential areas on which the Commission is currently working .
Mr President , the European Parliament has called for the whole economic cycle of a Member State 's economy to be considered when determining whether it has an excessive deficit .
This is wise , so as to ensure that a Member State which finds itself in difficulties is not driven ever deeper into the economic mire .
However , the conclusions of the Amsterdam summit concerning the Agreement on Stability and Growth contain a direct reference to the Council declaration , which in turn stresses adherence to very strict , automatic procedures for assessing excessive deficits .
They are to lead quite directly to fines .
Is this not extremely unwise ?
How is this to be reconciled with your efforts to promote employment , or was the declaration on employment needed purely to enable the French to return home in safety ?
My first answer to that is that the Stability Pact is absolutely and completely consistent with the Maastricht Treaty .
I would refer you to Article 104c of the Treaty , which states that the Council may resolve upon sanctions if certain conditions are present .
In the present case , the Pact for Stability and Growth preserves the autonomy of the Commission intact in terms of its power of initiative , and preserves the autonomy of the Council intact in terms of its normal powers of decision granted to it by the Treaty .
The Pact for Stability and Growth is a code of conduct , a guide to behaviour , which is intended to specify the conditions and timetable for the necessary action to restore budgetary equilibrium .
I can tell you , Mrs Hautala , that as far as I know public deficits do not create jobs .
I see this equally in the United States and the European Union - I am not talking about France , have no fear - and in the other European countries .
In recent years , those countries which have done most to reduce their public deficits have also seen the strongest growth and created the most jobs .
I am looking here especially at the Dutch presidency .
This is no obstacle to undertaking structural reforms , but , both in Denver and in Amsterdam , the Heads of State and Government of every country did indeed stress the fact that there is a link of compatibility , I would even call it a synergistic effect , between the pursuit of a sound economic policy , the reduction of the public deficit , the stimulation of growth and the creation of jobs .
I wonder if you would care to comment on the use of the Euro by international companies in the European Union .
In those countries which have the right to opt out , or which may not be eligible at the start of monetary union , do you foresee large international companies using the Euro in practice and for accountancy needs , thus allowing the Euro to evolve in those countries as a recognized currency ?
Will the Commission be making sure there is a legal base for that to happen ?
Let me reassure Mr Provan .
Of course international companies , even if they are not based in a euro country , will be able to use the euro .
At present , the regulations adopted on the legal status of the euro are specifically designed to provide sufficient legal guarantees to ensure that the euro can be used by every enterprise in the world that wishes to use it .
Secondly , I can pass on the news that the Commission has been working with , among others , those responsible for the finance markets on extremely technical matters of financial conventions and denominations , with a view to trying to lay down rules , at the request of the financial operators themselves , to ensure that the euro can be used on a harmonious basis .
My third comment is this : clearly , if the euro is a good currency , in other words a stable currency , it will be an alternative to the dollar and it will be in demand among investors wanting to diversify their portfolios .
So the euro is bound to grow and its use is bound to become more widespread as a trading currency and a payment currency and , also , a reserve currency .
Commissioner , I should like to take another brief look at the specific proposals to boost employment which the Commission believes it can implement as a direct outcome of the European Council resolution in Amsterdam .
Does the Commission believe that that resolution , the new chapter on employment and the integration of the social protocol amount to a sufficiently ambitious and explicit political commitment to enable the Union , between now and the implementation of the single currency , effectively to address the crucial and dominant problem of unemployment in Europe , and to respond to the urgent need and sometimes desperate anxiety of the social groups affected by it ?
Or is the Commission perhaps inclined to consider , with sadness , that the conclusions of the European Council as summarized in the resolution on growth and employment merely encompass a few generalities suitable for firstyear students of political economy , bearing witness to the timid and often inconsistent vision of a minimalist Europe capitulating in the face of some of the serious difficulties that confront it - the social problem in this case ?
To summarize , Commissioner , I doubt whether your apparent optimism is shared by our eighteen million unemployed .
First , let me say that I quite agree that jobs cannot be created with documents and treaties .
Nor can we give Europe back the confidence it needs to rediscover its drive and create new jobs if we are constantly going to throw in the towel and adopt the pessimistic view .
Today , when Europe has the necessary know-how and is rediscovering the secret of growth , the best way of providing the necessary stimulus and will to succeed is by encouraging the people , not discouraging them .
Secondly , the introduction of the euro will form an integral part of the solution to the problem of unemployment , because the euro will bring Europe greater growth .
It will also enable Europe to eliminate the monetary fluctuations - ' competitive devaluations ' as they were once known in certain quarters in France - which cost Europe a million and a half additional people unemployed in a two year period , 1995 to 1996 .
I believe , then , that the contribution made by the euro to growth in Europe will also be a valuable contribution to the struggle against unemployment .
But the majority of unemployment is structural , and so structural reforms must be our primary aim , now more than ever .
That means reducing the burden on the low paid , it means giving flexibility to the employment market , it means education , it means learning , training , all those fields of endeavour where perseverance and determination are required .
Once again , on returning from the United States after seeing the Americans and talking to them , I realized that Europe was certainly no weaker than the United States but that we had one flaw - we don 't believe in ourselves .
And I believe that the role of politicians , of whatever party , today is to give back Europe 's citizens that confidence in themselves .
Mr President , there is a rather unusual , not to say original , question I should like to put to the European Commissioner .
At the G8 meeting in Denver , which was notable for the lack of any positive decisions as far as Europe was concerned , a notable event was a cowboy evening paying homage to the American world order .
The President of the European Commission , Mr Santer , like most of the leading figures present with the exception of Mr Blair , who refused , received a present in the form of a gold watch of very considerable value .
Commissioner , might not this gift be an opportunity for the Commission and Parliament to set up a museum to store and exhibit all the gifts received in the course of their official duties by European Union dignitaries - Parliament , Council and Commission alike ?
I feel that this would be the best way to demonstrate to European public opinion , to the citizens of Europe , the keen interest which we all share in the preservation of integrity and transparency .
Do you wish to reply , Mr Commissioner ?
I have taken careful note of the Honourable Member 's suggestion .
Personally , I have not received any such gifts .
As for museums , let 's have museums by all means , but do we want to bury Europe in museums ?
To get back to employment policy , Commissioner , among the means available you mentioned recourse to broad economic guidelines , the extension of those guidelines and the Council 's recommendations on employment .
In particular , you also talked about extending the role of the European Investment Bank and making use of ECSC funds .
I wonder if you could tell us what effects these two eminently practical ideas can be expected to have on employment .
After all , as the Vice-President of the European Investment Bank , Mr Roth , has said , the Bank already takes account of employment problems in the investment projects it finances .
On the other hand , the ECSC funds are not disposable funds - they are funds that come from industry and they cannot simply be appropriated and put to work for a Keynesian project .
I should like to ask the Commissioner what the European Council had in mind when it settled on these two very practical ideas .
Thank you for that question , Mr Fayot .
I could spend two hours answering it , because it is technically complex .
To keep things as simple as I can , what we are asking of the EIB is first that it should give easier , quicker access to credit , and secondly that it should reduce the cost of that credit to small- and mediumsized enterprises operating in high technology areas .
So what we are talking about are specific , targeted schemes that will enable the EIB out of its own resources - out of its reserves , if I can put it that way - to provide easier access to borrowing for enterprises which need loans in order to expand , and this idea holds out promise for the future because the sectors concerned are the developing sectors of so-called high technology .
As for the ECSC , as you know , it holds substantial reserves which it is obliged to retain because it has to cover the loans it has made to industry .
The ECSC will cease to exist on 23 July 2002 .
A number of loans will still remain active , will still have a few years to run .
So , as long as those loans need to be covered , the reserves will remain .
The interesting point is that the European Council said that since those reserves were set up on the basis of a levy on the coal and steel industries , then when those reserves can be released they must be given to a fund which will enable research to be promoted in the industries connected with that sector .
So , instead of ending up with this money being handed over to some unspecified recipient , we can feel certain that it will be appropriated and used to best effect to facilitate research , because research stimulates employment and because not enough research is being done in Europe .
Mr President , now that it is becoming increasingly likely or almost certain that we will have the euro , I should like to ask the Commissioner what will happen to Europe 's green currency system ?
Will there soon be a green euro or when does the Commission envisage making concrete proposals in this area so that Europe will also have a single euro in the field of agriculture ?
That is a very good question .
We are already giving thought to that .
What I can say is that the euro will simplify the situation , at least for the countries in the euro zone .
Consequently , in agri-monetary matters , the difficulties that have arisen as a result of changes in exchange rates , and which have had agri-monetary repercussions , will disappear .
So that will simplify the situation .
Secondly , there will still be a problem to be sorted out with the non-euro States that are members of the European Union .
The technical aspects of these matters are currently under consideration , and I can assure you that all the arrangements will be made to ensure that , as soon as the euro comes into existence , any difficulties that may still persist will be eliminated .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Takeover bids
The next item on the agenda is the report , drawn up by Mrs Fontaine on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a thirteenth European Parliament and Council Directive on company law concerning takeover bids ( COM ( 95 ) 0655 - C4-0107 / 96-95 / 0341 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0204 / 97 ) .
I have received a request from the UPE group pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure for the report to be referred back to committee .
I call upon Mr Florio to move this request .
Mr President , we have made this request because we believe the issue needs to be examined more deeply .
We would point out that this proposal from the Commission began life as a proposal for a recommendation and then made enormous strides , turning into a proposal for a directive .
The consultations were geared to the proposal for a recommendation and not to the proposal for a directive it has transformed itself into on its travels .
Now in the light of these considerations , the determination and the conviction has grown in my group that it is right to go further into the matter in committee and also , perhaps , to deal in parallel with the imminent - or almost imminent - discussion of the directive on the European limited company .
So , on behalf of my group , I support the request for reference back to committee .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Socialists I should like to tell the House that the matter was debated at length in the Committee for Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , taking account of all considerations and all aspects .
It seems to me that there is no point in referring it back to committee now .
I therefore suggest that we keep it on the agenda .
I put the request to refer the report back to committee to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request ) I call upon the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine .
Mr President , the report on takeover bids which I have the honour of presenting to this House on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights cannot be considered outside its historical context , and I hope you will allow me to say a few words on that subjects .
It was in 1989 that the Commission , noting the proliferation of takeover bids , both friendly and hostile , in the European private sector , took the initiative of proposing the adoption at Community level of a number of joint provisions governing these practices .
In actual fact , the Commission 's proposal was nothing less than a harmonization directive .
This House added a few amendments , but approved the proposal as a whole , in a report adopted back in January 1990 .
Since then , however , the truth is that the matter has been continuously blocked by the Council .
Today , therefore , the Commission is suggesting a new approach .
That approach takes the form of a framework directive establishing general principles applicable to takeover bids , without making any attempt to achieve detailed harmonization of the rules in force in the various Member States .
It should be noted , incidentally , that since 1989 the Member States , one after the other , have made certain arrangements to regulate this matter .
The new approach by the Commission is consistent with the undertaking given at Edinburgh in 1992 to respect the principle of subsidiarity and leave the Member States free to implement the principles set out in the directive , making due allowance for their national traditions and practices .
Also , in the present case , this new approach is designed as an escape from the dead end created by the Council .
It is common knowledge that the fiercest opposition has come from those Member States which felt that the harmonization initially suggested went beyond what was desirable or desired .
In this context , you rapporteur felt strongly - and I hope Mr Florio is listening - that the Legal Affairs Committee should first give very careful consideration to the appropriateness of this new line proposed to us by the Commission .
That was , as it were , a preliminary question which I put to the Legal Affairs Committee before any consideration of the merits of the instrument .
Was legislation necessary or not ?
And if so , was a directive the right way to go about it ?
Should it be approached in the limited way proposed by the Commission ?
The Legal Affairs Committee once again , after very careful study , answered both these questions in the affirmative .
It instructed your rapporteur to continue her work along those lines - the lines of a directive of minimal harmonization , as the Legal Affairs Committee considers that the extreme diversity of national legislation means that takeover operations cannot be effected with the necessary degree of legal certainty to protect both minority shareholders and the employees of the companies targeted .
It considers that an attempt at harmonization - even with limited objectives , even , let us be frank , a somewhat timid attempt - would nevertheless make it possible to establish a degree of fairness between the various stock market players , acting as a deterrent to purely speculative raids by the strongest of those players .
I should add , ladies and gentlemen , that the argument along the lines of ' hold on , don 't let 's do anything until the fifth directive on worker participation , the tenth directive on cross-border mergers and the draft plan for the European company have been unfrozen ' is too reminiscent of the ' web of Penelope ' , which of course was never finished at all .
These various projects -unfortunately blocked by the Council for years - have no sufficiently direct links with the subject before us today to justify a universal freeze .
Indeed , the signal we are going to send could mark the start of a long-awaited thaw in this area of Community company law .
With regard to the substance , therefore , our guiding principle was not to try to make the text more restrictive , knowing that the same causes would once again produce the same effects and the text would again be rejected by the Council . Adopting a pragmatic and efficient approach , we tried to make it clearer , more precise , but also more dynamic in view of its intended subsequent application by the Member States .
That was the thinking that prompted our amendments defining the offeror , protecting minority shareholders and specifying the functions of the supervisory authority .
Finally , and as we did earlier in 1990 , we stressed the need for clear information for the employees .
Some of our amendments , adopted from the excellent report by Mr Hughes on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , are particularly designed to enable employee information to be improved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following on from the Amsterdam summit , which recorded a few timid steps forward towards giving the European Union that social dimension which it so grievously lacks , I hope this House will show that in such areas we will not accept paralysis or prevarication .
I hope with all my heart that this House will approve the views expressed by its Legal Affairs Committee and its Social Affairs Committee in favour of this directive and the amendments we propose to give concrete form to our desire for transparency , equity and social equilibrium in the European single market .
Mr President , first of all and not merely out of politeness or custom - I must congratulate Mrs Fontaine on the work she has done on a text which has an extraordinarily light touch .
Mrs Fontaine is to be congratulated because she has attempted to make the content of that text a little clearer although within the limitations which she has pointed out .
In fact , as she herself has said here and indicated in her report , Mrs Fontaine did doubt whether it was worth continuing to consider this directive and spending much time on it .
She decided that it was and I congratulate her on the work she has done .
Moreover , an attempt was made to put some flesh on the bones of this directive by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and by means of some amendments .
In fact the present proposal for a directive is an exercise which seems to me to have fairly limited results . That is because the principle of subsidiarity is applied to overcome the hurdle of opposition within the Council in giving its agreement to previous proposals .
This is one of the cases in which the principle of subsidiarity has been used in a rather forced manner , because if this matter falls within the jurisdiction of the Member States , then all company law , or the greater part of company law , will fall within the jurisdiction of the States .
And company law is not the same in Britain for example as on the continent .
The British have very much put the brakes on this draft directive - I would mention that it was the government of the day - and it might in fact be said that there are many aspects of company law which are specific to AngloSaxon law and do not necessarily contain a Community dimension .
However , the rapporteur points out - and I think this is important - that when we are aiming for a global approach , as we are now - it is clear that the European Union is not responding in this field of company law as might be expected when , strange to say , all aspects of trade are taking on a more international and global character and becoming ever more alike .
I remember that when , many years ago , I was studying comparative law it was pointed out to me that it was not possible to harmonize everything and the example of family law and divorce law was quoted .
This appears however to be practically harmonized throughout almost all the Union and , in contrast , we have company law which is not .
I hope at least this text will be approved .
We shall vote in favour with some amendments because something is better than nothing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal takes account of the principle of subsidiarity , on the basis of the experience gained with the aforementioned 1989 proposal , which failed .
So the proposal simply sets out an objective , a framework , and by and large leaves its practical implementation to the Member States .
However , this only minimally attains the objective of ensuring that the shareholders of listed companies will enjoy equal protection in the single market in the event of a takeover .
In view of the very divergent rules on takeover bids in the various Member States , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and my group rightly asked whether a recommendation might not have been more appropriate than a directive .
I personally would have preferred a recommendation , although there were good reasons for the decision to opt for a framework directive .
If we are to avoid distortions of competition and make the stock markets more transparent and give minority shareholders at least minimum protection , we need a minimum of legal certainty .
Given the wide differences between national provisions on takeover bids , this legal certainty can only be achieved by fixing a legal framework of action , however minimal .
The main way to ensure that the individual participants in the stock market act along the same lines is through harmonization and not through voluntary codes of conduct .
In terms of content , the Legal Affairs Committee has made it even clearer that the Commission proposal is a framework directive by nature .
Thus the report contains some amendments that give the Member States even more margin for reverting to their national systems .
The directive goes into some basic points either too briefly or not at all .
They include , for instance , the definition of minority shareholders , the inclusion of concerted action in the scope of the directive and the definition of cases in which the Member States can authorize their supervisory authorities to grant exceptions to the provisions of the directive .
Taking account of the difficulties I have mentioned , I believe the Commission proposal nevertheless deserves our full approval , in the version proposed by the rapporteur .
Mr President , first of all I would like to dispel any possible doubts .
I have the greatest respect and esteem for the outstanding work the rapporteur has done and my request , on behalf of my group , to refer the report back to committee was not intended and is not intended in any way to sound like a criticism of the work carried out by Mrs Fontaine .
As has already been said , the proposal for a framework directive on takeover bids is the result of an earlier initiative .
In 1989 the European Commission had already proposed a classic harmonization directive , but it was not agreed by the Council .
Then , when the single market came into force , the Commission at first proposed a recommendation , which I mentioned just now , and then a framework directive containing certain general principles , with the purpose of creating similar conditions in all the Member States , leaving them a wide margin of manoeuvre .
So the Commission feels the current extreme diversity of national legislation does not permit takeover bid operations to be carried out in a context where rights are satisfactorily protected , and a mild harmonization - even if the Commission would have initially preferred a genuine directive which would be more binding - would at least allow some fairness to be introduced between the various players in the stock markets .
The directive contains a number of points like this , which I shall not go through , but the Member States are left very wide opportunities to legislate in different ways .
In a field like this , linked to the free movement of capital , we think it would have been more appropriate to identify a larger number of precise common rules .
This has not been done .
So with some regret , we find that when serious and important decisions have to be taken , the European Union does not succeed in taking them in common .
Mr President , on behalf of the Liberal group I would like to say that we have serious doubts about this phase of the work .
We are of the opinion that currently there are more important matters of company law requiring our efforts .
By this , I mean the enormous problems which companies experience with genuine cross border operations .
Vigorous action is needed , based on the report by the Davignon group ; standardised taxation for companies operating in more than one Member State and we need to look into how we can handle the deficit .
This is where we should be concentrating our efforts now and I hope that the Commission will commence work seriously on this .
It is well known that the situation regarding take-overs varies in different Member States . The previous speaker has already mentioned this .
Some countries have precise legal systems while others have voluntary systems in place .
I hope that these will still be secure under the Directive even after the Commission 's scrutiny of it .
Even if we are talking about a framework Directive , there are issues in a framework Directive which ought to be specified .
The proposal on applicable law , for example .
I do not think the Commission 's proposal or the proposal which resulted from the discussion in committee are satisfactory ; Article 3.2 in particular .
This is why we have made an amendment proposal for this particular point .
I also think that it is important that we give real protection to minority share holders when we adopt such a Directive .
This is not the case in Article 10 .
This is why we have made our amendment proposal .
Ladies and gentlemen , I also think that the legal committee has made several proposals which are out of place in the modern world .
For example , the proposed obligation that a report be published annually for five years after the take-over showing how employment has progressed .
This gives employment but not real competitive jobs .
Mr President , I should also like to join in the congratulations to Mrs Fontaine .
She must feel as if she is receiving a bouquet of flowers .
She dealt with this matter in committee very well .
She united the committee at the end of the final vote , with the exception of two abstentions and Mr Cassidy voting against the overall committee decision .
I think it would need a miracle by the Archangel Gabriel to persuade Mr Cassidy to come round to our position .
The 1989 original directive has already been very well explained in this House .
This directive is very much reduced .
It is very temperate in its tone because it has taken into consideration what happened in the Council in 1989 and 1990 .
The United Kingdom has the highest rate of takeovers and takeover battles throughout the European Union .
There were something like 1 , 500 in the years 1995 / 96 .
It also has the excellent reputation because of the takeover panel of having knowledge of these particular matters .
We accept that and the proposal goes a long way to accepting that .
In Article 6 it says that the supervisory authority can be a non-regulatory body .
The takeover panel in Britain has been catered for with that amendment .
Hostile takeovers are now being seen across Europe .
Krupp / Thyssen will be seen as just an interlude when we see the massive hostile takeovers of the future .
Therefore , the Socialist Group takes the view that it is in the interest of competition policy in this field that we have some form of regulatory law in these matters .
Concerning the Commission 's hostility to Amendment No 11 , in 1995-96 in my country alone 12 , 500 job losses were due to takeovers and mergers .
Amendment No 12 calls for those people who have funds or shares in the companies involved through their occupational pension funds - a growing number of people throughout Europe - to be involved in any final decision on these matters .
I understand the Commission is concerned about this . If it wants to come back with different legislation , for example the pensions directive which is before the Council now , we could take this into consideration .
In conclusion , the challenge to this House is Anglo-American law and whether Anglo-American law will supersede the European model .
I hope and trust this House will reject that proposition .
Anglo-American law has caused us grievous problems in the United Kingdom and I do not want to see it here .
I am sure when it comes to the conciliation procedure with the Council , Mrs Fontaine will fight strongly on behalf of Parliament for our amendments .
Mr President , I shall retain only one point from the speech I had prepared and that is to congratulate the rapporteur on her competent work .
She did indeed manage to steer the ship of the European Parliament report with a masterly hand and I am sure she will manage to bring it safe to harbour .
Having said that , I wish to make a broader analysis centred upon the debate between those wanting to regulate company law by means of a recommendation - which is why a request has been made for this report to be referred back to committee - and those who advocate that it should be regulated by means of a directive or at least a framework directive .
After Amsterdam , Mr President , our next challenge is the third phase of Monetary Union and if that is to have any chance of success - and Europe needs this third phase of Monetary Union to be a success - we need to complete the internal market .
When we arrive at that point we realise that there is one sector where there has been no progress as regards the internal market for the past twenty years and that is the companies sector .
But that is paradoxical because the companies sector was the pioneer in European integration - the sector which gave the first spur to the internal market .
This sector has made no progress for twenty years and now we are told that we should not issue a directive - which has had a most complicated ten-year history - but rather a recommendation .
That is strange because I have also heard from the lips of the very people advocating the recommendation , that this directive does not go far enough and needs to aim at greater integration ; they also argue , on a matter which is unconnected with this point , that we should be in a better position to lay down suitable rules if we waited until the Davignon report was finished and then issued a directive on the European limited liability company .
I wonder , Mr President , what this constitutes .
In Spain this is known as institutional filibustering and is tantamount to hoping to arrest the progress of the vessel of the European Union and there are two words behind this - one is subsidiarity and , paradoxically , the other is globalization .
And between Scylla and Charybdis a realistic policy must be put into practice as my colleague from the Socialist group , Mr Verdi i Aldea , so rightly said .
This directive is , in my opinion , insufficient but it is a first and absolutely essential step which we hope will be followed by other steps which are also absolutely essential in the field of company law .
Mr President , naturally I join in the chorus of praise for the efforts of the rapporteur .
However , I would warn her with the Latin phrase ' Timeo Danaos et dona ferentis ' which means : Fear the Greeks even when they bring gifts .
May I suggest to the rapporteur that she should look very carefully at compliments coming from the direction of Mr Falconer because they come from a suspect source .
I have no criticisms at all of the work of the rapporteur .
Within limits she has done a competent and workmanlike job .
My criticism is aimed at the Commission .
This proposal is the wrong proposal .
The comment has already been made by Mrs Palacio and Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn that they would have preferred a recommendation rather than a directive .
That is a perfectly legitimate point and I know the rapporteur raised it in committee .
But this draft directive does not deal with the fundamental problem , namely that cross-border takeovers in Europe are extremely difficult to bring about and every country , or most countries , have barriers to takeovers .
The great argument is that we must look after jobs and so on .
But jobs will be much more in peril unless we succeed through cross-border takeovers in creating world size companies which will enable us to compete with the Americans , Japanese and others .
The proposal in Amendment No 23 by Mr Falconer and others that investment fund managers who manage portfolio fund investments should be excluded from the takeover proceedings is simply out of touch with reality since most of those institutions represent pension funds which represent the savings of workers all over Europe .
This proposal is the wrong proposal .
I voted against it in committee and I shall vote against it tomorrow in plenary .
I urge many others who have doubts about it to do the same .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission , I congratulate Vice-President Fontaine , on her fine report on this important measure in the area of company law .
I think we can all agree on one point : the situation in the Community as regards takeover bids and the protection of minority shareholders where control of a company quoted on the stock exchange changes hands , is currently characterized by a mass of different rules which are fragmenting the market .
In the light of the progressive integration of European financial markets , the Commission regards this as a real obstacle to the operation of the single market .
As you know - and this has been mentioned - the previous attempt to remedy this situation was not very successful .
The proposal for a directive drafted at the end of the ' 80s , and amended in 1990 to take account of the opinion of Parliament , met with strong resistance from some Member States .
The discussions made it clear that it would be difficult to reconcile certain fundamental differences through a directive geared to detailed harmonization of takeover bids , all the more so as the detailed harmonization approach has to some extent had its day , not just in this specific case but in general .
That is why this proposal is inspired by the spirit of subsidiarity , as Mrs Fontaine has mentioned .
So some people seemed to want a recommendation , and others seemed to want a more meaningful , more detailed directive .
We have opted for a framework directive , which sets some minimum principles and conditions while leaving it to Member States to apply it in the way that corresponds best to their own traditions and structures , and that includes self-regulation codes .
The Commission 's basic objectives are to ensure that , throughout the single market , shareholders of a company quoted on the stock exchange enjoy the same guarantees if control changes hands , and that there are minimum rules governing the progress and transparency of takeover operations .
It is crucial to ensure that when a takeover bid is launched , it takes place in a context of legal security where all the interested parties are aware of the conditions they need to operate under .
The Commission can accept the majority of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , with slight changes to the wording of Amendments Nos. 1 , 4 and 6 .
But at this stage it cannot accept Amendment No 17 , on the acceptance period for the offer because , in the light of the general economy of the text and its purposes , the reasons for it do not seem sufficiently clear .
The Commission reserves the right to reconsider its position on this point at a later stage of the parliamentary process .
Mr President , as regards the social aspects - and here I also want to thank the Committee on Social Affairs , Employment and Working Conditions and Mr Hughes - the Commission is in favour of the inclusion of the general principle of protection of jobs , contained in Amendment No 11 .
However it cannot accept two related amendments - Amendment No 13 , information on employed personnel and Amendment No 21 , consultation of employees by the management of the company affected by the takeover bid .
We find it difficult to reconcile these two amendments with the concept of a framework directive and with the principle of subsidiarity .
We accept Amendment No 14 , but with a less rigid wording , and Amendment No 16 only partially .
We cannot accept Amendment No 12 because it is not clear to us how people who are shareholders as a result of choices made by the managers of institutional investment funds can be involved in the procedure for carrying out a takeover bid .
We tend to think this matter , which relates to the management of pension funds , should instead be regulated at the national level .
Amendments Nos 23 , 25 , 26 , 28 and , in part , No 27 , presented during today 's sitting , cannot be accepted by the Commission . However we can accept Amendment No 24 , and the part of Amendment No 27 which provides for information of employees within a reasonable time after publication of the offer .
I hope the European Parliament will continue to support our initiative and I agree with what has been said about the fact that there are other important initiatives on the ground : cross-border operations , the European company statute , the need for coordination of taxation systems . But , like the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , I do not see how sending back this proposal can help solve the other problems .
Prompt and positive consideration of this proposal can make an important contribution to breaking the deadlock on all these matters .
Finally , Mr President , we have in drafting the proposal taken particular account of the concerns expressed by British MEPs and in Britain generally .
The directive , as drafted , is intended to keep the UK take-over system as intact as possible .
Litigation in the form of judicial review in the UK is already a possibility , although it is not a common tactic due to the reluctance of the English courts to intervene during a bid , as is the right of an injured party to sue for damages .
The directive itself explicity encourages voluntary control to be exercised by the supervisory authority in order to avoid recourse to administrative or judicial action .
I want to reassure those Members of Parliament concerned that we are as concerned as they are about these aspects and we tried to devise a mechanism that , while providing a framework directive , causes the least disturbance possible to a wellestablished and well-functioning system like the British one .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
Dangerous preparations
The next item on the agenda is the report , drawn up by Mrs Baldi on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations ( COM ( 96 ) 0347 - C4-0426 / 96-96 / 0200 ( COD ) ) ( A4-0186 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dangerous preparations are currently governed by Directive No 88 / 379 , which regulates their classification , packaging and labelling .
The Commission 's proposal , which we are now examining at first reading , is designed to update the directive in question , bringing together Community legislation on dangerous preparations in a single act .
This proposed directive introduces changes to the 1988 directive geared to extending the scope of the directive on dangerous preparations to five new sectors , viz : 1 ) environmental classification and labelling ; the original directive only covered the criterion of classification and labelling , with the wording ' dangerous to health ' ; 2 ) pesticides and biocides , as the directive on classification , packaging and labelling of the parasiticides will be repealed ; 3 ) safety data sheets , which the manufacturers must provide for preparations not classified as dangerous ; 4 ) explosives , for which professional users must provide a safety data sheet ; 5 ) labelling of certain sensitisers , by which products containing sensitisers , even below the normal limit for classification , must be labelled .
The great majority of changes introduced are important because they are linked to the assessment of preparations as a function of the dangers they represent for the environment , harmonizing with the seventh updating , in line with technical progress , of Directive No 67 / 548 on dangerous substances which is closely linked to the directive we are now discussing in this Chamber .
The aim has been to follow a process of harmonization of existing legislation on chemical substances and , while the proposal may not be easy for those not involved in the work to understand , it is also necessary to remember that the role of Parliament is to give political direction .
Nevertheless I would remind you that assessment of the dangers of a preparation is based on determination of the following indicators of the danger of a substance : physical and chemical properties , properties with effects on health , environmental properties .
What needs to be underlined once again is the importance of harmonizing the existing legislation , because different legislation currently in force in the various Member States on classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations , constitutes , as the Commission has rightly shown , an obstacle to intra-Community trade , sustaining unequal competitive conditions and having a negative effect on the functioning of the internal market .
So a directive geared to regulate this sector is welcome , as long as consumer protection is always given priority .
It is precisely to protect the health and safety of European citizens that we want the directive to introduce high safety standards in all the Member States : hence the requirement for safety data sheets , labelling of certain sensitisers and so on .
Citizens have the right to see their health protected and this can be done through clear and transparent information , and legible and easily recognizable labelling .
We have acted to ensure this by including , amongst other provisions , warnings recognizable by touch to protect blind people .
However , in cases of non-dangerous preparations containing a substance with a health risk , where information on certain properties is not relevant to the protection of consumer health , simplified safety data sheets need to be introduced for preparations not classified as dangerous , because drawing up and updating full data sheets involve major cost , time and difficulty for small and medium-sized firms which often do not have the necessary human and technical resources .
Finally , I would like to stress the fact that this European directive embraces and respects the wishes of the great majority of the Member States , as has emerged from the contacts I was at pains to make with the European national authorities , because the aim was to generate balanced legislation which takes account of Member States ' different legislation , by improving it and trying to harmonize it .
The amendments I have tabled in committee and in this House recognize the need to harmonize the legislation on chemical preparations .
This proposal is intended to be a real step forward in this direction and it is the result of mediation across the various existing national legislations .
Now the directive must be made feasible and operational .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Baldi for the amount of work she has put into this very complicated and important issue .
The handling of chemicals is one of the most important issues which comes under the scope of the environmental sector .
Every day we see the number of allergies increasing along with other negative effects on people and the environment .
This is why I welcome the Commission 's proposal which means we will be making a real effort at European level to deal with these problems .
The Directive itself is difficult and technical , but adopting a political stance will be simpler when we see the effects .
What we are doing now is deciding on legislation which will determine how hazardous goods should be classified , packaged and labelled .
This is particularly important for the thousands of European workers who come into daily contact with these chemical products .
They depend on detailed and correct information on how these preparations should be handled to avoid putting their own health at risk .
It is Article 16 of the Directive which concentrates primarily on the working environment .
One of the proposals in this Article is to make obligatory safety data sheets , which will have to contain information on handling .
So it seems absurd that Parliament should intervene and try and reduce the standard for this type of safety data sheet .
This would also mean that the three newest Member States , at least , would be forced to reduce the level of their current legislation in this area .
We are talking about safety at work here .
This is not bedtime reading which has to be made simple to make it easier for certain Members of Parliament to read ; we are talking about important issues concerning people 's health .
But it is not just the working environment which will be affected by this Directive but the environment generally and our daily lives as consumers .
Many of the products we buy in the shops have labels warning us of particular health risks or potential allergies .
Against this background it seems somewhat unrealistic to say that it is consumer interest groups who want the impact of this Directive lessened .
It is other interested parties who wish to see the standards in the Directive reduced and I sincerely hope that this House will reject such Directives and proposals which would mean that the type of safety data sheet which we already have in Sweden , Finland and Austria , for example , can no longer continue to be used in the future .
This issue forms part of the agreements which were concluded during our membership negotiations .
So I do hope that this House can see the benefit in starting at a high level when it comes to safety , for us as employees , as consumers and as members of society in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say on behalf of the EPP Group that this proposal for a directive concerning the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations is another good example of sensible European legislation .
The question of dangerous preparations has been regulated on a Community-wide basis since 1988 .
But that regulation has been supplemented and amended on several occasions .
The present Commission proposal not only revises and brings together various legislative measures but also closes a legislative loophole by covering the environmental effects of dangerous preparations .
The reason this question is so complex is that it does not only involve a great many - several thousand - substances , but also an even greater number of preparations containing these substances .
It is a matter of several hundreds of thousands of them .
Things become even more complicated because preparations are not just sold to the end user but many of them are only used within the industry .
Many small and medium-sized enterprises produce these preparations .
They are also expected to produce all the necessary data .
That means they must of course ensure that man and the environment are protected .
In the case of any further data , however , we must achieve a reasonable balance between cost and added benefit .
In this respect , I believe that the Commission proposal formed a very good basis .
Even in the case of most preparations not regarded as dangerous , the producer must provide a safety data sheet if the users so wish .
Labelling , of course , presents particular problems .
On the one hand it has to be comprehensible to the end user , on the other hand it must include a lot of information that may be important to the processor but is of no interest whatsoever to the general public .
I think it is important for the labelling to indicate really serious risks .
There may be three , five or seven of them .
But it cannot list another 20 potential or conceivable risks .
That would involve too much labelling and would confuse rather than inform the consumer .
The same applies to listing the chemical formulas , which the normal consumer cannot understand and where giving the more general name - for instance formaldehyde - would be more sensible .
That is precisely why some of the amendments give rise to problems .
Nor would such an abundance of information offer more protection ; in fact it is more likely to do the opposite because it is confusing .
Even if people might think that lists can clarify a generic term , in practice they do the opposite , for lists are limiting and disregard other possible aspects implicit in the generic term .
These are the main reasons why my group will reject some of the committee 's amendments .
To finish let me draw your attention to one more point , Commissioner , namely the poor translation .
The German version at least contains a number of mistakes .
For there is a difference between ' patentierung ' ( patenting ) and ' potenzierung ' ( potentiation ) .
There are several things like this in the text .
I mentioned this in committee too , but unfortunately the mistakes were not corrected .
I cordially request the Commission to look into this again .
I am in any case informed , Mrs Schleicher , that the relevant department have put that right .
Mr President , we are very pleased with the proposal for a directive which somewhat widens the field of application of the original directives , as this is a directive which incorporates in a single document the existing legislation which has long existed in the field of dangerous preparations .
In particular , we believe the European Commission has submitted a good proposal because dangers to the environment are included in addition to dangers to health as mentioned in the existing text .
This is progress .
We also find it a useful improvement that preparations which can cause an allergic reaction are now also to be labelled .
We , the Group of European Liberals , are strong defenders of a high level of protection for the environment and clear labelling for the consumer .
I repeat , the Commission proposal seems to be a very reasonable proposal , although I would have liked to see further improvements on a number of points .
In our view , the report by Mrs Baldi scarcely constitutes an improvement on the original Commission proposal and , unfortunately , some of her amendments in fact serve to weaken the original .
This is why my group is unable to support the amendments which Mrs Baldi has once again submitted after they failed to be adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We do , however , very much support the amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment which we believe usefully improve on the Commission text .
These amendments concern matters such as the labelling of dangerous preparations which attain a dangerous concentration , if not individually , then when combined .
If we accept these amendments , then together with the Commission proposal we believe it will make a good directive .
I hope that Mr Bangemann is of the same opinion .
Mr President , in its current form the Balti report is a good one .
My group will be voting in favour of it .
The report was not quite as good before the vote in the environment committee because , in its original form , some of the proposals it contained would have reduced the standard of regulations governing data sheets .
Consequently , we will also be voting against all those proposals which have been raised again here aimed at reducing the standard of data sheets .
On the whole , the report in its current form and the Commission 's proposal are very good and they will lead to significant tightening up in many areas .
Many more types of substances hazardous to health are now included which will be of benefit particularly to those with allergies .
Pesticides are included as well .
It is very important that the new Members are not forced to reduce the standard of their legislation by adopting regulations which are too weak .
We will be voting for the report in its current format , and we will be voting against the UPE 's amendment proposals .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission proposal .
It is a much-needed and longoverdue review of this area of legislation .
It is important not just for the safety of the environment but in particular for human health and safety .
There are three things in the Commission proposal which I welcome .
There is the general extension of information to preparations and substances dangerous to the environment , a new recognition of their importance ; the extension of this proposal to biocides and pesticides , something which is much-needed and long-overdue ; and an extension of the need to provide information on substances which are not necessarily dangerous by chemical characterization but when in use might pose some risks .
The Commission proposal , like everything else in this world , is not perfect .
Therefore I would commend to the Commission the majority of my colleagues ' amendments which extend , clarify and develop the proposals of the Commission in a direction which is worthwhile and , in particular , the amendments which extend the provision of information through safety data sheets .
This is a positive proposal which is in operation in some Member States already , including the United Kingdom and Sweden .
It is important for suppliers to be obliged positively to provide safety data sheets to users .
This really is essential .
In addition , I would stress the need for good design of these sheets to ensure they are comprehensible to all users throughout the Union , which is not easy when dealing with technical material like this in many different languages .
I hope that the Commission will examine this area carefully .
I have some reservations with regard to proposals to allow the use of common or generic names without , in addition , the full names or details of the substance .
I would hope that in these circumstances we would accept the safeguards proposed by the Commission as it is an effort worth taking and will pay off in time .
Finally , I should like to thank the rapporteur .
The gracious and enthusiastic way she has produced this report has made it very interesting .
Her personal endeavour and commitment has made it a very enjoyable report to work on .
Mr President , the directive on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the classification , packaging and labelling of dangerous preparations is certainly an important step towards genuinely completing the single market , because it is particularly necessary , in the field of chemicals , for us to have uniform labelling , uniform indications of risks and uniform methods of handling these dangerous materials .
Certainly it is also important to approximate the Member States ' different legislative systems .
But , Mr Bangemann , it would have been a good idea also to incorporate the legislation on this matter that already exists in the three new Member States , Finland , Sweden and Austria , and not to wait for Parliament to point out , in the relevant amendments , that some Member States already have more stringent legislation , which is of course very sensible .
My colleagues have pointed out on several occasions that in the case of dangerous preparations it is not just a question of the risks of individual substances but that it is often the combination of the various substances that presents a considerably greater danger .
This needs to be pointed out , both to the processing firms and to those who buy the end products .
I hope this amendment by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection will obtain the necessary majority here and that the Commission and the Council will approve it , because this is a most important point .
I would like to add to another point my colleagues have already mentioned : for the sake of the consumer , we must ensure that these dangerous preparations are not advertised as ecologically safe and environment-friendly , or can be sold with these attributes , for that leads the consumer astray .
Finally , let me turn briefly to the safety data sheets , which I believe are particularly necessary for small and medium-sized enterprises , even if they add extra costs , because the owners themselves are far more involved in working with their people than in large firms and they do not have the same chance to obtain information as large firms , which may have whole departments dealing only with chemicals .
Mr President , Austria has had very strict and very progressive legislation on chemicals since 1985 .
During the accession negotiations Austria was specifically assured that it could keep this legislation for a transitional period , with the promise of very careful consideration as to whether the other EU states could not also adopt these high standards , so that Austria would not have to lower its own ones .
We were given that assurance .
So we were all the more surprised , Commissioner , at what the Commission then proposed !
Surely it would have been only natural for the Commission to submit a document containing all the stricter Austrian provisions .
What Parliament or even the Council then did to it would have been another matter .
Yet the Commission did not even consider it necessary to incorporate them in its draft !
Even stranger was the explanation in committee as to why it did not do so .
The Commission told us : ' We asked the other Member States whether they might not be prepared to adopt the Austrian standards . ' So who did the Commission speak to ?
To a minister , to an official , or to some secretary ?
And in what form did it speak to them ?
Did it write to them , or just make a few phone calls ?
At any rate I consider this behaviour quite out of order !
I could now say as an Austrian that I don 't care , that after Amsterdam we certainly do not have to suspend our legislation .
But I shall not do so , for I am now an MEP and I am concerned about how that would look in Europe !
After all , we keep hearing from Amsterdam how important environmental protection is - top priority is given to sustainability in the economic sector too !
Very important , Commissioner !
We certainly hear that message , only we are gradually not believing it any more .
For whenever it comes to practicalities , when it comes to implementing things , the Commission at least recoils .
I very much hope the European Parliament will not recoil and that tomorrow we will approve the content of those amendments , which have in part already been law in Austria for the last ten years .
Mr President , this Directive is important to all Member States of the European Union , but clearly , since agreement was reached on certain matters with the three new Member States during the accession negotiations , it is to be hoped that sufficient account will be taken of these points .
Otherwise there is a danger that these countries will be left empty-handed at the beginning of 1999 .
The Directive , which was originally presented as an amending proposal by the Commission , has gradually acquired genuine substance of its own .
The new Directive will unquestionably improve the existing situation , inter alia by collating and unifying EU legislation on dangerous preparations .
It is also an improvement on the earlier Directive that the new proposal takes into account environmentally hazardous compounds and requires them to be classified and labelled .
However , the job has been left unfinished .
In the Directive it is proposed that , in the case of preparations which are not classified as hazardous substances but large batches of which contain small active quantities of hazardous substances , safety information for users should be provided to professional users only where required .
However , this information would concern only substances hazardous to health , and not those hazardous to the environment .
Yet decisions as to which compounds are to be used in practice are mostly taken at the work-place .
It is there that it is decided how to use and store substances and how to dispose of waste .
Many workers , as well as the trade unions , are aware of issues relating to health , safety at work and the environment .
It would therefore make more sense to label these compounds in all cases with information about constituents hazardous to health or the environment .
This is the purpose of Amendment 40 .
Certain sensitizing and possibly allergenic substances should be marked even if they can only provoke a reaction in sensitized people .
Mr President , the directive we are discussing today does not just deal with labels on cans and drums and requirements to provide safety data sheets .
It is a directive that will determine whether Danish painters are protected in the future against organic solvents .
Many people in Denmark have a view on this .
Unfortunately they remember it as one of the areas in which the EU is scrapping high Danish standards .
In Denmark we consider that , while it cannot be demonstrated with certainty that painters suffer brain damage through being exposed to organic solvents , the mere suspicion constitutes sufficient grounds for taking action .
Clearly therefore , painters need to know exactly what it is they are using .
We now have some new friends in this circle : the three new Member States , who also support better labelling .
In all three countries there has been concern that EU membership will lead to a lowering of standards on the environment and the working environment .
The revision of the old directive , which also covers unwholesome things like pesticides , biocides and medicines , is viewed in these countries as a decisive test of whether membership can be reconciled with high Danish environmental standards .
The European Parliament thus has a vital role to play here .
It is up to us to put maximum pressure on the Commission and the Council of Ministers to ensure that we do not end up with inferior standards for consumers and workers .
We are the only EU institution elected by direct suffrage in the fifteen Member States ; we therefore have a duty to argue the case of the common man .
Mr President , I do not want to discuss all the objectives we are aiming at in our proposal , because I believe it has become quite clear during the debate that the Commission , like Parliament , is endeavouring to improve the existing provisions .
By and large all the Members who spoke in the debate have confirmed that .
But in particular I want to thank the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , because we find most of the amendments they have tabled acceptable and think they improve the proposal which , I believe , was fairly good in the first place , taken as a whole - as Mrs Schleicher rightly pointed out .
I want to concentrate mainly on the amendments now .
We can accept 29 of the 39 amendments supported by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection either unreservedly or in principle : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 27 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 and 39 unreservedly and Nos 6 , 17 , 24 , 29 and 30 in principle .
Since Amendment No 35 was adopted , Article 12 of the proposal has to be deleted , which of course means that the amendments tabled to that article lapse .
Let me turn now to the amendments we do not want to accept .
In our view Amendment No 4 would lead to unnecessary tests on animals because it would suspend the use of the conventional method .
That is why we do not want to accept that amendment .
Amendments Nos 8 , 9 , 11 and 12 , to which Members from Sweden , Finland and Austria mainly referred , seek to introduce into the report a specific situation that exists particularly in Austria .
It is not true that , as some of the ladies who spoke to these amendments believe , when we drew up the proposal we paid no regard whatsoever to the treaties we have concluded with the new Member States .
For instance we also introduced classification and labelling provisions for pesticides , i.e. we incorporated legislative provisions that exist in , for instance , Austria .
The same applies to substances that may pose a risk to the environment ; we included this feature of Austrian law too .
It is absolutely not the case , i.e. it is incorrect to say that we paid no regard at all to that .
What we did not do is to incorporate a provision requiring that the chemical name of all dangerous substances contained in a preparation must be mentioned on the label .
We rejected that idea because we believe - and this is not an affront to Austria , Sweden or Finland - that this would in fact be of no benefit at all to the consumer .
On the contrary , if we listed all the substances that may be contained , even below the threshold level , we would have a mile-long list which no longer had any real meaning .
I think it was Mrs Schleicher who rightly pointed that out .
We did not do this just by the by ; I want to tell you this because of the criticism that we just made a few phone calls .
Of course we prepare our proposals carefully and we do so by discussing them with experts from all the Member States who can then put their own points of view in working parties .
During these preparations we and the experts from the other Member States asked Austria to produce material or arguments to justify the special situation in Austria .
It did not do so , which is why all the other Member States accepted the Commission 's position .
So you really cannot say that we proceeded in an arbitrary fashion without regard for these interests .
I regard that almost as a personal attack , because I love Austria , and of course Finland and Sweden too !
All love affairs are dangerous , Mrs Flemming , that is why they are so wonderful !
So we did this for carefully considered reasons and I hope we will obtain Parliament 's assent .
On the question of translation , let me say I regret what happened .
There are indeed a number of mistakes in the German version .
We cannot correct that now , Mrs Schleicher .
The document is in the Council 's hands and the Council already has a proposal before it from the German delegation on how these mistakes can be corrected .
So I assume all this can be sorted out .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow .
1998 estimate for EP and Ombudsman
The next item on the agenda is the report , drawn up by Mr Tomlinson on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of the European Parliament and the estimates of revenue and expenditure of the Ombudsman for the 1998 financial year ( A4-0178 / 97 ) .
I call upon the rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson .
Mr President , I should like to commend to the House the report that stands in my name on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
First , I want to say to the House that the one thing it should understand is that today 's debate is the beginning of our budget procedure and not the end .
I say that in the light of comments I shall subsequently make in relation to some of the amendments .
This is not the conclusion but merely the start and , as you rightly pointed out , Mr President , when you read the subject for debate today , it is a report on the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the European Parliament and the Ombudsman .
That is what we are establishing today .
Therefore , at the outset , I want to emphasize , over and above the report itself , Amendment No 17 tabled by Mr Wynn which I urged him and my group to submit .
Obviously I could not table it myself because it had not been dealt with in committee .
The importance of Amendment No 17 is that in establishing the draft estimates we have gone over the 20 % ceiling of Category 5 appropriations which would normally be the maximum that Parliament spent in accordance with our normal practice .
Therefore , Amendment No 17 contains a firm commitment to remain below the 20 % ceiling of administrative appropriations .
I had a long discussion yesterday evening with the President of Parliament and with the Vice-President responsible for budgets .
We are clearly agreed about the mechanisms which need to take place .
There will be a rectifying letter sent by the Bureau of Parliament to the Committee on Budgets .
That will need to be sent by the middle of September in order to effect the necessary changes .
It means that over and above the suggestions that already exist in the draft report on the estimates , the Bureau has to face up to the need to find a further ECU 4m of cuts in the draft estimates and submit that proposal for ECU 4m of cuts to the Committee on Budgets .
However , the letter of rectification will have to deal with other things beside that .
It will need to see if there are any consequences , for example , of the outcome of the IGC in relation to places of work .
That is going to be somewhat more complicated than people imagined at first sight .
I do not want to produce a rather pejorative note into our discussion today but there will clearly be implications from the outcome of the IGC for the budget of Parliament and these will also need to be covered in the rectifying letter from the Bureau to the Committee on Budgets .
The third area that such a rectifying letter will clearly need to cover - and I say this very clearly to the House - is the question about the outcome of the Bureau working group in relation to the transparency and control that was called for by Parliament in its resolution of December last year concerning Members ' allowances .
I and the Committee on Budgets will be resisting in the vote this week a number of amendments in relation to those allowances .
That is not a value judgment on those amendments .
It is intended as a proper respect for the competence of the Bureau to fulfil the mandate it has been given .
It was asked to produce a report to Parliament by April .
It has not been able to do so .
Parliament and the Committee on Budgets are being extremely tolerant in accepting that it might take until September .
But it cannot take beyond September .
If we do not have the proposals from the Bureau for the transparency and control of Members ' allowances in that rectifying letter in September , then it will be right and proper for the House to make its own decisions on the recommendation of the Committee on Budgets in the vote at first reading .
I say that with as much clarity as I can because I do not want anybody to misinterpret votes that are made against some of the amendments .
They are made not as a value judgment but out of respect for the Bureau competence , and include a promise that we will return to these questions at the reading of the budget in October if we do not consider that they have been adequately covered by that time .
I now turn to the report itself .
We work on the basis of the estimates that have been established by the Bureau on the basis of a report from the Secretary-General .
The Committee on Budgets has mainly formulated proposals in six areas to work on the basis of the report that had been given to us and , we believe , to improve it somewhat .
The first of those six areas is changing the updating of remarks and nomenclature , in particular in the statement of revenue .
That is rather technical but , nevertheless , important to the clarity and transparency of our budget .
The second area , which I have already partly referred to , is in relation to Members ' travelling allowances .
Concerning travel expenses , we have now reached an agreement with the Bureau that there will be no increase in the travel allowance , not even the increase for inflation for the year 1998 .
We have clearly incorporated that .
It does not depend on future votes .
It is in this draft report .
The third area where we have concentrated our endeavours relates to the freezing of the establishment plan of the secretariat but , at the same time , within that overall context of freezing the establishment plan , there has been the granting of a certain number of upgradings on the basis of parameters set for career developments .
There are a number of other areas that we will be looking at in some detail on the basis of reports we ask for in the course of the budgetary procedure .
For example , there are a number of requests that we ask for further information concerning mission expenses and canteen expenses .
I have to say that I do not feel any sense of grievance at the somewhat perjorative way I have been represented by the Staff Committee who advertise what they claim to be the price of Tomlinson .
I had suggested that we put the appropriations for subsidies to the canteens into reserve until we could examine more fully how they were currently used and how they could be justified in future , if at all .
I suspect , however , on reflection that the staff did not agree with its Staff Committee either because at the Staff Committee elections where this figured as one of the most prominent aspects of their election campaign , the Staff Committee found that it was 350 votes short of a quorum .
That indicates the need for it to get its act together and fight on the real issues of concern and not on phoney issues such as whether they deserve a subvention to their canteens .
The next major item on which we will be focusing relates to the whole question of building policy .
One of the problems we have had in the 1998 budget is that although we move out of the Belliard building in order to occupy the new building , our lease on the Belliard building continues well into the next millennium .
So there had been no provision made for the rent of the Belliard building .
That might have satisfied everybody in theory , but it did not satisfy the landlord .
The landlord needed to be paid .
Therefore , we have had to enter over ECU 7m into the budget for the rent for the Belliard building until we have managed to dispose of that lease .
An extremely important part of our building policy , therefore , is not just concentrating on moving into new buildings but making sure that we dispose properly of leases on existing buildings such as Van Maerlant and the Belliard building .
Finally , there was the assessment and updating of strategy in the data-processing sector where the Committee on Budgets are collaborating very well with Vice-President Haarder who has responsibility in this area .
A substantial amount of money is being put into the reserve until the data-processing strategy is somewhat clearer .
There are many other things in the Committee on Budgets ' deliberations which I could focus on .
For example , we have looked at the whole question of telecoms in a liberalized telecommunications market .
We find it somewhat surprising that as the telecommunications market has liberalized we have not gone to competitive tender for the provision of telecom services .
So , the Committee on Budgets has called on the administration to produce an appropriate report with appropriate savings .
Therefore , on the basis of what I have said , I will be opposing all amendments to the Committee on Budgets ' report and urge people who have amendments to realize that frequently the best place for their amendment is not in the estimates but when we come to the reading of the budget in October .
I can deal with the other part of the report in the remaining 20 seconds .
It is in relation to the estimates of the Ombudsman .
It shows the general state of satisfaction with the modesty of his requests and demands that it has received no amendment at all .
I commend the report to the House .
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mr Tomlinson for his report on the 1998 estimates for the European Parliament and the Ombudsman .
This report clearly shows the need to continue the budgetary austerity line begun last year , so that the 2.7 increase in Section I as compared with last year is the correct and the most suitable figure which could be applied .
But austerity should be backed up by sound financial management which would necessarily require greater interinstitutional cooperation and better use of technological resources , since data processing , as Mr Tomlinson has just mentioned , would make the work more efficient .
I fully agree that we could obtain much more for the money which is to be spent .
However , it must be noted that there is still a lack of transparency as regards the implementation of various parts of Section I , so information is rather scant : Epicentre , security , cleaning and maintenance .
I also regret that the situation on the future of the Belliard I and II Buildings has not been clarified nor the transfer of the Maerlantd Building .
Is the Maerlantd Building to be occupied by the Economic and Social Committee or the Committee of the Regions ?
I am aware that none of these decisions is without its difficulties since , although we have buildings enough an to spare now , we might be short of them following enlargement .
It is still essential to make sure that the removal from the Maerlantd building is coordinated in order to avoid leaving the building unoccupied which would entail further expense .
I am confident that the competent administration will do everything possible to clarify the future situation on the accommodation front .
As regards the last point which Mr Tomlinson mentioned on budgetary heading 1840 - the restaurant subsidy - I think that subsidy constitutes compensation to a firm which is providing a continuous and correct service to people who are not present for the whole week and many of whom are for one week in every month in Strasbourg .
I therefore think that the subsidy provides some compensation for diminished use .
If it is discontinued that will be reflected in an increase in prices and , finally , like the whiting biting its own tail , in even less use so that it will then be necessary to go out to eat , which would increase the time spent away from the offices .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Tomlinson for the spirit of thrift that ran through his speech to Parliament , and I want to thank the Committee on Budgets and the Bureau , on which I myself sit , for unanimously deciding to keep Members ' expenses for travel and the like at the same level as last year or , more accurately , to keep expenditure for next year at the same level as this year .
I should like to thank Mr Tomlinson for his clear insistence that the release of money to refund travel expenses in the future should of course be subject to the production of documentation showing that a journey has actually been made .
That is the least that can be expected .
The Liberal Group has a very clear position on this matter .
No firm would cover travel expenses for its employees without proof that they have actually travelled .
Our Parliament should not give politicians terms any different to those governing the conduct of our citizens .
It is not a question of mistrust , it is about order , propriety and openness , so that everyone can see that things are being done correctly .
We in the Liberal Group take an equally clear stance on Parliament 's sittings in Strasbourg .
We accept - albeit under protest - the ordinance that Parliament should meet every month in Strasbourg .
But every month means 11 and not 12 part-sessions .
We think that the Council of Ministers shows contempt for Parliament by not taking account of this , because it causes expenditure to increase quite unreasonably .
It is important that Parliament get used to saving in all areas and that we do our work more efficiently .
If we get used to saving , we shall also have money to spend on necessary projects , for example in the field of information technology .
We must transform Parliament from the bogey it is in some Member States into a model , an example of a unique , effective and modern international Parliament working in close cooperation with the national parliaments and with ordinary citizens .
That must be the goal of our activity .
Mr President , there is increasing public concern that parliamentarians receive extra tax free income because of their high allowances .
Such privileges are damaging to democracy and create a gulf between us and our people .
In the interests of democracy such privileges should be abolished .
Those responsible ought to take note of this before September .
The Tomlinson report also proposes that funds be set aside for political parties at European level .
This is a very strange proposal .
Parties are created by the people .
Their legitimacy arises from this popular base .
To create ' super parties ' by allocating money from above is democratically unnatural .
It is contrary to national constitutions that foreign based parties should be able to intervene and be active in national politics , in competition with national independent parties .
The creation of such ' super parties ' which stand above society and above the people is alien to all democratic tradition .
Democracy is not constructed from above .
Nor is Parliament - and nor can they be bought with money .
The whole of this absurd idea should be rejected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that building policy is a very heavy burden on Parliament , which is why I also presume that retaining the 20 % limit is the most delicate question we will have to resolve at the first reading .
Regardless of that , I believe we can no longer escape the necessary pressure for reform and the call for transparency in this House .
In this context I would like to openly praise the rapporteur and thank him for including in his report a demand which my group has been making in this House for a long time .
Let me refer you to paragraph 36 .
We too would like to see an ecological audit of Parliament 's buildings .
We cannot call on EU enterprises to observe the eco-audit directive while we ourselves sidestep it in the case of our own buildings and our own approach to paper and the environment .
The second remark I would like to make concerns the public procurement system in this House .
We have tabled a supplementary amendment on this and I would be very grateful if it could still be considered .
In my view , this House is far too sloppy in its approach to public procurement .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is currently examining the cases that have arisen in the course of last year and the year before and I believe a warning about the need to observe these public rules would be a good idea for us and especially of course for the administration and the Bureau .
My third remark concerns the urgent need for transparency in relation to allowances for us , the Members of this House .
We have now found that the working party set up to this end has not yet reached any conclusion and perhaps we should not just call for the appropriate reform proposals with a warning that we will come to our own decision at first reading in September but should say openly that in future Parliament itself will decide on Members ' allowances , and not the Bureau .
In this context , I certainly support the rapporteur .
All the requests we , and in particular my group , have put forward on transparency in relation to travel allowances , checks on attendance by means of roll-call votes , auditing secretariat costs and the transferral of the general estimate of these allowances directly to the pension fund , all these requests which I and my group regard as minimum standards for transparency in relation to allowances , will be put before this House for a roll-call vote in September .
Then we will see how serious the House is about transparency !
Mr President , with just two minutes in which to speak I must of course limit myself to a couple of fundamental comments .
First of all , I once again regret that no serious attempt is being made to set an example as Members of Parliament .
It is a fact that in all Member States - and partly as a result of the Maastricht criteria - our electors are being asked to make huge material sacrifices , with the imposition of new taxes and levies .
But we ourselves are not touching our princely - even by parliamentary standards - expenditure allowances of various kinds .
I know that I can now be accused of being a hypocrite .
I understand such comments .
I must certainly acknowledge that the leading proposer of amendments on this subject is a member of the Flemish Socialist Party , the party which is notorious for the bribes and other scandals of which not one penny has yet been returned to the taxpayer .
But nevertheless , if tomorrow we support all the amendments which correct the anomalies of our allowances , nobody needs be a hypocrite any longer .
Secondly , as a Fleming I want to categorically state that under no circumstances must savings be made on the back of translation costs .
I note that members of the European Commission among others are increasingly trampling on the right to information in your own language .
I experienced this once again in Strasbourg this month , for example , during a speech by Commissioner Cresson .
Anybody who takes even a cursory glance at this Parliament 's budget can immediately find tens of millions of ecus in possible savings .
It is no exaggeration to say that in ' Europe ' money is being thrown out of the window .
In these circumstances , in my opinion anyone who wants to save on translation costs is motivated by other than budgetary considerations .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating our rapporteur .
It is the typical style we have come to expect from him - combative and taking no hostages when he is fighting particular causes .
However , I should like to echo the point that we are dealing with estimates of revenue and expenditure .
We will come to our first reading later this year and that will be the time when substantive decisions will be taken .
On behalf of my group , in contributing to this debate and in setting Parliament 's budget for the 1998 financial year , I want to underline the following points .
Firstly , we would like to make sure that the overall approach we take is one which respects a general rigour in monitoring the expenditure of the budget .
So we find ourselves , as in 1997 , in sympathy with Member States who are having to cut back on expenditure to meet the Maastricht criteria for the single currency .
In doing so , we wish to retain the 20 % limit and quite clearly a decision will have to be taken as to how to do that .
Secondly , looking at particular items , the Group of the European People 's Party will be putting forward amendments , in particular on information policy , to make sure that we are going to get the right economies in both the Commission and Parliament budgets .
We have done that in the past and will continue to do so .
For example , we will aim at the objective of having common European houses in our Member States by the year 2000 .
Equally , we back the position of the rapporteur in the treatment of the Epicentre .
We have to be extremely cautious about setting up a new system of information without coordinating it effectively with other means of distributing information to parliamentarians .
In terms of building policy , now that the Council has decided that Parliament should have its seat in Strasbourg , we will be voting for the cheapest way in which we can purchase our buildings .
The ten-year solution , however inconvenient , is the one we must stick by .
Lastly , when it comes to the first reading we will be looking for the report which Parliament asked of the Bureau on the question of a statute for Members ' allowances .
That is the point in time when we must take a decision and not now , as one or two Members seem to think , in order to gain some short-term political capital .
In the Amsterdam Treaty under Article 138 ( 4 ) Parliament is asked to come up with proposals on how a common statute will operate .
We will be looking to bring all these elements together and take some sensible decisions as to how our finances should be expended .
Mr President , the estimate of the European Parliament 's next year 's expenditure has been drawn up most professionally .
My thanks to Mr Tomlinson .
Parliament 's budget ought not to exceed 20 % of Category 5 appropriations .
This document exceeds that ceiling by ECU 4 million .
This is a blemish which ought to be expunged . I therefore support Amendment 17 .
Among the other main points , I should like to stress point 6 ( f ) of Part B , concerning data processing .
The European Parliament 's systems are years behind those at the Member States ' parliaments - at any rate Finland 's . The rapporteur 's stress on this point is accordingly justified .
In my view it is also right that the rapporteur has cut expenditure on canteens .
Originally , running costs amounted to two and a half million ECU , or approximately 100 Belgian francs per customer per day , assuming that every employee and every Member eats every working day .
I do not see any need for subsidies . If the employer wishes to subsidize employees ' meals , this should be done in a different way - openly , for example by issuing luncheon vouchers .
Canteens and a possible Parliament shop ought to be organized by means of open competitions - the approach which has in fact already been adopted in many Member States . 3-079
Mr President , I welcome Mr Tomlinson 's decisiveness with regard to Members ' privileges and expenses allowances .
He has decided to put these matters in order if the working party set up by the Bureau does not achieve anything .
But as a member of the Bureau 's working party , I have to say that Mr Tomlinson is far too polite .
I would advise you not to expect too much of the working party .
Its chairman , who is leaving Parliament to take up other duties , has just postponed the final meeting , at which proposals were supposed to have been made .
It has been quite impossible for us to obtain definite information as to how the various amendments tabled affect Parliament 's budget .
But Parliament undoubtedly needs to reach a quick decision about this , as we know that the Court of Auditors is also taking an interest in the curious problem that expenses are paid here for journeys which have not been made .
It is also known that citizens have complained to the Ombudsman about this administrative defect .
Proposals therefore need to be made without delay .
As Edith Müller has said , the Green Group believes that travelling expenses should be paid only if documentary evidence is produced .
This is the only way of overcoming the existing problems , which undermine the very legitimacy of Parliament .
Roll-calls should also be held at plenary sittings to ensure that Members do not draw their daily allowances unless they participate in the electronic voting .
I should also like to draw attention to the secretarial assistance allowance .
This totals around 7 % of Parliament 's entire budget .
I believe there is a good deal of negligence here .
A proper audit is called for .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon tomorrow , Thursday .
The information society
The next item on the agenda is the joint debate on the following reports :

A4-0163 / 97 by Mr Hendrick , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual Community programme to stimulate the establishment of the information society in Europe ( COM ( 96 ) 0596 - C4-0030 / 97-96 / 0283 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0208 / 97 by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communications from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on : - ' The Information Society : from Corfu to Dublin , The New Priorities ' , and ' The Implications of the Information Society for European Union Policies ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0395 ) - ( C4 0521 / 96 ) and- ' Europe at the Forefront of the Global Information Society : Rolling Action Plan ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0607 - C40648 / 96 ) ; -A4-0209 / 97 by Mr Rübig , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on ' Standardization and the global information society : the European approach ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0359 - C4-0523 / 96 ) ; -A4-0200 / 97 by Mrs Ahlqvist , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , European Parliament , Economic and Social Committee and Committee of the Regions : ' Learning in the Information Society : Action Plan for a European Education Initiative ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0471 - C4-0528 / 96 ) .
Mr President , my report is concerned with the awareness , raising and dissemination of information about the information society .
As we all know , information in itself is power .
And our job , as elected representatives of the people , is to disseminate that power to the people .
We do that by creating an information society where information is plentiful and widely distributed and through reliable infrastructure .
Information empowers people and we as Socialists cannot accept an information society of haves and have-nots .
That is why the Commission with the support of this Parliament continues to support the multiannual programme to stimulate the establishment of the information society in Europe .
The setting up of the information society project office is a tremendous step forward .
The worldwide web and the Internet has developed into a phenomenal medium .
The use of this medium will revolutionize society as we know it .
The nineteenth century was the age of agriculture and the twentieth century the age of manufacturing industry .
With computers and mechanization , most of our food , consumer goods and services will be provided by automated systems .
Early into the next century , only approximately 8 % of our population will be employed in agriculture or manufacturing goods and services .
The vast majority of human activity will revolve around the use of information and the twenty-first century will be the age of information .
Information will be the raw material .
Economic performance and prosperity will be determined by the ability to process raw information into knowledge , by the ability to transport that knowledge throughout information infrastructures , through fibre-optic cables and via satellite to destinations where it can be utilized to create wealth for our citizens .
Teleworking , teleshopping , teleconferences are all activities which will utilize the new technologies and the new infrastructure .
What we also need are people with the skills to do that .
The multiannual programme will contribute significantly to making people aware of these new technologies and encouraging them to take up the new technologies and learn the skills required in order to utilize them so that they may find fortune in the future with work and prosperity which will keep Europe ahead of the game in terms of economic performance .
In addition , we should not just set up a programme to stimulate such use without monitoring the effectiveness of that programme .
Therefore , in my report I suggest that we monitor the performance of the programme using specific parameters which will say how effective that programme has been and ensure that the Community funds are being well-spent and used effectively .
It is also important that we involve other players apart from the Commission , Parliament and national regulatory authorities in this process .
I have therefore suggested that we set up a committee made up of industrialists and academics , experts in their own particular field , who could provide an input to the Commission , Parliament and the regulatory authorities so that this multiannual programme can take into account the views of people in the Community as a whole .
It is for this reason that we hope to see an information society that will benefit all our citizens in the future and one which will give them the jobs and the prosperity they so desperately need at this moment in time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the White Paper ' Growth , Competitiveness and Employment ' already contains a notable overall view of what needs to be done to allow Europe to enter the 21st century as a major player in the information society .
After the White Paper came the Corfu , Esssen and Dublin Summits .
On each occasion the Council and Commission took the necessary measures . They were then either not implemented at all or implemented too slowly .
Now the Amsterdam Summit has once again called for more employment and has decided to hold a special employment summit in Luxembourg .
On paper everything is in place .
The Commission proposals which we have before us today , studies by the high level group , the Club of Brussels , the information society forum , ... and just too many to name .
What we must now do is make a final choice and then promptly act upon it .
This is why I call upon the Council and the Commission to place all the proposed measures concerning the employment aspects of the information society high on the agenda at the employment summit .
The ministerial conference in Bonn can provide the necessary first steps in doing this .
The information and communication technologies are an example of a new activity by means of which new jobs can be created without too many extra European resources , provided the right conditions are created .
In the telecommunications sector alone 150 , 000 jobs have been created .
The indirect effect of ICT on the European economy as a whole could lead to the creation of between 0.5 and almost 1.5 billion new jobs .
Secondly , Europe must create a competitive environment for industry .
An internal market which , unfortunately , remains inadequate , is resulting in an inadequate European competitiveness .
This is why it is important to strictly respect the deadlines linked to the action plans .
There is a need for improvement in areas such as combating government assistance to national companies and ensuring fair competition .
In this connection , I support Commissioner Monti 's proposals for the completion of the internal market .
It is the Member States which are the biggest problem in this area . They are often too lax in implementing European regulations .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the information society it is new small businesses which play an innovative role by developing new products and which are therefore important to boosting Europe 's competitiveness .
At the present time just 4 % of Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises have Internet access .
It must be the EU 's task to stimulate the activities of these small firms .
The European Investment Bank can grant loans to new and fast-growing businesses , as was decided at last week 's European summit .
I also believe that a substantial part of the resources under the Fifth Framework Programme must be allocated to activities relating to the information society .
At present just 2 % of the regional funds are used for this .
The same applies to the European Social Fund .
It is possible to do more and better things with the same money .
The information society is not only a question of technology , it is also a question of the impact on society .
I am pleased to see that the focus of the Rolling Action Plan is shifting to the social aspects of the information society .
Hopefully this aspect will not be neglected at the ministerial conference in Bonn .
Special attention must be paid to lifelong learning and adult education .
Attention must also be paid - and this is probably the most difficult part of the European Commission 's work - to creating a more flexible market and reformulating the rights and obligations of employees and employers .
The Member States must always remember that a European population given the constant possibility to undertake further training under working conditions which take into account the new forms of work is a formidable weapon in the war of competition with the United States and Japan .
The four policy lines on which I comment in my report are good policy lines .
I am pleased with the documents as presented but , as I have said , at the end of the day ICT must be for people and not the other way round .
My greatest concern is therefore the implementation of the correct regulations . This is why I call upon the Commission , upon us as a Parliament and upon the Council to produce fewer memos and take more action .
Mr President , I want to congratulate the negotiators in Amsterdam on not downgrading employment to a question purely of convergence but on deciding that this issue will be discussed in depth at a summit in Luxembourg .
I believe that a competitive European economy is the main point of departure for creating new jobs .
That means we must work even harder to complete the internal market , which is where the information society has a central role to play .
Mr Hendrick has highlighted this very well .
This is where we must start .
This is where we must make more progress .
Of course standards form part of it and standardization can do much to make the European economy more competitive .
For standards are not just a technical or legal matter ; they are the precondition for creating competitiveness .
In the field of information and communications technology , the development of standards is - and in my view must be - market driven .
I believe that is crucial to the drawing up of standards .
Four basic questions arise here .
Firstly : official standards and the concept of publicly available specifications .
I think we have to consider the technical and legal aspects of this .
The second major question is the changing role of standards and of the European standardization organizations .
I believe in future we will have to work more closely together both with the national and with the international standardization organizations , avoid duplication and twin-track situations and in particular speed up this process .
The third question is the legal status of publicly available specifications , also known as PAS , in Community law .
I believe that in relation to this legal status we must also consider to what extent this involves the software , hardware and manware areas .
Mrs Ahlqvist will be going into that later .
In the information society , learning is of fundamental importance and we need learning standards too so that we can see whether certain standards have been achieved and what standards are needed .
The fourth question is the importance of strategic proposals for developing competitiveness through the standards policy .
That brings me to standardization itself .
It offers substantial benefits , namely legal and technical certainty for the users , for the firms , for the consumers and for the suppliers , and I believe that this is a most important basis and a fundamental consideration .
But in the end we are also talking about a legal basis for the world-wide extension of these standards and taking direct account of essential requirements such as security - for security is always a central issue - network interconnection , application interoperability and data protection .
Standards also offer the advantage of being published , which means they are easily accessible worldwide , without time loss .
That means we can easily obtain carefully checked , written documents and opinions , on the basis of which we can then also improve our standards .
At present these processes take too long : a period of 6 to 8 years is no longer compatible with the life cycle of products of these technologies .
We also find , for example , that certain standards have never even been developed .
A simple example is the electric plug ; there are many different , incompatible systems in the European Community .
We also have standards that were not developed quickly enough , where the European industry did not decide quickly enough , for example Video 2000 , which never established itself .
On the other hand we have standards that have achieved international recognition , such as GSM .
GSM is becoming established worldwide and it is quite easy to telephone Slovakia or Russia today thanks to GSM .
Now , with the introduction of the euro , for instance , new opportunities have opened up for standardization , and especially for the PAS .
With the prospect of the introduction of banking codes we can already consider how Europe is to meet this challenge internationally and thereby become more competitive .
I believe the report makes it very clear that both de facto and de jure standards should be applied and that new systems must also be developed .
As in the case of proprietary rights - patents , trade marks , copyright , protection of patterns and designs - a complete system should be developed for standards , in which small and medium-sized enterprises and consumer organizations should be very closely involved .
Mr President , this discussion today of the first report that I have had the pleasure of writing on behalf of the culture committee evokes special feelings for me .
I am pleased to have been given this task , particularly because my homeland , Sweden , can in many ways be held up as an illustration of information technology and its use .
The Commission has given the Swedish Department of Education the task of developing a school computer network which will be used throughout Europe .
We have started work and I hope to be able to present the results to the culture committee at the end of the year .
At the same time , I cannot refrain from mentioning the slightly bizarre fact that the position adopted by Parliament concerns a plan of action which was launched in December last year .
I am not one of those who wish to increase the power of the European Parliament to interfere in everything but I really do think that when we do something we should do it seriously .
It is true that I have had regular contact with the Commission and I assume that some of my opinions will be evident in the future handling of the action plan .
But I really would like to emphasise that positions adopted by Parliament which are not legally binding must also be treated seriously .
How will our people have faith in the slogan ' Citizens first ' if the opinions of elected members are treated as pure formalities ?
As far as the actual action plan is concerned I support the Commission 's proposals for the most part .
The initiative has three goals : to hasten the entry of schools into the information society , to promote increased use of multimedia technology in teaching and to strengthen the European dimension in education with the help of the tools of the information society , and to put emphasis on cultural and linguistic diversity .
In order to achieve these three goals the initiative will concentrate on four courses of action which will support local and national initiatives .
T his will be based on promoting the interlinking of school networks to each other and encouraging the development and spread of the programme .
In addition , teachers will receive training and support and all those involved will be given information on the pedagogical opportunities offered by multi-media technology .
Both research and pilot projects demonstrate that information technology makes the acquisition of new knowledge easier and stimulates personal development provided that it is adapted according to need and that the educational content is sufficient .
Based on my experience as head teacher at Hertsön 's high school in Luleå I think that teacher training and information for parents are prerequisites for the success of the project .
It is important that teachers have time to familiarise themselves with new methods of teaching and that they fully understand the possibilities .
At the same time I know that parents have an important role to play in reinforcing school work at home .
Both of these points are also underlined by the Commission .
But the original action plan does not address an issue which I consider to be extremely important in this respect and that is the situation of the disabled .
As a result of information technology , opportunities for disabled people are greatly increased both in education and at work .
There is a need to develop software and information and to undergo training in order to take advantage of this .
The wonderful thing about most software packages is that there is practically no extra cost involved in adapting them for the disabled provided this is done at an early stage in the development process .
I think that this must be a political priority .
The Commission have shown themselves to be in favour of my proposal which I hope will now be developed in more detail .
The same applies to the aspect of equality .
It is also extremely important that we redress the unfavourable balance between the sexes which even now can still be seen on the computer front .
This is why I have proposed that a pilot project be created within the action plan aimed particularly at young girls .
Regardless of the risks associated with the information society we must acknowledge that there really is no alternative .
This is why it is important that we politicians enter the debate at an early stage and that we are aware of the opportunities available through new information technology .
It is in primary schools and secondary schools that the new technology must be taught .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights let me warmly congratulate Mrs Boogerd-Quaak on her report and thank her for fully incorporating in her report the unanimously adopted conclusions of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
All the reports we are jointly debating today show that the European Parliament is fully committed to the Commission 's policy on the information society .
But they also show that we have to point to the dangers of unilateral development .
Unilateral developments are becoming increasingly evident and the Commission must do more to counter them in its policy .
While applications in the commercial and entertainment fields , for instance , are becoming increasingly varied and numerous , the field of public administrations is lagging behind at both national and EU level .
We do not see comparable progress in improved citizens ' access to public information , access to the law , or accelerated legal and administrative procedures .
The same applies to non-commercial applications in the field of schools , education and culture .
These useful applications would also make it more attractive to a larger number of women to use the techniques of the information society .
Another possible field of application is rarely if at all mentioned in the action plan , namely the potential of the information society to strengthen the citizens ' democratic rights .
We could do with a more imaginative approach here at all policy levels .
If we want to bring the project of Europe closer to the citizen , and after Amsterdam that will be more necessary than ever , we will have to embark on large-scale experiments in tele-democracy .
Mr President , you are just ten years old and already surfing the Internet .
You can put information on Voicemail and exchange data and news through your E-mail .
You use CD-Rom not just for games and also make discoveries in virtual reality .
Europe 's young people are using the new information and communication technologies , which are still a mystery to many adults .
Yet while a number of schoolchildren are teaching themselves , but also their parents , how to use these new technologies , others have no access to them : disabled pupils , pupils with learning difficulties and those who do not have the money to buy the basic equipment .
The gap between those who know and those who do not know must be narrowed .
They must be given equal access to these technologies at an early stage .
They should be taught and learn how to use them responsibly .
One aim of the European Commission 's action plan , which we support in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , is to promote their use in primary and secondary schools .
Regardless of the type of school , regardless of the level of qualification , minimum knowledge must be transmitted in order to equip young people for their future working and social life .
These technologies are bringing Europe closer together .
Children at school can contact each other across frontiers , learn to know other cultures and languages and develop common interests which can be built on through visits to the host families .
At present the costs of equipping schools with data banks are still far too high and the multimedia applications are totally inadequate .
Mrs Ahlqvist , the rapporteur , showed that very clearly .
So we need to implement more pilot projects , such as our German ' schools on the network ' initiative .
That could link up ten thousand schools to national and international networks and multimedia services in the space of three years .
At European level , the further training of teachers in the use of these future technologies is being supported through the Socrates programme .
Let me draw your attention in particular to the need to support women teachers , for we must not allow them to continue to be disadvantaged in a technical world often dominated by men .
There is also a shortage of pedagogical material at schools .
To this end high-grade databases must be developed and used .
To ensure that many people do not rely solely on computers , teaching must also aim to motivate pupils to develop a team spirit and work creatively in groups .
It should also help ensure that information is not just swallowed but also interpreted and that pupils checks its veracity .
In this way the new information and communication technologies can help pupils make judgments and decisions , which are essential elements of true democracy .
Mr President , I am the rapporteur of the opinion of the Committee for Research , Technical Development and Energy on Mrs Ahlqvist 's report on Learning in the Information Society .
The committee unanimously accepted my proposal for the opinion .
Mrs Ahlqvist has included most of the points raised by the energy committee .
So I will just briefly describe three areas which I would particularly like to highlight .
The first is that there is a big difference in terms of IT and Internet capability in the various schools in the European Union .
Fewer than 5 percent of European schools had access to electronic networks in the middle of last year .
This figure varies enormously between Member States .
In Sweden and Finland for example two thirds of schools have access to the Internet while the figure is fewer than 2 percent of schools in Germany .
This is something which we must bear in mind when we are discussing these issues .
The other point on which we have spent much time is the attitude of teachers to the technology .
Personally , I do not think that it is the young people and students who have the most difficulty in adapting to new IT information .
The difficulties have more to do with the teacher 's attitude and expertise .
In many places it is now teachers who have the most difficulty in adapting to this type of information while young people view it more naturally .
We must also be cautious in placing too much faith in multi-media technology .
It is by no means certain that the use of multi-media technology will mean better teaching in schools .
Multi-media technology should complement normal teaching methods .
Schools also need funds for non-material resources , in other words , for teachers .
This is linked with my third point which is that we must look seriously at EMU in this respect as EMU requires the fulfilment of certain convergence criteria which , for example in Sweden , has meant that the public sector , which includes schools , has had to make savings .
I do not think it is right to make savings in such an important area as schools .
Young people are the future of the EU .
We should not therefore be making savings in schools as we are doing at the moment .
Mr President , if we develop the immense potential inherent in information technology , we can improve the economy , we can make life easier , not least for the disadvantaged in society , and we can increase public information and democracy .
There is no end to the possibilities ; applications are emerging all over the place .
But , if the EU is to take full advantage of and have its full share in this new market and in these new possibilities , we urgently need to bring about a single , homogeneous internal European market .
There is a lack of legal security and legal predictability .
That is weakening European enterprises with respect to their American counterparts .
A large number of directives are in hand and awaiting implementation .
The present rules of competition are inadequate .
There is plenty to do .
There is one bright spot - and we should be grateful to the Commission for it - namely that agreement was reached at the Amsterdam Conference to call upon the European Investment Bank to set up a new loan facility for advanced technology projects in small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is a very important step .
The Commission must be asked to step up its efforts to secure and improve the operation of the internal market in the field of information and technology .
The Member State governments must take steps to ensure that the liberalization of the telecommunications sector is implemented in good time and on a fully unified basis by 1998 .
And we must not forget the part we ourselves have to play .
The European institutions must also think of their own information technology policy .
The Commission must do that , and so must we in Parliament .
And indeed so must the European Schools , which are regrettably lagging somewhat behind with regard to these possibilities .
There are problems in large parts of the education sector as regards the use of the new possibilities .
As a former education minister , I would gladly speak at greater length on this , but I will instead merely echo the points very eloquently made just now by Mr Thomas Mann .
Mr President , I have been asked , on behalf of Mr Ripa di Meana , to outline the views of the Committee on Culture concerning the Commission 's two documents on the information society .
It is clear that the Commission has a duty to take cultural aspects into account in this field , as Article 128 ( 4 ) of the EU Treaty stipulates .
However , the Committee on Culture is concerned that the Commission 's plans for the information society do not take this duty seriously enough .
The Committee on Culture has particularly drawn attention to the fact that practical ways of promoting cultural diversity are now needed .
There is no shortage of fine-sounding words on the subject , but the specific proposals are not particularly impressive .
One significant element in cultural diversity is multilingualism .
There is a serious risk that the information society may become a monolingual society .
This is not a development to be welcomed .
The Commission ought therefore constantly to be making practical proposals concerning ways of promoting a multilingual information society .
It is also important to point out that what is at issue is not merely equipment and technology .
To a very large extent , we are also concerned with the type of social and broader societal impact information technology will have , and one cannot stress too much that these social and societal effects have not by any means been investigated as fully as their seriousness warrants .
We are witnesses to a development which is nothing short of revolutionary : national tax systems will already be seriously threatened as people start to do their shopping through the Internet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to concentrate on three parts of Mrs Boogerd-Quaak 's report .
I believe that the move to an information society signifies a radical change in our society .
In my view , the information society is based on two pillars , technological development on the one hand and social and societal development on the other .
Until now technological development has stood in the forefront , and it does indeed remain crucial to European industry .
This area is marked by rapid technological change .
Buzzwords such as broad-band networks , ISDN , Internet , Intranet , telematics in communications , etc . , are commonplace now .
The Commission 's many efforts in this field are laudable .
The rapporteur , Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , is supported in her call for the various activities to be integrated .
We need more transparency in this area .
The Commission must try harder to integrate the many individual information systems and regulations in a coherent and transparent whole .
The second pillar of the information society is society and its societal aspects .
Initially , not enough attention was paid to these aspects , but they are increasingly being given their due place .
So I warmly welcome the fact that the Commission has made this clear in its green paper on ' Living and Working in the Information Society : People First ' .
Here the key words are : lifelong learning , knowledge as the central qualification , etc . , but also fear of technology , the disintegration of society into those who can handle the new media and technologies and another those who have no technical or psychological access to it .
The rapporteur is right to recognize a deficit in relation to social and societal aspects .
I can only share her view .
We do not want an information society that is concerned only with how the few can boost their profits .
The European concept of an information society must carry the citizens with it along the road to the future .
Social change must also open up opportunities for the individual on a broad front .
By that I mean giving the individual a greater say , more access to information , more chances of education and more opportunities for low-cost communication .
And looking to the future , the EU must prepare itself for the next round of enlargement even at this stage .
It is most important to involve the applicants for accession in the regulatory process if we want to have a homogeneous market in Europe .
Once again we must also stress the importance of a European regulatory authority in the telecommunications field .
I think that is the only way to ensure competition in this area and to reduce disputes between European operators and governments .
Seven amendments have been tabled to the report as such , which our group supports except for Nos 3 and 4 .
They make it clear that the development of an information society must not call workers ' rights in question .
We reject any idea of a protection-free zone .
We could accept Amendment No 2 if the words ' public service ' were replaced by ' universal service ' .
But this is probably just a question of terminology .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during the last session we debated an own initiative report from the Committee on Research on the information society .
Last week at the Le Bourget Salon we had the opportunity to hear about the commitment of the space agencies and European industry in the field of satellite transmission .
In May , in Cairo , in the presence of Commissioner Bangemann , we sought to put on the agenda the initial elements of a plan for application of the information society via satellite with a view to a cooperation which goes beyond the confines of today 's Union .
The initiatives are really multiplying and we must give the Commission credit for that .
It seems to me that the work on the rules of the open market is reaching completion , so a major obstacle for citizens in the information society is slowly being removed .
I am pleased the Commission 's plan of action that we are discussing today finally prioritizes the effort on education , perhaps the highest barrier for citizens and firms to scale .
Linking schools to the Internet , introducing a wide band multimedia network for teaching and for the new applications , expanding the ' Citizens of Europe ' initiative with additional programmes - these are all excellent ideas which the United States has already implemented , in its own way .
What still concerns me and what I am still not clear about , is how the Commission intends to proceed on cooperation with the Member States and local government , on forms of incentive and financing , on the respective levels of economic commitment , on how to introduce the new techniques of keyboard and mouse into a system - basic education - which tends to have rigid programmes and rules , pretty limited resources and strong resistance to change .
And I believe it is in these issues of flexibility in our society that the information society may encounter its greatest difficulties .
Mr President , discussion of the information society has been dominated by technical aspects , at the expense of content .
It is high time to consider the development of the information society from the point of view of people 's needs and as a broad social trend .
A time will come when an ability to use information and communications technology is an absolute precondition for full participation both in working life and in other areas of the life of society .
The necessary skills must therefore be imparted to all , in order to try to prevent a fresh class division and a new kind of marginalization .
Only an information society based on equality can strengthen competitiveness and employment .
Mrs Ahlqvist 's excellent report stresses that familiarization with information technology should begin at kindergarten and primary school to ensure that as many children as possible start out on an even playing field .
Equally important is to give aging people an opportunity to learn how to use new technologies and information flows .
This is one of the main challenges of lifelong learning , and appropriate materials and methods are needed to meet it .
The availability of and access to information and communications technology are of particular importance from the point of view of regional equality .
Distance learning must be developed , and peripheral areas must not be left behind in economic and social development .
The extent to which schools are equipped with network connections varies very widely from country to country , as has been observed here .
In Finland , more than two thirds of schools are networked , whereas the corresponding figure for the Union as a whole is less than 5 % .
In this connection it is important to stress the significance not only of educational establishments but also of libraries , and their considerable potential to operate as regional learning centres open to all .
Professional staff with up-to-date training in the library and information field can also help to find knowledge and afford access to experiences which exist in new forms .
The position of information and communications technology in teacher training and in-service training should be enhanced .
I believe that quality educational software and teaching materials urgently need to be developed .
The Commission should also continue its efforts to develop a European multimedia industry so that it genuinely promotes Europe 's linguistic and cultural diversity .
( without microphone ) ... emphasizes the dangers of exacerbating social inequalities in the course of realization of the information society , thus recognizing that the new technologies represent an opportunity for society , a step forward , provided they are made accessible to all through teaching and through the universal service , whose responsibilities include that of supplying the necessary equipment to the various public establishments .
Well , although the Commission acknowledges the evolutionary and dynamic nature of the universal service , it is still refusing to extend it to include the supply of advanced telecommunication services to educational establishments .
We agree with the Ahlqvist report when it deplores the total absence of any new resources to achieve these objectives .
We agree with the analysis that attributes this total lack of resources to the budgetary austerity connected with the convergence criteria for the single currency , resulting in public spending cuts that have a particular impact on education , closing classes , abolishing jobs and providing no real training for the teachers in the new technologies .
We regret that none of these reports offers any criticism of the dominant conception of education that emerges from the Commission 's various communications .
We cannot accept that , in the name of progress , the very foundation of education is being called into question by the theory that apprenticeship should be given priority over education and training as a way of meeting the needs of industry .
Let us think back to paragraph 62 of the Herman report which cautions us against the illusion of regarding information technology as the solution to all teaching problems .
We are still opposed to , and very concerned about , everything to do with excessively tight private or public partnerships , and especially everything to do with privately financed education .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , far from concerning itself with a global , co-ordinated Union policy on the new technologies , prefers to dole out its thoughts and communications and papers of various colours little by little , depending on the highly objective criterion of the subjects handled by each parliamentary committee .
And the parliamentary committees , basically , have had no option but to attend to their own individual helpings .
Ladies and gentlemen , this procedural farce must end .
If it is true , as they say , that the brave new world is coming , the world of the information society replacing the industrial society , should it not be our priority to hold , at long last , a sensible and rational debate in this House about the future of the new technologies and their far-reaching consequences for the 21st century ?
So I can only welcome today 's joint debate .
The four reports before us do in fact touch on several areas of the information society : finance , standardization , education and training , the change in the value of ' work ' , and the quest for dominance by the information technology multinationals .
At the end of the day , ladies and gentlemen , is not the essential question this : information highways to where ?
For the creation of infrastructures alone , Jacques Delors 's White Paper puts the total finance needed to link up the entire European Union at 150 billion euros .
Well , the Community 's five-year programme has a budget of 45 million euros .
That is devisory , it is not enough , and it will achieve nothing .
Because , ladies and gentlemen , if we want to go out and play with the big boys we have to start by making sure we have the resources .
Confronted with economic issues like these , I acknowledge with Mr Bangemann that prudence is the mother of safety .
But , pace Mr Bangemann , there is every prospect that the European model of the information society will bear an uncanny resemblance to Microsoftland .
And don 't be surprised , ladies and gentlemen , if the European consumer continues to prefer the American original to the pale European imitation .
And yet it is still not too late to take action to bring about a genuinely European model of the information society .
Four months ago , the European Parliament adopted Mrs Morgan 's discerning report on the information society , culture and education , advocating a European model guided by democratic , social , cultural and educational concerns .
Taking due account of the human dimension is a priority for all of us .
Because the supertechnological information society will be capable of manufacturing greater and greater wealth with a smaller and smaller workforce .
And so we shall see - more than we see it today , more than we may believe - the generalization of parttime working and the partial wages it brings .
That is why politicians have a duty to rethink the status of ' work ' as the only vector of social cohesion in today 's society .
And that is why , too , things are going to change in schools .
Children are going to have to learn by using the new technologies , not just learn to use them .
And as for the politicians , where will they be , confronted by the IT multinationals ?
Driven by the profit motive alone , the giants of information technology , telecommunications , optical fibres and the media are embarking on what they see as a great adventure - world domination .
Well , if a nation no longer has control over the production of its own images or the power to supervise new technologies , is it still a sovereign nation ?
That is the real issue behind this unstoppable revolution .
In our Western democracies , Mr President , we refer to the media , or at any rate the press , as ' the fourth estate ' . Isn 't it going to become , quite simply , the first estate - the only estate ?
That is the question we have to ask ourselves in the course of our future work .
Mr President , the reports we are debating should be endorsed .
Yet I have a sneaking suspicion that once again a lot of money is to be spent mainly on producing paper .
I have nothing against detailed research and studies , but we have to consider whether it would not be more sensible to use the ECU 45 million available for the multiannual information programme to stimulate the establishment of the information society in order to implement projects of practical use .
Let me give you a concrete example : if the European tourist industry is to remain competitive in the next millennium we will have to create comprehensive electronic information and reservation systems .
The technical requirements for these kind of tourism marketing systems already exist ; but because of its small-scale structures and fragmentation , the industry currently has neither the organizational ability nor the motivation to produce comprehensive , reliable and up-to-date information and reservation systems .
For the many small and medium-sized firms that , after all , represent the backbone of European tourism , the key to the success of tourism will be not just the supply of information but accurate and rapid information .
The tourists , i.e. the consumers of tourist products , book their holidays increasingly late and are becoming increasingly fussy .
The consumers naturally expect detailed information at the press of a button and last-minute booking facilities from their suppliers .
So we must encourage the development of networking between suppliers among themselves and in particular between suppliers and markets , especially travel agencies , but also directly with the consumer , for instance via the Internet , on a Europe-wide basis .
The European tourist industry must set up information and booking systems that can be accessed world-wide even in the most remote regions , which will also help protect and create jobs .
In the framework of the action plan , considerable progress could be made in this respect in the area of school education , motivation and the transfer of know-how , which would help make an industry that is constantly losing world-market shares become more competitive .
Mr President , colleagues , one of the claims most frequently made on behalf of the information society is that it eliminates distances and thus makes it possible to use countries ' land areas more effectively .
Services can be used , businesses managed and jobs created without it being necessary to move to major population centres .
However , this optimistic appraisal does not take account of two significant problems .
They must be resolved to ensure that developments do not proceed in quite the opposite direction .
Even if it were to be assumed that information technology and data communications improve employment , the added value they bring does not by any means in its entirety accrue to the benefit of society through traditional work : to a large extent , job opportunities and purchasing power pass to well educated town-dwellers , while in peripheral regions purchasing power does not grow .
Another essential aspect of the information society is that of democracy .
Democratic control and democratic opportunities should guarantee that even so-called marginalized groups have a chance to take part in electronic dialogue .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak 's report is praiseworthy .
I secured an amendment to it warning against the accumulation and globalization of information networks , the marginalization of the less educated and abuse of power .
I also asked the Commission to investigate the information society 's impact on employment and to stress that , despite information technology , there is still no substitute for a skilled teacher .
The opportunities for both users and producers to use services in the information society depend on the existence of state-of-the-art hardware and public infrastructure .
The required expensive , and in virtually every case private , investments are readily made in densely populated areas , and become concentrated there .
This adds to the marginalization of areas where communications facilities are already inadequate .
It seems rather alarming if ' general telecommunications services ' are taken to mean providing basic services for certain groups of poor customers who are lagging behind , rather than adopting ambitious development objectives for society as a whole .
The fact is that , in less developed areas , modern information technology equipment , and particularly access to the Internet , cannot be based on privately purchased machines .
Accessible work stations are needed in public places , for example at schools , libraries and hospitals .
Finally I should like to draw the Commission 's attention to the fact that satellite communications and state-of-theart data communications ought to be possible throughout the territory of the Union , particularly in areas where the conventional telecommunications infrastructure is inadequate or outdated .
A broad-band European intelligent network is a project of urgency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as often happens here we seem to be overlooking the main issue and focusing on considerations which - while certainly quite legitimate democratic and moral priorities - are secondary in any consideration of ways and means .
Because the main issue is that Europe has now fallen far behind the United States , far behind Japan , and the rate of growth of the big American companies and producers , in every field , is five times as high as that of their European counterparts .
As Mr Scarbonchi rightly put it , Europe is going to become ' Microsoftland ' .
That is the main issue .
Why ?
Because we all have our different priorities : for some of us it 's the public service , for others the public sector ; a third group is mainly interested in universal access , and a fourth wants to avoid inequality .
All well and good .
But in the meantime , what happens ?
While we hold forth about everything we think the information society should be doing , others are creating it .
And we , ultimately , will be mere users of what others have produced .
I am in agreement with the content of most of the reports . I am not so happy about the measures proposed by the amendments , which incidentally are the same for every report .
The amendments tell us that the workforce , the consumer , the representatives of this , the representatives of that , must be involved in the work of standardization , etc .
The effect of all these conditions will be to make it impossible for any decisions to be taken at all .
However much I may agree with the idea of consulting everyone , because there must be no limit to consultation , I am equally convinced that the making of decisions must not be shared out , because if it is there will be no decisions at all .
That is Europe 's problem , and that , sadly , is what many of us fail to see .
When I read all the amendments that have been tabled , on Mr Rübig 's report or Mrs Boogerd-Quaak 's report or Mr Hendrick 's report , they all say the same thing : everybody has to be involved in the decision .
Everybody has to participate .
For heaven 's sake , if you want nothing to be done , no participation at all , then the way to ensure it is to call for universal participation .
We 've seen something of the kind in Belgium : the idea was that virtually all the interests concerned should be involved in town and country planning policy .
As a result , it is no longer possible to reach any decision at all .
So the decisions are imposed by market forces , and horrible decisions they are for everyone .
That is the end product .
So let me make a solemn appeal to Honourable Members : don 't sink your own ship , don 't suffocate the European information society just when it needs all the air it can get .
Mr President , I could not agree more with the previous speaker , Mr Herman .
There are many occasions when I do not agree with him , but today I fully agree with him .
Naturally , I should first like to congratulate Mrs Boogerd-Quaak on her report .
I think that the problem , Mr Herman , does not only lie here with fellow Members of this House , but also with the European Commission .
Because what does the Commission do ?
It sends us a constant stream of documents about the information society . Each one bigger than the one before .
There is a great deal of overlap between all these communications .
Today we again have four documents with a great deal of duplication .
We do not expect this .
The Commission itself must better coordinate its different services in order to eliminate this duplication .
A good example is that my report on the ICT industry was adopted at the last part-session .
The Commission now comes out with its own communication on the subject .
Thus we are rehashing the whole thing again .
None of this brings Europe 's citizens one step closer to the information society .
So I also call on the Commission to better coordinate its activities in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , basically what is known as the information society is the result of an objective process in the technology revolution which is unfolding , chiefly at the level of information and communication techniques .
It is the result of the introduction of new technologies , services and innovations at an almost mind-blowing rate .
It is undoubtedly the result of human achievement .
Nevertheless , these achievements , having been pushed on by selfish interests and by the engine of commerce , have been appropriated by those doing the pushing and their use is very far from intended to benefit all humanity .
Quite the reverse !
We are very concerned at the role which this process might play in accentuating - even exacerbating - yawning social chasms which are already so marked and so serious .
In fact , it seems clear to us , that with the way it is being built , the information society is exacerbating and accentuating these chasms by creating a divide between those with access and those who are far from having access or who are excluded .
The amendments we support to the Boogerd-Quaak report are designed to reflect that concern and , if they are adopted , we shall vote in favour of the report as we shall for the Hendrick , Rübig and Ahlqvist reports and we congratulate all the rapporteurs on the work they have done .

Finally , I cannot , nor do I wish to remain silent about the threat that we shall have to contend with different types of illiteracy under the umbrella of the information society as it is being built :
the illiteracy of those who do not learn to either read , write or count and who are thus forced to live as though in the last century or even several centuries ago and who will constitute a significant part within the large and growing number of social strata cut off from the new technologies ; -the illiteracy of those who rapidly forget how to read , write and count because all they can do is click an electronic mouse , brilliantly of course , and who will live in a world of the future which I want , although I fight against it in that form , since it will create an ever-broader social spread with infra-humans on the one extreme and information supermen on the other who have no idea about Rimbaud and who are indifferent to the horrors of economics .
Mr President , I would like to thank the three rapporteurs for their reports which are all excellent in my view .
I have just a few simple comments to make in particular with regard to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak 's report .
In contrast to the views put forward by many of the speakers here , I do not think that we should be concerned about the USA 's technological leadership in this area .
This is in fact the same argument , namely that European technology is trailing helplessly behind the USA , which was used by Mr Servan-Schreiber thirty five years ago when he wrote about the American challenge .
The fact is that the growth per capita during those thirty five years has not been any greater in the USA than in Europe and I am quite convinced that this will continue to be the case in the future as well .
The reason that we do not need to be concerned is that trade is based on relative advantages .
Europe has trade advantages in other areas instead , so it will not be a disaster if Europe does not become a world leader in every sector of Information Technology .
I also think that if we really want Europe to take the lead in specialist technologies , we must base our thinking on the simple fact that eight out of ten Nobel prize winners for science come from the USA .
So we must concentrate our efforts on basic research if we wish to lead the field in the technology of the future .
But it is the question of equality in the information society which concerns me most of all .
It is currently young , well educated and highly paid men who clearly predominate in the field of information technology .
The problem , as I see it , is how can we spread this knowledge to the general public .
I think that Mrs Boogerd-Quaak is absolutely right when she points to the role of schools .
We have a clear responsibility here and we must ensure that information technology does not create a class-based society for future generations .
Even now , we see well-off families , who are able to afford it , linking their home PCs to the Internet and in so doing giving their children knowledge of this technology right from infancy .
Unfortunately , not all children have parents who are interested in computers or who can afford to buy a computer .
We must tackle this problem in some way , I think , to ensure that we do not create different levels within the information society .
Finally , Mr President , I would also like to point out the great opportunities which the information society gives us to decentralise employment .
The fact that people located right up in the North can work together with people in the South on the same project gives us an opportunity to develop rural areas and to reduce the population concentration in the cities .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate Mrs Ahlqvist , whose report I shall be discussing , on her work .
The Commission Communication on which her excellent report is based is entitled ' Learning in the Information Society ' and is intended as a European education initiative .
Let me say as a matter of principle that perhaps we are not entirely doing justice to our education systems in suggesting that they are only just entering the EDP age .
Information technology is already being taught and computer rooms already exist in schools all over Europe .
Yet this initiative aims to emphasize that the use of EDP and the media represents a constant challenge which everyone involved in education has to face up to on a continuous basis .
But we must not forget that education and training are a field where the primary responsibility lies with the Member States .
So I am glad that paragraph 3 specifically refers to the Member States ' jurisdiction over cultural and educational matters and that in other passages too the report resists the temptation to prescribe rules to the Member States , offering them suggestions instead .
I must admit that I still have some reservations about paragraphs 13 , 14 and 15 .
I am getting fed up with girls and women still being presented as technical dunces !
If you just look at the offices round here you will see that women are perfectly capable of using the new technologies .
To say that there is a shortfall here would also mean that 40 years of coeducation was just a waste of time !
Nor should we be too didactic .
The reference to encouraging play with these technologies as an educational tip may be harmless but it is superfluous !
I quite agree with the rapporteur that the changes proposed in the Communication must be accompanied by a reform of teaching .
I think that is overdue .
But teacher training is not really a Community task and I have reservations about supporting this from the structural funds .
That is why my group will call for a separate vote on paragraph 27 and only vote for the first part .
There are two other aspects I welcome .
The first is the reference to the disabled , which I consider mot important , and the second is the proposal to examine whether the research and education programmes can be used for the networking of schools .
But here we must decide clearly where the priorities lie and where we can then cut back .
Despite these reservations , I wish the report success .
Mr President , there have been many obvious points raised today but one sector which neither the Commission nor the majority of members have paid serious enough attention to is the need for Europe to create standards and an infrastructure for digital geographic information .
By this we mean information bound to a certain place .
There is one point in the action plan which mentions G12000 , but there has been no action , although the French , German , Spanish and Dutch Ministers asked for action in this area in a letter to the Commission in 1994 .
We can make substantial savings in follow up work .
Something must be done in the fifth framework programme for research .
There is nothing in the 1998 budget for geographic information .
If it is not included , the EU will be unable to do what is required of us , or what we promised at the G7 information conference a few years ago .
We also need better co-ordination of the data bases created by the Commission itself .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing four reports on telecommunications and we are discussing them jointly .
That is indeed sensible .
For there are so many aspects to the information society that we can only consider them together .
But what is the real situation in the European Union ?
At present we as producers are losing market shares , and on an annual basis .
We only have two large firms , accounting for just 10 % of the market , that are European .
We are fuelling a broad social debate on the potential hazards of the information society , on those who might lose out .
We do not have harmonized markets .
We are cutting back on resources for research and development in the field of information technologies too .
So we find the Americans asking us - as they actually did at a meeting last week in Bonn - why are you actually so against E-mail and the Internet ?
Incidentally , when we discuss the Internet we spend more time on the risks and on child pornography than on communication between remote parts of the world .
So what do we need ?
First we need more R & D resources .
And we need broad consensus on that .
We cannot just finance things we want to keep .
We must also finance things that will secure our future .
This research has to be coordinated and to be applied research .
That in turn also means we have to agree to pay far more attention to applications , going so far as really to offer assistance to the industry where that is necessary .
We also need broadly based research on standards .
Only if we can develop our own standards will we be able to conquer the markets of the future .
And it is precisely in this context of the information society that we need a far greater and far better transfer of technology than we did in the past .
Why is it beneath us to finance applications , why do we only stick to the basics ?
There is nothing wrong with satellites that bring in money , with satellite applications .
We do not have to confine ourselves to sending out research satellites .
But above all , we will only create an information society and create networks if the people accept them , if there is a demand for them .
In other words - and even if I do not think much of this in other contexts - in this case we need a broadly based information campaign , but also a positive information campaign that begins by listing the potential and opportunities of the information society rather than its possible risks .
For the rest , we need a largescale offensive to promote teleworking .
If we have a lot of teleworking that will also contribute to rural development and will encourage women to work by making it easier for them to combine family and a job .
If we create a large number of teleworking jobs , we will have to introduce accompanying social measures .
But if we reject this from the start and take a negative attitude from the start we will never make headway here .
I sometimes fear that we will miss out on an opportunity for the future .
In the field of the information society it is particularly important that we act centrally , and we must do so now .
That is why these four reports and the four Commission proposals are so welcome at this particular point in time .
Mr Bangemann , I would like to repeat something you did not understand correctly .
So I will now say it in German .
You were very defensive today .
You need not be , for I did not say that all you send us is papers .
I merely said that the various departments within the Commission keep sending us information and communications at different times .
That is the reason for our reaction .
We would like them to be integrated .
I asked whether you could not coordinate the Commission 's activities better .
I never said that you do no work !
Perhaps you are aware that I too sometimes visit projects and give talks at conferences about telecities and suchlike .
I am quite aware of all you do in this area and I am glad you do it .
You then said that we are not losing any market shares .
Perhaps you should have another look at my last week 's report on the matter .
In 1990 we had a 35 % market share and now we only have 29 % , which is a 6 % decline .
But I will be glad to see you at the ELDR Group again ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Imports of hormone-treated meat
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Commission on imports into the European Union of hormone-treated meat ( WTO ) .
Mr President , first let me apologize for the absence of Mr Fischler , who would have liked to make this statement in person but cannot do so and has therefore asked me to read out the statement on behalf of himself and the Commission .
The WTO hormones panel forwarded the parties concerned two virtually identical preliminary reports , one for the USA and one for Canada , on 8 March 1997 .
The panel of expert 's preliminary conclusion , and I stress preliminary , was that the EC ban on imports of hormone-treated meat was incompatible with a range of the WTO agreement 's rules on health and plant health measures .
Of course the Commission is disappointed .
At the request of the European Union , an interim meeting was held with the panel of experts on 4 June 1997 , at which the Commission made a number of comments on the panel 's use of scientific data .
The final report is expected at the end of the month , which is why the Commission does not want to adopt a position before the panel has completed its work .
For even if there does not seem much prospect of a different conclusion being reached , that would certainly be a procedural error .
The Commission will , however , do its utmost within the WTO context to ensure full recognition of the fact that European Community legislation can decide what level of protection it considers appropriate for its citizens .
Mr President , Mr Bangemann , the Commission is not always able to adopt such welcome positions as this one .
I gather from what you said and from a letter from Mr Fischler , which he sent to the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection a few weeks ago , that the Commission , like the European Parliament , is adhering to its many decisions and resolutions to continue banning the use of natural or artificial growth-promoters , i.e. , hormones , in the European Union .
Their use is prohibited in the European Union for good reason .
No long-term studies exist on the effects on humans .
Scientists have produced very different assessments of the uses and risks of hormones in animal feed .
Nobody knows the effects of the hormone cocktails that are so often used , not just on the animals but in particular on humans .
When we consider all that , it becomes quite clear to myself and my group - and , I am sure , to the majority in the European Parliament - that we must adhere to our ban .
Let me say a few words on the situation in the European Union and what we expect the consumer to accept .
The loss of confidence we have suffered recently in the European Union in relation to food production , but also as a result of the BSE scandal , is quite incalculable .
It can probably be calculated for farmers and can also be calculated for some distributing and marketing organizations , but we cannot calculate what it means for the people .
If the WTO now forced us to authorize hormones , imported from the United States or wherever , labelled or not , we would face a further enormous loss of public confidence , and quite rightly so .
That is why I am convinced that our strategy in reorganizing the market in beef and veal and milk must ensure that we continue to prohibit any use whatsoever of hormones .
Moreover , we must evolve a strategy on how to deal with our partners in the framework of the WTO .
Mr Bangemann , I ask you to take the appropriate measures in the Commission to enable us in the European Union not just to present the scientific evidence offered by the WTO but also to look into it .
For once again , the supposed evidence of harmlessness that was produced has not been checked at all and we all know the old saying about ten scientists and ten different opinions .
The same applies to lawyers .
Looking at the evidence the WTO has submitted , I think we are just as capable of finding different evidence .
If we want to be sure of ever building up any kind of consumer confidence again in the European Union , any kind of certainty or conviction that we are ensuring that our meat and food is harmless , we will have to adhere to our ban on hormones .
Mr President , I agree entirely with Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's final remarks .
We are talking about consumer confidence and that is the most important thing .
Our objective tonight as a Parliament is to reinforce the position we have adopted over several years and to make sure that the Commission keeps its resolve to maintain the current position of the European Community .
I was intrigued to hear the Commissioner say that it would wrong for it to pre-empt any decision that might be taken following the final result that comes from the WTO panel .
We must be careful because we are in a very strong position .
A decision was taken by the Commission , by Parliament and all the way along the decision-making process in the Community .
And just because there are certain influential companies in the United States which have great influence on the Hill , the decision-making process in the United States , it does not mean to say that we should weaken our resolve on this issue .
It is not a question that what is good for the United States is good for the rest of us .
Surely we in the Community must be allowed to take our own decisions on these sort of issues .
We are going to run into many decisions and many difficulties in the World Trade Organization unless we have some mutual respect and mutual recognition of what others in the world believe .
The WTO panel is going to come to a decision .
I hope that the Commissioner is aware of the strength of feeling in this Parliament on the issue and that if the decision is maintained which is not satisfactory as far as we are concerned , the Commission will stand up for what we believe in , what the Union believes in and make certain that we do not allow meat to come into the Community that is not acceptable under our own legislation .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I take great heart from the words of my colleague , Mr Provan ; I am always heartened to see a representative of the United Kingdom supporting a measure against the United States and against the tyranny which they now represent .
The United Kingdom is Portugal 's oldest ally and I therefore for the first time feel that there is in fact an old Luso-British alliance in operation .
As regards the question of hormones , we all know that they are used also in Europe and the Americans know that too .
They know that there has not been sufficient control in Europe .
In Portugal , unfortunately , hormones are used and they are at the moment fetching more than cocaine - and that is the truth !
That is because they are banned !
I am , moreover , concerned about the philosophy of using hormones .
Why should we use hormones ?
Why should we want animals to grow more quickly when we have meat surpluses ?
To be competitive ?
It was the principle of competitiveness in the milk sector which led us to BSE ...
It is true that , from the scientific point of view , it will not be long before research results show that hormones cause cancer .
However , from the philosophical point of view , I always told the Americans that I did not agree with the fact that they had used a false concept of progress to produce more of what they were producing too much of .
As regards health , we are all aware that the question of hormones as a cause of cancer raises major doubts .
As regards control , we are all aware too that it is not sufficient in Europe .
In any case I am even more shocked to see what the World Trade Organization panel is doing .
How are the judges chosen ?
We already had the case of the bananas in which the three judges were from Hong Kong , Australia and Switzerland .
No-one knew anything about bananas .
It appeared too that the panel judging the hormone question was made up of lawyers who knew nothing about hormones !
The intention is clearly to instal judges who are slightly impartial who naturally take a completely wrong view of the concept of justice .
I hope that the Commission has the courage to tackle this problem and to rout the illegal designs of the United States .
Mr President , once again this House is discussing the hormone question in connection with the United States .
I can inform the Commission that the Liberal Group supports the Commission 's resolve .
We oppose the use of artificial hormones in meat production .
The main reason for this - as other groups have already said - is that there still remains too many doubts among scientists about the effects of their use and as long as there is the slightest doubt we must not permit them .
I therefore believe that we must support the European Commission in continuing to argue our case for as long as is procedurally possible .
However , and this is also the view of the Liberal Group , I would not go as far as to say that we should condemn the WTO panel as such .
It will be difficult to dismiss the arbiter in the event of a wrong judgement .
We must therefore simply follow the procedures which are designed for such cases .
But on one point I believe the Commission must prepare itself .
In Europe we have another view of food than in the United States for example or other continents .
We have another view of animal foods and the conditions under which animals are kept and transported .
In this case I believe we must respect the consumers ' wishes as much as possible .
We are seeing this already in a number of Member States .
We are seeing a multiplicity of quality marks , the one more environment-conscious than the next .
I believe it is up to the European Commission to give leadership in developing something in this direction so that it is easier for the European consumer to recognize what is safe to eat and what is not .
The customer is still king .
He must be able to choose , he must have the choice and we must give European leadership on this .
I am totally in agreement with what Mr Provan says : we must state what we want and we must promote mutual respect within the WTO .
Mr President , Commissioner , you are waiting for the panel to complete its work , and I realize that , but you must admit that the World Trade Organization is producing one verdict after another , and all the verdicts are similar .
Following the decision on banana imports , the WTO panel concluded that the European Union 's ban on imports of hormone-containing meat was contrary to the rules of international trade .
The refusal of Europeans to eat hormone-treated meat was considered no more admissible than the argument in favour of supporting the economies of the French overseas departments and the ACP States in the case of bananas .
Once again , the WTO is giving precedence to commercial interests and the free trade principle over any other human consideration - health , social , cultural or environmental .
Let us recall that when the European Union decided to ban imports of hormone-containing meat from 1 January 1988 , the reason was not an artificial , protectionist attempt to prevent trade but an attempt to protect consumers against the harmful effects of hormones , whether natural or artificial - effects acknowledged by many scientific experts and by the European Veterinary Committee .
In actual fact the United States Government , making light of the situation facing European farmers and even the health of their own consumers ( several thousand people die of food poisoning every year in the United States , 4000 in 1996 ) , have only one objective : commercial .
Having been an importer , the United States has now become a net exporter of more than two million tonnes .
They want to continue this trend .
This commercial aspect is all the more important for them in that the question of growth hormones for meat conceals another : the question of the dairy production hormone BST , the authorization of which in Europe would open up an enormous market for American companies .
This verdict by the WTO panel is unacceptable , as is the use of the Codex Alimentarius as a reference criterion on health and quality issues .
We must refuse , therefore , to compromise on human health and food safety , which must take precedence over any other consideration .
That is why our group calls upon the Commission and the Council not to give way to the WTO 's orders , and calls upon this House to adopt the resolution .
Mr President , my group is totally against the use of hormones and against imports of meat from the USA that has been treated with hormones .
We do not want the stuff !
We do not need it !
We are supported in this by the majority of European farmers and the majority of European consumers .
We have nothing against commercial interests in principle , but we are against commercial interests being defended to the detriment of the financial and commercial interests of the farmers of Europe !
And we are also against this being done to the detriment of consumer health .
I believe the Commission must take a hard line .
It may be unable to say anything more at this stage for procedural and strategic reasons ; here we in Parliament are in a better position .
We can and we will table a strongly worded resolution tomorrow and I am convinced that Parliament will adopt it with hardly any votes against .
The Americans , or perhaps I should say the American chemical and agricultural multinationals , are adopting an arrogant , nationalistic and insolent stance .
They are trying to impose their ideas about agricultural production and food on us .
We have to resist that .
There is no culture without agriculture !
If there is some other culture in America , then let them live with it , we do not want it !
We assert our right to develop and continue developing our own food culture , and it does not include hormones .
Mr Bangemann , I am calling on the Commission to evolve a strategy directed not just at the panel but also at the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
These considerations must be given their due place in the new agreements ; for consumer and health reasons we must be able to reject certain things .
The various states and organizations must also have the right to take their own decisions and should not be forced by others to follow a line they do not agree with .
I do not think it necessary that our children should reach puberty earlier than they used to because of the use of sex hormones .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt rightly pointed out that no long-term studies exist on the subject .
That is why we must strongly resist this and not allow it in the long term either !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome Mr Bangemann 's reply .
He says that every possible means will be employed to continue the battle and to justify our position before the World Trade Organisation .
I welcome this and I hope that the Commission will continue to argue its case .
The report by the panel of experts remains a provisional report .
It simply fails to take any account of the opinions of the nine scientists appointed by the European Union .
Our scientists came from Germany , Norway , Hungary , Puerto Rico and also the United States .
I myself invited three of them to a conference in Brussels last month .
They were Professor Metzler from Karlsruhe , Professor Liehr from Texas and Professor Epstein from Illinois .
They stated outright that the so-called American hormones are never administered separately , but always in combination .
And that it is precisely this combined formula which can have such harmful long-term effects on the human DNA .
These can apparently take the form of gene toxic and carcinogenic effects .
The scientific conference convened by the European Commission itself stated in its conclusions that more research was needed into the use of hormones in combined form and this is essential .
Research into long-term damage is particularly important .
Our nine experts also told the World Trade Organisation panel that the scientific data on which the United States based and is continuing to base its findings are hopelessly out of date .
Everything is based on the so-called JEFCA report which dates from 1987 .
And more than a half of the 80 references were out of date in 1987 .
The United States is thus continuing to base itself on scientific data which are now more than 20 years old .
We all know that scientific research is , fortunately , constantly progressing .
What was considered harmless 20 years ago can today indeed be shown to be harmful .
The whole history surrounding the DES hormone - which was originally seen as totally harmless - speaks volumes .
It was only 20 years later that DES was shown to be carcinogenic .
Clearly the argument that hormone treatment could be harmful should in itself be sufficient for the World Trade Organisation to accept a hormone ban .
The principle of being safe rather than sorry correctly applies in the area of international decision-making .
This is why we fully support the European Commission which in Geneva had already submitted objections or replies to that provisional report and we also support the Commission in what I hope will be its further efforts if things go against us and it appeals .
An appeal if the World Trade Organisation maintains its original position .
We also want the European Commission to already make preparations for a new scientific forum , a forum of independent scientists and not scientists who are in the service of industry .
Scientists who are not only competent in veterinary science , but above all scientists from the field of human medicine and also scientists who are known and renowned for cancer research .
Finally , scientists who first and foremost investigate the risks linked to the combined use of hormones .
In this way we can further reinforce our risk analysis and at the end of the day we must certainly be found to be in the right .
The principle of prevention must take precedence over all other considerations .
Of course the general hormone ban must be upheld along with the ban on imports of hormonetreated meat .
I naturally want to support the Commission in the position which it is now adopting and I hope that our resolution will receive unanimous support .
Mr President , Commissioner , the use within the Community of anabolic substances in animal production has been the source of major controversy ever since the 1970s , involving politicians , consumers , scientific experts and the entire international community in a virtually continuous debate .
So there is nothing new about the matter , and I will spare you the historical details .
However , on 7 May this year the joint special group delivered its interim report to the parties - a report which , incidentally , should have been kept confidential as required by the memorandum on the settlement of disputes .
The conclusions of that report are clear and unambiguous .
The panel is quite clearly giving precedence to strictly commercial considerations over any legitimate concern for public health , and rejecting the principle of caution which consumers are entitled to expect .
In its motion for a resolution , our group has called upon the Commission to organize as soon as possible a conference to determine consumer reactions regarding the health aspects of hormone-treated meat .
In this connection , we must state our opposition to the panel 's recommendation that voluntary labelling , stating that the beef or veal in question contains no hormones , might be one possible way of responding to consumer concerns about information .
Quite the reverse : as in the case of genetically modified organisms , what is needed is obligatory labelling specifying that the meat has been treated with hormones .
Be that as it may , the measures prohibiting the use of hormones in meat production are fundamental and cannot be called into question .
Consumers would not understand it if those measures were to be lifted when the safety of these hormones has not been proved , or even tested .
Furthermore , the production constraints imposed on European farmers must not be swept aside by imported products that are not covered by the same health and quality guarantees .
What we ask , therefore , is that the dispute procedure should be carried forward to its conclusion , to the appeal stage in other words , and the whole of our group is ready to support the Commission .
On that issue I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commission , there is no reason , is there , why meat should escape the new religion , the worship of the golden calf , which seems to be the one guiding principle of the public and of leaders in our so-called rich and civilized societies ?
Why hormones , when - as was said earlier - we already have too much meat and too much milk ?
Why ?
The answer is simple : profit .
If the Americans want to make us eat meat with hormones in it , their motive is not just the pleasure of selling us meat - the main motive is to make us accept the hormone principle , because of course the real profit comes from the production and marketing of the hormones .
I understood that more than ten years ago , when I wrote the first report on somatotropin .
The intention of selling bad meat , selling poor quality products , means that the consumer is being robbed twice over : first his trust is stolen , then his food values are undermined .
Corticoids and other hormones , used singly or in combination , cause meat to swell .
That means incorporating more liquid , which means the consumer is buying water at the price of meat .
The interests of human beings , of the citizen , are non-existent , because the citizen is just an uneducated consumer and therefore submissive .
Hormones are dangerous .
No one , at least , is going to claim that they are vitamins .
We fought against DES .
We must fight against the others as well .
Human health is at risk , clearly , but so too is animal health .
It is already a proven fact , today , that the use of hormones causes bone deficiency in the mothers and , in the medium term , sterility in the offspring .
It will obviously be necessary , even more necessary than it was with BSE , to insist on labelling , traceability and transparency .
We in Europe are entitled to be culturally different in our diet .
That is a right which you , Commissioner , can defend on behalf of the citizen and on behalf of human society .
If Mr Bill Clinton sees fit to adopt a moralizing tone towards Europeans and accuse them of mismanagement or failure to understand modern society , as he did at the G8 summit , that 's his problem .
What I , personally , will not accept is that anyone should tell Europe 's citizens that they have to eat poisoned meat because the Americans need the money .
And that , Commissioner , is why I call upon you urgently to continue the struggle to ban this meat , and hormones in general , in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
The hormone issue was decided by the European Union some years ago not on the basis of science but rather on emotion .
I would remind the House that all food contains hormones .
I give the examples of wheatgerm and green vegetables , etc. which contain many times the levels one would find in meat .
But they are naturally occurring substances and not dangerous , synthetic cocktails .
The US and the WTO will continue to insist that science , not sentiment , and scientific measurement , in particular , be the yardstick which determines food quality and food safety .
Having put the ban in place , I see no option but to hold the line and to continue even if we have to buy our way out .
A huge amount of damage has already been done to consumer trust and consumer confidence in the recent past .
We cannot afford further risk to the industry .
I would reiterate the appeal by a previous speaker for the setting up of a competent , independent , scientific body to act as a watchdog and to communicate with the public at an early stage , especially through consumer associations .
It should be given the specific tasks of ensuring that the public is adequately protected on the one hand and , on the other , that new developments in food production be carefully explained at an early stage .
Only in this way can fact rather than fiction govern our decisions on food law and food safety in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I believe we are in a difficult situation , and we are very well aware of it .
We know more or less what the panel 's decision will be .
It will not look good for us .
We can more or less anticipate that , meaning that we should prepare ourselves for a strategy , as many colleagues have pointed out .
The second difficulty we see is that we are dealing not just with the USA and Canada but with other meatproducing countries too , such as Argentina , South Africa and Australia ; there are others too .
That means that in future we will have to consider a much further-reaching strategy , which will have to encompass an entirely new agricultural policy , an entirely new trade policy and an entirely new consumer protection policy .
In fact we missed the opportunity to start a debate on this subject at the last WTO round .
Let me remind Members that we opened up a new area by introducing trade and environmental questions into the conference in Singapore ; similarly we should of course have tried to open a debate on trade and health and on trade and consumer protection at the last WTO round .
It is essential that we do so if there is a next round .
We do not know whether there will be one , but we will have to act promptly to introduce these ideas into the WTO discussions .
We will have to go even further than this .
We will have to consider crucial questions .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt rightly pointed out that we need to hold discussions with our partners and that we will have to discuss how on the one hand we can ensure free trade , which of course we do not want to disturb and which also protects our own producers , while on the other hand we can maintain very divergent cultural perceptions of different levels of protection .
How can that be reconciled in future , and when will we have these kinds of rules ?
I know these are fairly difficult questions , but I believe we must tackle them promptly .
I am assuming that in any case the Commission will go to the court of appeal .
Then we will definitely have a chance to underpin this strategy by the findings of new scientific research .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Cohesion Fund - Structural Funds
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0167 / 97 by Mr Novo , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission 's annual report on the Cohesion Fund 1995 ( COM ( 96 ) 0388 - C4-0509 / 96 ) ; -A4-0210 / 97 by Mr Belenguer , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission 's Seventh Annual report on the Structural Funds - 1995 ( COM ( 96 ) 0502 - C4-0020 / 97 ) .
Madam President , the report which we are presenting and debating today studies the seventh annual report presented by the Commission on the Structural Funds for the year 1995 , a report incorporating amendments approved in the Committee on Regional Policy , which will certainly help to define and give form to the ideas which we are presenting in the current report .
The year 1995 is of vital importance bearing in mind that it is the first full financial year of the 1994-1999 period of funding for which Austria , Finland and Sweden were finally included .
It must be pointed out that there were over 400 Community initiative programmes presented by the Member States which led the Commission to acknowledge that certain problems were arising because of the complexity that entailed .
The present report is therefore divided into five major sections dealing with implementation , complementarity , additionality , evaluation and follow up and , finally , the principle of coordination .
As regards implementation , it is appropriate to say that there is an alarming degree of under-implementation of the budget varying according to the various funds , objectives and States .
However , the improvement noted in the Objective 1 regions of the four Cohesion States - Greece , Ireland , Portugal and Spain - must be stressed .
In my report I therefore request the Commission to analyse in the next report the causes of the delays in this implementation , the situation in the various Member States and the consequences for the global package for the 1994-1999 period .
Similarly , we ask the Commission to provide us with information on the evolution of outstanding appropriations .
Secondly , as regards complementarity with other Community policies , we welcome the Funds ' concern to improve the environment .
We also underline the Commission 's concern to make it compatible with and complementary to other Community policies , since it must be borne in mind that the Structural Funds are the most important financial amount available to the European Union and that the Treaty itself makes cohesion a horizontal policy , which must be complementary to other Community policies .
We therefore place special emphasis on the fact that the basic objective of the Structural Funds is to pursue economic and social cohesion in order to overcome the local and social disparities apparent in intra-Community solidarity , whilst pointing out that there are still regional disparities .
Thirdly , as regards additionality , we are concerned to note that even the Commission itself cannot guarantee the principle of additionality , which worries us because one of the characteristic features of the Structural Funds is the additional nature as a back-up to state and regional efforts thus making sure that it is promoting cohesion .
The Commission is still powerless to test this principle in seven Member States .
I shall not mention which those States are , but for four of them the Commission says that it has no data and only incomplete data for the other three .
In order to avoid this problem , we ask the Commission to look into the possibility of including clauses for the suspension of aid where the principle of additionality is not respected , including the requirement for each Member State to submit figures .
Fourthly , as regards assessment and monitoring , we unfortunately have to point out that no complete and detailed study has yet been carried out on the first Structural Funds Programme .
In that connection we welcome the Commission proposal to involve independent experts , still not appointed , as well as the attempts made in the field of montoring , we welcome the drawing up of the monitoring guide .
However , the criteria and procedures bound up with the Structural Funds are still very complex , which is why I advocate simplifying the rules which would be helpful to these monitoring measures .
Fifthly , as regards coordination , we note that coordination with the regional authorities has improved substantially , although it is still inadequate as regards the local authorities .
However , the latter has improved as regards information .
We underscore the good working relationship with the Committee of the Regions and the need to strengthen the principle of coordination so that both the local and regional bodies carry out the real policy of moving closer to the citizen .
Finally , we reaffirm our confidence in decentralization as a method of managing the Funds , although it is appropriate to point out that the current system has an inherent contradiction , since , whilst the management of the Funds falls in almost all the States upon the State , the responsibility for that management falls almost exclusively upon the Commission .
Finally , Madam President , my thanks to all the members of the Committee on Regional Policy for all the series of amendments presented and debated in committee to be debated a tomorrow 's sitting and also to the secretariat and , of course , to all those who have cooperated in the drafting of the report .
Mr President , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has been looking at the annual report on the Cohesion Fund by Novo Belenguer .
We noted that the Cohesion Fund often understands the environment in too wide a sense .
We can well imagine that water supply and waste disposal are genuine environmental projects .
But when it comes to a dam which is clearly damaging to the environment - and this can also be read in the report - then the Committee on the Environment believes that it is very difficult to understand why such a dam should be seen as an environmental project .
This is why it is a good thing that the Committee on the Environment is also involved with regional policy , which we call the integration of the environment and other sectors .
This is why I am so pleased that a large number of our amendments have been adopted by the rapporteur and his committee .
Our interpretation of the word environment is too wide .
I would therefore argue for more purely environmental projects in the future : the combating of soil erosion , reforestation , nature conservation , the protection of habitats .
These are matters to which cohesion policy must also pay much more attention .
We submitted an amendment , Amendment No 4 , on this subject , and I hope that the Commission also finds this amendment by our group acceptable .
I support Mrs Shroedter in submitting a number of amendments in which she says that too much attention is paid to roads and too little to environment-friendly infrastructures such as railways .
Finally , I should like to stress - and this opinion is also on behalf of our committee and is included in your report - that environmental impact reports should be drawn up by researchers who are not involved in the planning or implementation of projects .
This must be the practice , it must be objective .
This principle must not only apply to the Cohesion Fund but to regional policy as a whole .
I am very curious as to how the Commissioner will react to this in order to achieve a more objective environmental impact reporting .
I repeat , Mr President , I am very pleased that we have found the rapporteur and his committee so ready to accept our amendments out of this concern to integrate the environment into regional policy .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I should like to begin my speech by mentioning that there are very few people present in the House when we are in fact discussing 34 % of the Community budget , which is intended for the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund and in this case we are dealing with the 1995 financial year .
I think this debate should serve to point the way to what the Structural Funds should be , both as regards what they should be for 1999 , when the current period of funding from the Structural Funds ends , and as regards the way the regulations need to be amended in order to make the implementation of those funds more effective to promote greater economic and social cohesion and greater local cohesion between the various localities which go to make up the European Union of today .
Neither must we forget the new planned enlargement - taking us perhaps to 2004 - of the European Union .
None of these points must be forgotten in the analysis of what the Structural Funds have represented .
On this matter I should like to congratulate Mr Novo Belenguer on his report and to draw attention to some points which give cause for concern , such as the under-implementation of the Funds .
That means that budgetary surpluses remain for allocation - and these might be very considerable - and we shall therefore have to decide how to use these amounts for the benefit at least of those States which have been the most assiduous in implementing the Structural Funds .
The matter of additionality is highly disturbing , as Mr Novo Belenguer pointed out too , because there is insufficient information available to the Commission on the application by the Member States of the additionality criterion required for implementation of the Funds .
The subject of coordination seems especially important to me , above all with the regional and local authorities , especially on those aspects on which the regional authorities have significant jurisdiction as regards the Funds .
As regards the rural areas , the Structural Funds are a very important support for farming and rural incomes and in that connection it should be pointed out , as was agreed at the Cork Conference , that the decentralization of the administration of the Structural Funds should serve to avoid the danger which any future re-nationalization of the Common Agricultural Policy would entail .
To this end , more information needs to be given on the possibilities for harnessing and disseminating the Structural Funds throughout the rural world .
I think the European Observatory for Innovation and Rural Development which has been set up also deserves a mention and needs to be given the necessary powers .
I therefore , for all the above reasons consider that this report is a positive one , but we must keep a watchful eye on the implementation of the Structural Funds in the future .
Madam President , this Seventh Annual Report has 341 pages .
It is very difficult for the ordinary Member of the European Parliament or the member of a national or regional parliament to read and digest this major volume .
I would like to see a brief summary such as the Court of Auditors includes with its reports , so that the average Member of Parliament could quickly get some idea of what is contained in the report .
The rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy , Mr Novo , expressed concern at the bureaucratic workload both at Member State and Commission level involved in the programming exercise .
He blames this for the low level of utilization of the funds .
We should note this point seriously and should also note that the four different funds , the seven objectives and the thirteen initiatives make for far too much administrative work .
They also make an evaluation of what has been done more difficult .
The Committee on Budgets is concerned about the low level of utilization which Mr Novo Berlenguer drew our attention to and recognizes that some states have had difficulty with the complexity of the regulations involved .
The overall outturn for 1995 was 82 % of available funds .
If we had had a simpler regulation we could have done much more and done it at a lower administrative cost .
However , we welcome the fact that it was the poorer Member States which achieved the highest utilization and at least that gives us the satisfaction that the objective of social and economic cohesion is being achieved .
In my opinion I recommended that whatever monies - and it appears definite that money will be pushed forward - are not utilized in the last year should be redistributed for the purpose for which they were intended amongst those states that succeeded in utilizing the funds available to them .
Rapporteur of the Opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment . ( SV ) Madam President , the Structural Funds must undergo basic reforms .
Almost 100 of the 250 billion kronor which were allocated for the funds during 1995 have not been used .
These are going completely to waste because administration and bureaucracy cannot keep up with processing the applications and allocating the money .
It really is an utter scandal , this is a large sum of money which is not being used effectively .
It is a matter of poor housekeeping with tax payers ' money .
There are also serious shortcomings in programme planning , supervision and evaluation .
The most radical solution would be to allow each country to be responsible for their own regional policy , with certain objectives laid down by the EU regarding how the funds are to be used .
We will not achieve this today , and must instead reform the funds one step at a time .
I have several proposals from our committee which I would like to highlight : Bureaucracy , both in the EU and in the Member States , must be greatly reduced with fewer funds , fewer objectives and fewer Community initiatives .
Programme planning , decision making and supervision must also be improved .
More decisions must be taken at a local or regional level .
It is our opinion that all regional political initiatives must be directed primarily at resolving the EU 's serious problems ; unemployment first of all , followed by improvements to the environment and better border region co-operation .
The Novo Belenguer proposal also takes this view , and the view , we think , of the employment committee 's proposal on greater decentralisation of decision making , more local decisions and better co-ordination between the Member States ' regional policies and the EU 's labour market policies .
But , I am extremely dubious about the value of penalising Member States through the actions suggested in the report if they do not fulfil the principle of additionality , i.e. the addition of their own funds .
I think that this is the wrong way to change and improve the function of the Structural Funds .
But , on the whole I agree with the Novo Belenguer report .
Madam President , the situation of the structural funds in the fisheries sector is as follows .
Firstly : for the period 1994-1999 the budget allocation for the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance , i.e. the FIFG , is ECU 2600 m .
Secondly , over the same period the allocation for the PESCA Community initiative is ECU 250 m .
In the case of the FIFG , a number of innovative elements were added to structural policy in the sector in 1994 / 95 .
Following pressure from the Committee on Fisheries , new measures were introduced to provide , firstly , for early retirement for fishermen and secondly , for individual grants for younger fishermen forced to leave the industry following the withdrawal of fishing vessels from service .
By and large , the FIFG commitment and payment rates in Objective 5 ( a ) regions are average compared to those for all structural assistance objectives in the EU .
The rate of implementation of FIFG assistance in Objective 1 areas is also satisfactory .
This is not the case with the new PESCA Community initiative , although the general trend is positive .
The 98 % programme authorization rate is still above average in relation to all EU Community initiatives .
But the payment rate is substantially below average , which gives us cause for concern .
The reason for this is that administrative procedures are too expensive , too complex and too slow .
There is not enough coordination within the Commission either .
Moreover , the Member States must also work more effectively , according to the European Court of Auditors .
According to my information , things did not improve significantly here in 1996 either .
The picture for 1997 looks different .
Tomorrow the Commission will be holding a PESCA conference in Brussels .
We hope it will confirm this .
However , let me appeal to all concerned : keep the PESCA initiative alive during the forthcoming structural reform discussions , for every start-up phase is difficult and the fishermen need this initiative .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the European Commission 's annual report on the activities of the Cohesion Fund in 1995 is a very important document , since it provides clear and full information about the Cohesion Fund 's operation and effectiveness , records data and trends , and outlines perspectives .
The positive assessment of the Fund 's contribution towards achieving the aim of economic and social convergence acquires particular value following the publication , a few weeks ago , of the European Commission 's general report on cohesion , which unfortunately makes it clear that the divergences between the European Union 's better and less well developed countries have not yet been eliminated , while serious divergences are also to be found within the Member States .
The approach to the aim of economic and social cohesion must therefore be recognised as a long-term and painful process , and not as an effort that can be completed within some limited period of time .
Economic and social cohesion is not a fixed point but a constantly moving target .
Granted the large developmental distance between the countries in terms of cohesion and other factors , which do not remain static but are changing all the time , it is unreasonable to expect that the aims of economic and social cohesion will be achieved in five or in ten years .
In countries in the South of the Community , such as Greece , the main priorities of policy are still to modernize the infrastructure , attract investment , and to educate and train the population so that long-term employment prospects can be secured .
In parallel , the strengthening of cohesion presupposes that policies will be adopted which mitigate the negative consequences of deregulation , unification of the market , and conformity with the prerequisites for participation in EMU .
For example , with reference to the trans-European networks for transport , telecommunications and energy , I should like to stress that deregulation of the networks before their basic infrastructure is completed and before a certain minimum level of services is secured for the population as a whole , could lead to further divergence instead of convergence .
We consider that these positions justify the need for transitional periods of adaptation , such as those requested by Greece .
Consequently , much greater account should be taken of the dimension of cohesion when planning and implementing the Community 's structural policies as a whole .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I fully share the concern of the European Parliament in stressing that in the resolution under discussion on the Cohesion Fund ought , since greater regional internal disparities have been noted within the beneficiary Member States , to include an analysis of the possible impact of implementation of the Cohesion Fund on the said disparities within the field of the Commission 's assessment of the socio-economic impact .
The Cohesion Fund , like other funds , is essentially intended to promote economic and social cohesion .
This is assessed both by the relative levels of development of the Member States between one another and by the degree of social and local disparities which exist within each Member State .
In this context it is not irrelevant to mention the option which exists as regards the investment targeting option made within each of the four beneficiary Member States of the Cohesion Fund submitting projects .
If there were no criteria for the options , the implementation of the Cohesion Fund itself might actually serve to increase the social and local disparities in the beneficiary Member States .
For that to happen there need simply be a financing of projects exclusively or predominantly in areas with a higher level of development .
There is still time to put right these points which seem to need to be put right .
It is illogical and therefore untenable that the cohesion Fund should pay so little attention to the most peripheral regions .
I am therefore very pleased to see the Commission , with the express agreement of the European Parliament , assuming a more flexible position on allowing projects with a value of less than ECU 10 million , since this approach will make it possible to invest more in projects aimed at less-developed regions , which helps to offset the over-concentration on aid to the more prosperous regions .
But although it is essential to ensure that there is a contribution from the Cohesion Fund to realise the principle of economic and social cohesion , it is also essential , since this Fund is exclusively intended for the financing of investment in the transport and environment sectors , that it should follow the policies of the European Union in these fields .
We therefore fully support the strategy announced by the Commission , to step up , by means of the Cohesion Fund , the implementation of Community directives , for example in areas such as water , supply , management and treatment .
As regards the Cohesion Fund it seems clear to me that there are many points on which the European Parliament and the Commission agree . That is the result of course of a great deal of work together which we have all put in to this end and I should like to take this opportunity - and I think this is fully justified - to congratulate Mr Honório Novo on his excellent report .
We now only have to await the results .
Madam President , first I wish to compliment the rapporteur Mr Novo for his excellent report .
This is the first time the Commission has submitted an annual report based on a complete year of operation of the Cohesion Fund and it is the first time this Parliament has had the opportunity of examining how the Cohesion Fund has been implemented in the beneficiary Member States .
Without a doubt the Novo report is exceptionally important .
From the Commission report I am pleased to note that , globally , the results are positive .
The budgetary implementation of the reference year was almost 100 % for both commitments and appropriations which is a unique and commendable result .
However , I find it extraordinary that in at least one Member State , Cohesion Fund investment in one region has caused major problems in another .
This has to be of great concern as it flies in the face of the purpose of the fund .
I would invite the Commission , in conjunction with the Member State concerned , to find speedy and appropriate solutions to this problem .
It is also heartening to note that no fraud was found in connection with the projects which were financed and this is an example to follow in other areas .
Following on from a previous report in 1996 by Mr Hatzidakis on cohesion policy and the environment , it is fitting that the environmental aspects relating to the fund have been given particular emphasis by Mr Novo .
It is clear that some improvements have been made in this sector , in particular in a better balance of projects between transport and the environment .
I agree that more needs to be done here .
Even though they do not apply to all the beneficiary Member States in the same way and to the same degree , I subscribe to the rapporteur 's concerns about other environmental aspects relating to the fund .
Mr Novo says that other environmental projects such as combating coastal erosion might be envisaged .
On this point , I give my total support to the rapporteur .
For a considerable time now , I have been on record that coastal erosion is no longer to be regarded as a local problem .
It is not even a national problem .
It must be regarded as a European Union problem .
For European Union problems there must be European Union solutions and here I would emphasize that coastal erosion is a particularly important problem in Ireland .
I can support paragraph 9 of the resolution on the assumption that the rapporteur is referring to regions such as the Azores and Madeira .
In conclusion , the very existence of the Cohesion Fund has been of the utmost importance for Ireland .
Through the Cohesion Fund good progress has been made in my country towards the objective of economic and social cohesion and it should continue to do so .
Mr Novo 's call on the Commission and the Council to guarantee that the Cohesion Fund will continue as of 1999 receives my full and unambiguous support .
Madam President , the Commission 's report is a kind of incomplete account , with many deliberate omissions , of the implementation of Community policy on economic and social cohesion , and of the action and effectiveness of the Structural Funds .
On these issues we have two parallel reports which go together in one way or another , the Novo and the Novo Belenguer reports .
They take a positive view of the Commission 's report , but put forward a number of noteworthy critical views .
In expressing my view of this two-sided picture , the reports by the Commission and those by our colleagues , I should like to say that while on the one hand they highlight the problem , on the other hand they are incomplete .
The main problem concerns what the European Union is trying to achieve today with this policy of the Structural Funds , the policy of economic cohesion .
It is striving for regional development , approximation , convergence , and the cohesion of countries and regions at some particular level .
The account given shows that this policy has so far been negative , and has consequently failed .
It has failed :
first , because the resources available are insufficient and ought to be increased and made more available ,
secondly , because the programmes and Community initiatives are numerous and many-sided , but they have no priority or criterion of what they are trying to develop , and
thirdly , Madam President , even after the Amsterdam Conference there is no impulse in that direction .
We fear that there will be a series of such deficiencies , that countries and regions will remain in a state of underdevelopment , that expenditure will continue to be squandered for bureaucratic and pointless or inappropriately prioritized , supposedly developmental purposes , and that the desired result will not be achieved .
I can quote Greece as an example . It is very much a country with marked peculiarities , but these are not taken into account .
It is as if a bulldozer were trundling across all the regions , all the countries , in the same way .
But there are particular features , hyper-regionality , underdevelopment , concentration of the population in some centres and desertion of some other areas , and the various funds , programmes and Community initiatives take no account of these particularities so that the respective needs may be dealt with appropriately .
And Greece is said to be always on the scrounge , as we are now hearing here , whereas this is not true .
Greece only asks for what it is entitled to .
What the Structural Funds provide for the four countries of the Cohesion Fund , in relation to Greece , is distributed unequally and the resources do not match the needs , if proper account is taken of the country 's particular features and of those needs .
Unless the problem is dealt with in that way , by a radical approach to Community policy on the issues of economic and social cohesion and the development of countries and regions , we will no doubt come back and debate more reports , but with no result .
Madam President , making money available for infrastructure certainly does not automatically imply progress with cohesion .
This is apparent simply from the fact that the development gap between poor and rich regions has still not been closed despite the large sums of money spent .
So it is not a question of the amount of money made available but mainly of the quality of the projects .
In the past , large road-building schemes in the cohesion countries have destroyed more than they have really achieved .
We can only give a real impetus to sustainable development if we strengthen small-scale infrastructure .
That applies even more to environmental infrastructure .
Excessively large-scale environmental infrastructure places a burden on the citizens and communities of disadvantaged regions and makes them even poorer. that is why I call on the Commission to give preference to small-scale projects and to support those which will leave the next generation an environment worth living in .
Parliament was putting on the emergency brake when it set upper and lower percentage criteria for the proportion of combined transport - road and rail - in its decisions on the trans-European Networks .
There seems to be no other way of really implementing models of sustainable development , as called for in Chapter 10 of the White Paper .
These decisions were parliamentary decisions and it really would be terrible if we bypassed them .
Looking to the future , I doubt whether linking the resources for structural intervention to these convergence criteria really has produced any benefit .
That is why I call for this link to be dissolved in the next Financial Perspective and for us to aim at making the needs and neediness of regions the main criterion for structural intervention .
For it is a question of genuinely doing something for the people of Europe .
Mr President , the Commission 's reports on the cohesion fund and the other structural funds for the 1995 financial year have arrived punctually .
The Commission 's judgement is that the budget for the cohesion fund has been implemented satisfactorily and it is cheered by the fact that it has not been notified of any cases of fraud affecting the projects that have been financed .
The Commission should pay equal attention to the goal of publicizing the availability of the structural funds and facilitating their use .
The working document drawn up in 1996 by DG XIX expressly mentions an alarming underspend of structural funds appropriations , in addition to a great deal of disturbing data and analysis .
The 1997 budget procedure envisages a reduction of the payment appropriations for the structural funds just because of the underspend .
If we want targeted and effective projects which have a concrete and substantial impact in needy areas , we should first of all strengthen the initiatives designed to extend the means of disseminating information through modern communications technology .
We must also change the complex rules , make them more transparent and easier to apply so as to discourage fraud at its inception , and encourage decentralization of the management of funded projects .
Experience shows that in regions with decentralized management greater advantage has been taken of the opportunities offered by Community structural interventions , because the regional authorities are better equipped to assess them directly .
For example , Italy , a centralized country , has the disturbingly modest rate of implementation of 28 per cent , whereas Germany , a federal country , has 66 per cent .
If these statistics were published in Italy there would be an immediate upsurge in the struggle for independence in Lombardy .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 1995 was the first year in which the three new Member States , Austria , Sweden and Finland , played a part in European structural policy .
A while ago this House debated and adopted an excellent report by Mr Rack .
I believe that these countries have managed to implement the structural policy rather well , partly thanks to the experience they had already gained with their existing national regional policy .
But let me also say in the rather carefree manner of a Member from a new Member State that we found it hard to get to grips with the red tape in the administration of these structural policies .
Even though we have managed to implement them fairly well and properly in our countries , I must say - and this is something one has to bring up again and again as a Member - that we sometimes become a little discouraged when we apply to the European Commission or to the regional bodies .
My second point , to which other Members have also referred , is that the amount of appropriations not utilized increased from ECU 15 000 m to ECU 23 400 m between 1993 and 1995 , as the report notes .
This in itself raises the question of the success of the structural policies .
How successful can a structural policy be if it does not prove possible to make the money we budget for in Parliament available for the appropriate measures ?
I think it is a rather unique situation in the world for money made available not to be used .
To think that a few days ago saw the end of a summit that apparently placed special emphasis on employment , that once again found that we have some 18 million unemployed in the Union while at the same time we do not utilize these kinds of structural funds , I must say that speaks for itself and we Members simply cannot accept it .
I would certainly support it and consider it most important for the Commissioner present here today to make headway in this matter .
I believe we need one regional policy in the European Union .
We cannot make distinctions on the basis of there being few rural areas here and more urban areas there , etc .
I remember certain discussions in which it became clear that everybody in fact agrees on the need to concentrate resources , not just in other countries but in their own too .
I think here we must support the proposals of the Commissioner responsible on the future reform of the structural policies .
However they need to assume a different form , and Mr McCartin has already indicated on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control that we must be in a position to redistribute unutilized resources from one Member State to another , otherwise I think the future of the common structural policy will look rather gloomy , given the moves towards renationalizing the various structural policies .
Madam President , earlier , Mr Costa Neves spoke on our behalf , for the European People 's Party , about the report on the Cohesion Fund .
I myself will therefore refer to the report by Mr Novo Belenguer on the Structural Funds , which I must say , is a very good report which was adopted unanimously by the Committee and for that reason I think Mr Novo Belenguer deserves to be congratulated .
I would like to mention a number of points , mainly in order to draw various conclusions about the future , because the past , what happened in 1994 or 1995 or 1996 , is something we should bear in mind when considering the review of Structural Fund regulations .
The first point I want to dwell on concerns the issue of underperformance , i.e. the non-absorption of the resources of the Structural Funds . Here , I should like to point out that this is observed mainly among the wealthier Member States , not so much in the Objective 1 areas , and it applies mainly to the European Social Fund , which is not within the Commissioner 's purview , but since the problem has arisen we should address it here in our debate .
I want to say that it is an issue we should certainly all take seriously , both the Commission and the Member States , and besides all the other efforts we will have to make , I think we ought to see what can be done to simplify the regulations without preventing transparency , a thing that as I know , the Commission is already thinking about .
The second point I want to mention is the monitoring and implementation of supplementarity .
It seems that the Commission is naturally unable to guarantee its application completely , and there are serious implications that it is not applied sufficiently well , even during the present planning period .
This is a very important issue , and the Commission must cooperate closely with the Member States to achieve the requisite improvements , perhaps with the threat contained in the report itself , in other words that funding should be cut if the principle of supplementarity is not ensured .
A further matter that arises is the new assessment system proposed by the Commission , based on the intervention of independent experts .
This is certainly a positive step , which will contribute towards the prevention or correction of certain mistakes , but mainly towards the qualitative improvement of the new programmes for the future .
In each case , however , it must be ensured that those experts will be chosen on merit and with objective criteria , and provision must also be made to subject them to some form of control .
In my view , the monitors will have to be monitored .
Another point is the question of the environment .
I know the Commission attributes great importance to that , and as Parliament , that satisfies us .
However , I think further steps could be taken as well , especially where studies of environmental consequences are concerned , and those will have to be more substantial and more binding .
Madam President , I conclude with a final comment concerning the participation of local and regional authorities , which contributes to the transparency of the programmes .
I know that steps have been taken , but I think there could be many more , and more substantial ones , so that the participation of regional and local authorities can be truly substantial .
Mr President , any member of this House who commits himself to the spending of Cohesion and Structural Funds is immediately popular with the citizen because the citizen sees an improvement in his own environment which is a good thing and which improves support for Europe .
But there is a bomb beneath the support of the Structural Funds .
A bomb of money which is not being spent .
If this under-spending is not drastically but responsibly corrected than the support of the European citizen may well be lost .
In the long term it is not possible to justify to the European citizen that there is a lot of money which is not being spent while the individual Member States are being required to contribute more to Europe .
On the eve of enlargement that is a particularly inconvenient and difficult consideration .
The shared burdens which we bear have grown into a shared sense of solidarity within Europe .
This must remain both before and after enlargement .
But before we come to that it must be made very clear what exactly the additional character is which warrants projects being funded out of European funds , as otherwise we are simply moving the money from one pocket to another and in this case also just sitting on it .
So this is an appeal to all governments to submit good proposals to spend this money .
On the eve of enlargement an unspent bomb of money sends out the wrong signal for the cohesion of European solidarity and certainly to Central and Eastern Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , I just want to comment briefly on two points .
The first is additionality , where I am speaking more from the point of view of those who are making increasing attempts to obtain structural fund resources at local level .
The problem is that we have several principles in the EU .
One of the most recent and no doubt most rational principles is the need to reduce further public indebtedness .
Since Amsterdam , it has been decided to adhere to this principle on a fairly lasting and strict basis .
One effect of this , which is already becoming apparent at local budgetary level , is that small local authorities find it increasingly difficult to raise the complementary resources for EU projects , even if national and regional resources are of course contributed as a matter of course .
We must ensure that this does not turn into a disastrous trend for certain regions .
I believe we must try to prevent that in time .
Secondly , I would like to make a comment on the principle of partnership .
We still have major reservations in many respects about extending this principle .
Let me at this point specifically thank the Commission for making serious efforts and also taking serious initiatives in this area .
What obstacles still remain relate mainly to partnership between the national governments , the regional administrations and often between the latter and the local authorities .
If I may say so , we in Thuringia , for instance , have a large number of regional development plans drawn up in a democratic manner which were not really taken into consideration when the programme planning documents were drawn up .
Let me conclude by making one point in this connection : anyone who wants to deal with the crucial tasks in this area in coming years will have to attach considerably more attention to the principle of partnership , because the main task is in fact to use fewer resources more efficiently .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report on the Seventh Annual Report on the Structural Funds for 1995 is the first one to also cover the new Member States of Austria , Sweden and Finland .
We recently had an opportunity to say something more specific about some of their experiences , in a separate report on the implementaton of regional policy in those three Member States , and I am taking the opportunity today to draw certain comparisons .
They are very interesting at times .
In many respects our report was very similar .
We criticized the fact , which is indeed a problem , that in many cases there was and still is far too much bureaucracy both at Community level and in the Member States , too many programmes and , comparatively , too little money in the end .
In many ways the picture in the three new Member States was more positive than on average in Europe , and certainly so in relation to some real black spots .
In regard to the utilization of resources in particular , despite the fact that we have only been Members for a very short time , the three new Member States certainly managed to utilize a very large proportion of these resources in the start-up phase .
I am pointing this out here because it is important to ensure that resources which were not utilized at the time can and must be used up by the end of this year .
On the whole , utilization of resources was very good .
This is exceptionally true in the case of SMEs , women 's programmes , the information society and in particular LEADER and INTERREG .
There were some not so good examples .
In particular , the new Member States did not or not entirely manage to make it clear that EU resources were also contributed to the projects in question .
We must draw the necessary consequences .
We must provide more information and also learn from best practices ; we must take the assessment seriously and must continue with careful planning in future too .
We are glad to note that the Commission is itself planning to radically simplify and clarify the programmes for the next phase .
We in the European Parliament will be happy to take part in this work , even though we will not yet have the new co-decision powers under the Amsterdam Treaty .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Seventh Annual Report is a special one , not just because for the first time it covers three new Member States but far more in fact because the report refers to the beginning of the second planning period , a time when the discussion on reforming the structural funds was already in full swing .
There is really no point in looking back to the past , in this case to the year 1995 , unless one draws lessons from it for the future .
So I will not evaluate the many positive aspects noted in the Commission 's report , in relation also to previous reports , but lay the finger on a few sore points .
As with the previous annual reports , once again we note that in practice the beneficiaries face the problem of excessive bureaucracy and more or less inflexible disbursement procedures .
That is why talk about the need to simplify the legal provisions and administrative procedures is not just a matter of empty words that keep sounding in our ears but an important factor of the reform , if we are to achieve greater efficiency and transparency .
In my view the Seventh Annual Report also makes it clear that in regions where the administration has been decentralized , more use has been made of the possibilities offered by the structural fund interventions .
Decentralized administration can also help resolve an acute problem in some Member States where the regions face long delays before receiving payments from Brussels .
A further finding relates to planning .
Here more account must be taken of the direct political responsibility of the regional players in setting the structural objectives and determining the assistance priorities .
And if we want to create wider possibilities for structural fund measures in the year 2000 and later , regardless of statistical values , we will have to make provision for a relative number of changes , so that we can react to any unforeseeable structural fluctuations .
In short , it must be possible to adjust programmes after they have started and in a flexible manner ; that is a requirement we should set out in relation to the reform .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Novo and Mr Novo Belenguer , for their clear and balanced reports and to thank all those who took part in this debate for their valuable contributions , which are indeed most important because we are concerned not just with the year 1995 but , I hope , also with ensuring that together we manage to improve matters as from the year 2000 .
Let me begin by briefly addressing a few questions in connection with the report on the 1995 Cohesion Fund .
I was pleased to see that real note was taken of the progress we have made towards a more balanced financing of environmental and transport projects .
As you know , the Member States concerned are not overly enthusiastic about the Commission 's endeavour to split the resources between environmental and transport infrastructure investments for the entire planning period , and I may say that the positive trend you noted in 1995 has stabilized .
In 1996 we managed for the first time to split the resources almost exactly by allocating ECU 1200 m for environmental and transport projects respectively .
I believe the suggestion that we link environmental and transport projects more closely is an interesting one , and we will look at it carefully in the context of what is feasible here .
For the rest , Member States are also putting more emphasis on the need to build up rail , sea , combined transport and urban transport systems and to give precedence to environment-friendly projects over huge road-building projects .
I do think we are making slow and gradual headway here , although I would not say that I am satisfied with this progress as a whole .
We hope that the new directive on environmental impact reports , which the Council adopted in March , will also lead to an improvement in procedures ; the Commission will ensure that these procedures are applied correctly and strictly .
However , that is all we can do , for we probably all agree that we could imagine even better environmental impact assessments , that responded more closely to your concerns and ours .
In connection with our agreements with Parliament on the greening of the budget , we have trained our own officials in the relevant areas in this particular sector , to enable them to see more clearly and become more aware of the problems involved .
In the context of the greening of the budget , the Cohesion Fund will also commission independent experts to evaluate the Cohesion Fund 's contribution to environmental protection and sustainable development in general .
I am not sure this will earn us nothing but praise , but I do believe it is important and that it will teach us lessons for the future .
As for small projects , especially in the field of environmental protection , let me simply point out that the Commission already takes an extremely flexible approach here , thanks to which it managed to achieve this 50 : 50 distribution in the first place , and that we are also being somewhat flexible in relation to the distribution of funds normally intended primarily for large-scale projects .
But I do agree with you that a great many local environmental projects need our support .
That is why we have often combined a number of small projects , in order to place more emphasis on environmental protection in the cohesion countries .
In your report you again asked for information on the application of the conditionality clause .
Let me just point out that the procedure is explained in detail in the Cohesion Fund report for 1996 , which responds to your request at the time when we first applied this procedure .
In the report on the Structural Funds - 1995 , for which I also offer warm thanks , you rightly criticize the low take-up of budgetary appropriations in the start-up phase 1994 / 1995 , the complex procedures and the high - I think we can say excessive -level of bureaucracy both in the Member States and in the Commission .
But let me point out that the budgetary implementation has been improved considerably in the meantime .
In 1996 almost 100 % of budget appropriations were committed .
Overall , the three-year rate is also satisfactory ; but that does not mean that there are not exceptions in certain areas .
In response to the Italian speaker I must say that it is not just the national programmes that are largely to blame for Italy 's low rate of implementation , but simply that it is still the case that almost nothing has been done in some regions .
Nor is there any universal remedy for this ; basically , it means that all three levels , European , national and regional , must act in concert .
But let me state in any case , by way of clarification , that the structural fund programmes are multiannual programmes .
Clearly , if you plan an investment over several years , the expenses only tend to increase in later years , which does not necessarily imply poor management .
Rather it means that it sometimes takes a while for projects to be clearly defined , funds to be allocated and payments to be made .
Nevertheless , I believe that there certainly is a large grey area between the normal running of multiannual programmes and the occasional poor take-up of funds that we are criticizing here .
I would be glad if we could make a concerted effort over the next structural fund period to define some kind of criteria for success , in relation not just to the take-up of funds but also to the quality of the programmes and projects , for it is pointless to spend money badly .
We must try to combine spending money according to the rules and using it for good and successful projects , which will certainly not be an easy exercize .
For the rest , let me also point out once again that in most of the cases where the slow disbursement of funds in the regions was criticized , the resources were blocked in the Member States ' capitals , which means that there is a need for substantial simplifications and for improved procedures in the Member States too .
Mr Belenguer , I am very pleased that in your report you emphasized the importance of the principles of European structural policy , such as economic and social cohesion , additionality and broader and deeper partnership .
You also rightly underline the need for coordination with other Community policies and horizontal priorities , such as employment , the environment , equal opportunities and support for SMEs , which we also proposed in recent years as guidelines for the new Objective 2 programmes , but also as means of adjustment of the Objective 1 programmes in the mid-term evaluation , with a view to job-creation and economic revival .
I think it is important to make real use of the mid-term evaluation now .
There has been some delay because some things simply took a little longer , in relation also to the monitoring committees , i.e. , the level to which we in fact want to assign more responsibility and which we think should have a greater say , until the experts are appointed .
Yet I am certain we will have a chance to take a flexible approach to changes in the world and in economic circumstances and to pay more attention to means of actually creating long-term jobs , which is a major aim of the structural funds .
We will also be undertaking evaluations on the subjects of employment , the environment , equal opportunities and support for SMEs in response to your wishes and I hope that the evaluation methods will gradually improve both in the Member States and in the Community .
Basically , we finally made progress here for the first time about six months ago , in terms also of convincing the Member States to regard this not just as a bureaucratic exercize but as a chance to improve the implementation of structural policy ; I hope that will bring us some way forward .
In your report and during the debate , your proposals regarding the basic principles of the structural fund reform in the Santer package , which relate to the reduction in the number of funds , budgetary structure , decentralization and linking credits and loans more closely , also reflect central concerns of the Commission .
The Commission will be adopting this package in Strasbourg on 15 July and submit it to Parliament on 16 July .
That is why there are no concrete or official proposals yet at this point .
I discussed some ideas discussed in the Cohesion Forum , in which many MEPs also took part , with members of the Committee on Regional Policy yesterday , so I will simply summarize them in a few words now .
For instance , we discussed the need , which I think we all appreciate , for simpler implementing and financing procedures , for more transparency , for a reduction in the number of objectives , for a drastic reduction in the number of Community initiatives , for concentration on cross-frontier cooperation and integrating most of the Community initiatives in the mainstream programmes , and for decentralization , which of course also means a clearer assignment of responsibilities .
We cannot have the Member States implementing the programmes while the Commission continues to bear the responsibility .
During the reform of the structural funds regulation we will , therefore , also have to establish more definite rules , which will make things easier for all concerned and clarify the areas of responsibility , but also provide for monitoring and evaluation in future too which , I think , is an important aspect and one of interest to Parliament .
I think we also agree on the need for more concrete and binding rules on the partnership principle .
As you know , the problem here , in the past too , has been not so much a matter of the Commission 's proposals as of the Member States ' unwillingness to accept these proposals .
Nevertheless I believe our past experience has shown the need to pursue this road and I am sure that the debate on Agenda 2000 and the reform of the structural funds regulations will offer us many opportunities for extensive consultation in the coming months .
Thank you for your suggestions and for today 's debate !
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Agreement with the Kyrgyz Republic
The next item is the report ( A4-0032 / 97 ) by Mr Chesa , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 49-11156 / 95 - C4-0685 / 96-95 / 0063 ( ACC ) on the conclusion by the European Union , the European Coal and Steel Committee and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and the Kyrgyz Republic , of the other part , on trade and trade-related matters .
Madam President , the reasons that led the REX Committee to approve the interim agreement on Kyrgyzstan are the same reasons that induced it to approve the economic and commercial aspects of the partnership agreement .
That agreement is based on the difficulties and prospects of the Kyrgyz economy : difficulties resulting from the break-up of the USSR , difficulties linked to relations with the other Asian republics , and difficulties linked to the privatization and modernization of the economy , reflected initially by a drop in agricultural and industrial production , and also in food production .
The partnership agreement of 1994 , similar to those previously concluded with other States of the former Eastern Bloc , relates particularly to three main points .
The first is the trade in goods , based on most-favoured nation treatment as far as customs formalities are concerned , textile products being the subject of a separate agreement .
The second point relates to the provisions affecting business and investment , and especially includes conditions affecting employment , the setting up of companies , day-to-day payments , liberalization of transactions and the protection of intellectual property .
The third point covers economic co-operation , with a view to assisting the process of reform , economic recovery and sustainable development in the Kyrgyz Republic .
With this in mind , economic co-operation is focused particularly on economic and social development , the development of human resources , support for business , agriculture and food , non-military nuclear energy , transport , tourism , environmental protection , co-operation in general and many other fields .
The width of this coverage provided by the partnership and co-operation treaty means that the future of economic and trade relations between the Kyrgyz Republic and the European Union is very promising .
For all these reasons , I ask Honourable Members to vote in favour of the interim agreement between the European Union and Kyrgyzstan , particularly as the Committee on Budgets has given a favourable opinion .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the EPP Group I want to support our rapporteur , Mr Chesa , in his positive evaluation of the interim agreement and also propose that we approve the conclusion of the interim agreement .
This will make it possible rapidly to apply the trade-related provisions of the partnership and cooperation agreement .
Following the break-up of the Soviet Union , this Central Asian republic is still struggling not just with enormous political but also with very serious economic difficulties .
The entire trade system has broken down and to provide normal supplies of food and energy proved well-nigh impossible for a long time .
This resulted in an economic isolation that is still apparent today and blocked its further economic development .
Paradoxically , Kyrgyzstan 's difficult situation is exacerbated by the recently implemented customs union with Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan because these two partner states have provided for and are also imposing trade restrictions on third states .
At the same time , it is clear that there is much potential for developing economic and trade relations between Kyrgyzstan and the EU .
The TACIS programmes were radically reformed for Kyrgyzstan , which may result in greater local interest and more investment partners .
Kyrgyzstan 's ambitious privatization programme is the main element of the economic reform that has been initiated .
But at present the people do not seem to be very interested in becoming involved in the private economy and setting up small businesses , although there are signs of a gradual fall in inflation .
That is why the following areas seem especially appropriate for closer cooperation between the EU and Kyrgyzstan : first , the development and implementation of a new national energy plan ; secondly , the transfer of technical and administrative knowhow ; thirdly , the establishment of joint ventures in the field of services , tourism and infrastructure .
But what about providing the young people of Kyrgyzstan with business training ?
How is the Commission organizing this help for self-help so that privatization will finally get under way ?
Should we not make more use than before of the TACIS programme resources ?
At any rate I think it is clear that the interim agreement offers a favourable environment for the development of trade and trade policy between the European Union and Kyrgyzstan and we should support this agreement .
Madam President , let me begin with a few basic comments on the strategy pursued by the Council and the Commission of pushing for purely trade-related cooperation instead of a comprehensive partnership and cooperation agreement .
The Greens cannot endorse this strategy and consider it far more important to implement the partnership and cooperation agreement fairly quickly , not to put the EU 's interests in the forefront but to pursue an overall strategy to support the process of transformation in these countries .
Otherwise this would have disastrous consequences for Kyrgyzstan .
In practice only 20-39 % of the economy is privatized and there is scarcely any real legislation on privatization , only on leasing .
Democratization is faltering and far greater support is needed in this area .
On the other hand , it is very much in the EU 's interest to exploit Kyrgyzstan 's valuable resources , such as the gold and uranium mines , which has a destructive effect on this mountain republic 's valuable nature reserves .
What little still remains will then certainly be destroyed .
The agreements are already in existence .
Joint ventures are possible even at this stage .
That does not primarily require an interim agreement .
It would be preferable to follow the overall strategy of the partnership and cooperation agreement .
Madam President , first I want to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
The Commission agrees with him that this as an important step in our relations with Kyrgyzstan .
The purpose of the interim agreement is to implement the provisions on trade and trade-related questions without waiting for them to be ratified by all the Member States ' parliaments , and I believe this first step is also a positive one in regard to economic and democratic developments there .
The interim agreement also contains provisions on observing the principles of democracy and respect for human rights .
Its implementation allows for and promotes the expansion of trade relations , which are scarcely developed at this stage .
It has been pointed out by several speakers that the weakest bilateral trade between the EU and any of the republics that have emerged from the former USSR is that with Kyrgyzstan .
I also think that certainly means TACIS funds should be used for training programmes , with a view to restructuring the economy and also using own resources on the basis of own activities .
That is why about one third of the TACIS funds is to be used for training programmes of that kind .
With the entry into force of the interim agreement it will also be possible to put pressure on the Kyrgyz government to observe the provisions on respect for human rights in the event that this proves necessary and that human rights are violated in the very young and unstable democracy of Kyrgyzstan .
So we hope that overall this represents a first positive step towards improving relations and improving Kyrgyzstan 's potential .
Madam President , I know that Mrs Wulf-Mathies is no expert in this field , but the fact is that we also keep being served up this promise to underpin democracy through the democracy clause by Mr van den Broek too .
Yet when it actually comes to applying it , there is always a loud silence .
I ask you to call on Mr van den Broek finally to apply a procedure that has been on file since 1995 so as to ensure that these promises really are kept .
What we keep being promised should finally be done , i.e. , where difficulties arise , the democracy clause must be applied .
Hitherto we have had nothing but empty promises !
Mrs Schroedter , that was not a question , it was a continuation of the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
PHARE programme
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0165 / 97 ) by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the Commission 's PHARE 1994 and 1995 Annual Reports ( COM ( 95 ) 0366 - C4-0022 / 96 and COM ( 96 ) 0360 - C4-0176 / 97 ) .
Madam President , I am afraid that this is a debate being conducted for the Minutes .
My apologies to all my colleagues who are still here this evening .
This is a great pity because the PHARE programme is the European Union 's most important instrument in granting aid to Central and Eastern Europe and hopefully it will also be the most important instrument in permitting the European Union 's enlargement to include these countries .
I fear that the way this item has been placed on the agenda will have dissuaded many people from participating in the debate , but it is clearly the aim to use this occasion to speak about the future of the PHARE programme .
In six months ' time a number of Central and Eastern European countries will be meeting on a Mediterranean island to begin discussions on enlargement .
This is of course a very major investment in the future of a more integrated and secure Europe .
It also makes it particularly urgent to undertake a thorough examination of the functioning of the PHARE programme as the most important instrument in this enlargement process .
As I said , we have taken the opportunity of the annual reports to undertake a more fundamental appraisal of the PHARE programme , a forward-looking appraisal .
The constructive position of Parliament in writing this report and the debate which has since taken place with the Commission on many aspects of it is unfortunately ill-rewarded this evening , with all due respect to the Commissioner present , due to the absence of Commissioner Van den Broek .
I very much regret this , perhaps next time we should be somewhat more negative .
I will nevertheless make a number of points , although as I have already said this is more of a debate for the Minutes . These are points which I believe warrant the greatest attention by the Commission in the short term in further developing the reorientation of the PHARE programme .
For example , the assessment of the situation of the PHARE programme in Romania revealed an important defect in the programme which I believe applies more generally , namely the poor evaluations , or the lack of evaluations , which have an effect on project implementation .
How can this be improved ?
As a Parliament we have too little understanding of the actual effects of the billions which the European Union is at present investing in Eastern Europe .
There is a serious lack of clarity about the objectives of the various PHARE projects in the Central and Eastern European countries .
There is also a lack of clarity about how projects contribute to the reform process and will soon be contributing to the enlargement process .
Only when we have effective evaluation instruments will we as a Parliament , and also the European Union , be in a position to see how our attempts to provide support also make an active contribution to a successful enlargement process .
Secondly , and this is an important point , there is major under-spending in the PHARE programme .
A large part of the funds allocated are either spent too late or not at all .
I believe this is a very regrettable situation .
It is a subject which has been much debated in this House , but I believe that in future we must focus primarily on ways in which this situation can be ended .
It detracts from the value of the PHARE programme , but it is of course primarily damaging to those countries for which this money is intended .
I therefore want to see more money going to major projects , especially to promote investments , to improve infrastructures in the candidate Member States and , first and foremost , for improvements in what I describe as the administrative culture in these countries , an administrative culture which still fails to comply with the standards in the European Union . In particular , it is important for governments and administrations in these candidate Member States to be able to apply the regulations and undertakings which apply within the European Union .
Another important point I should like to highlight is the question of priorities .
I am afraid that all attention over the next few years will be paid to the successful candidate Member States , if I may describe them in this way . Countries such as Hungary and Poland which everybody says will be included in the first round of new Member States .
I can foresee this development and understand that there is a certain logic in it , but that is specifically why I want extra investments and extra attention to be paid to those countries which may well be joining in the second round .
I believe that this must be a very important starting point for the Parliament .
I should also like to say something about the management of the PHARE programme .
There has been much discussion in this House on subcontracting , or the subcontracting of subcontracted projects , if I may put it like that .
The Parliament and the Committee on External Economic Relations find that the Commission itself must assume more responsibility and in particular more political responsibility for matters which fall to policy-making officials who are subject to the authority of the European Union .
In concrete terms this includes , for example , more staff for the PHARE programme .
I should also like to draw attention to another important point in connection with the accession strategy .
This is the matter of democracy and democratization .
I believe more money must be allocated to developing and reinforcing democracy in countries which have applied for European Union membership .
Finally - and I believe this is the last important point - when we look at the future and the investment of European Union resources in the candidate Member States , which is very important in enabling these countries to earn more , much greater attention must be paid to cofinancing , also within the PHARE programme , so that the countries themselves are also encouraged to commit resources to joint projects .
These were just a number of points which I have been able to make in my allocated speaking time .
I hope that the Commission will consider these recommendations , but above all that in future the Commission , and also Parliament , as we must also put our own house in order , will take the discussion on enlargement and the resources to be allocated to it somewhat more seriously .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , like Mr Wiersma I am sorry that his report , which I think is a very good and important one , was put before such a small number of Members of this House .
Since the main points of principle have already been made , let me perhaps make a few comments on our recent experience with PHARE .
Firstly : a pan-European transport conference recently took place in Helsinki .
I attended it and noted that one government representative after another from the Eastern European states emphasized the importance of the PHARE programmes for the development of the infrastructure programmes in their countries .
If Europe is to grow closer together , which is the objective , it is crucial to expand the infrastructure , especially in public transport but elsewhere too , and that is where PHARE makes its contribution .
The general maps in the two annual reports clearly show how much is being done for transport .
I do believe , and this is a point Mrs Wulf-Mathies also addressed , that it will be important in connection with developments over the next few years to coordinate the PHARE programmes in Eastern Europe more closely with the regional and infrastructure programmes in the West so that we can achieve an even greater objective .
Given that corridors were recently decided in Helsinki and that a tenth corridor has now been added , it is most important for this coordination to be achieved in practice .
Secondly , I was in Zagreb in Croatia last week with a parliamentary delegation .
We noticed how much importance is attached there to PHARE as a means of support and assistance for economic factors but also for integration and democratization .
I think we initially had some reservations here .
But we should consider entering into further talks , in the context of precisely this objective , as Mr Wiersma also said , namely promoting democratization , promoting the integration of the various ethnic groups , etc. so that we can make even more targeted and efficient use of PHARE in this area .
Albania certainly serves as an example of money being spent and not being used very efficiently .
I do not want to criticize anyone specifically , but I do want to point this out and ask the Commission to take greater care when it disburses these funds that they are used efficiently .
I know it is difficult to convince a country : you will get money but you must change your administrative structures , change your approach , change your political structure .
Yet that is most important , for otherwise the people of Europe will ask why they are handing out money when so much of it is spent badly or simply wasted .
So it is important for the countries concerned , but also for the Western European countries , to take more care to ensure that these monies are put to the best use .
On that basis we are happy to approve Mr Wiersma 's report .
We consider the PHARE programme an important one that will become even more so with the enlargement of the European Union .
However , we also believe that the Commission must devote greater attention to ensuring that the resources are used efficiently .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the PHARE programme is , in my view , a legitimate child of the European Parliament .
A few courageous colleagues put the available budgetary resources together at the end of the 1980s to promote the economic modernization of Hungary and Poland , countries which at that time were just trying to extricate themselves from the domination of the Soviet Union .
Of course modernizing the economy means restructuring the economy with a view to a social market economy .
We are very keen for the PHARE programme to be successful and to be integrated in the next few years in a longterm pre-accession strategy , which will also be reflected in differentiated form in Agenda 2000 .
But , and here I agree with the rapporteur Mr Wiersma , we cannot yet tell whether the PHARE resources are now being used more efficiently than they were in the beginning , whether they are being oversubscribed or are inadequate , whether the misdirection of funds mainly towards EU consultants that occurred in the initial phase has now been corrected .
When you look at the well-presented reports you would think they were drawn up by an industrial association , although with the difference that they do not summarize the statistics of success but give statistics on expenditure that shows no prospects of success and no background of success .
Of course that makes it difficult for the European Parliament , which attaches very great value to the favourable development of the PHARE programme , to monitor them .
So we also think that there is no point in the long run in drafting reports of this kind but that we must change the monitoring systems , as the Hungarian president proposed a few days ago in the joint parliamentary committee .
Mr Horn thought we should provide for a global pre-accession programme that would make the INTERREG funding , the PHARE funding and the European Investment Bank funding transparent while at the same time giving the European Union and the country concerned a chance to use the funds in a manner likely to promise success .
The question is whether that is the right road to follow .
We all have our own experiences .
Perhaps it would be an idea for the Commission to check what happened with the human resources funding in Romania , as part of the PHARE programme .
If you look at the composition of the Romanian parliament and government now , you will find a large number of young politicians who were initially given assistance in their capacity of members of unions or associations and now hold important political offices and also form part of the Romanian political elite .
That is an example we can only look at on the basis of own experience .
But we believe there must be other means of making the successes , which PHARE has certainly had , more visible in the long term , both for the Commission , which has to build on them , and for the European Parliament , which must monitor this expenditure more efficiently .
Mr President , I share the opinion of Mr Wiersma and Mr Swoboda regarding holding a debate on such an important subject at such an hour .
It is indeed a pity .
The European leaders at the Amsterdam Summit did not succeed in reconstructing the European house so that it can accommodate more people without us falling through the floor .
This makes the PHARE programme all the more important in protecting Europe 's stability .
Unfortunately , we must now draw the same conclusions as earlier in the evening in connection with the Structural Funds .
The money is there , but not enough is being spent .
In this case there is the possible excuse that the programme was originally technical in nature and had to quickly deal with a wide range of matters at various levels in society without the criteria being really clear .
It is too wide ranging and insufficiently targeted .
The rapporteur , Mr Wiersma , has submitted a good analysis of the situation , together with particularly pertinent recommendations .
He first speaks of the need to arrive at a new strategy .
To that I can give my support .
There are certain priorities , such as promoting democracy , the observance of human rights , nuclear safety and environmental management .
Also positive is the encouragement of cross-border cooperation which can promote stability in the region and the status quo .
Regarding project implementation I would , however , like to see a greater increase in staff levels among the people who must implement them here as opposed to increasing the members of NGOs , and preferably more cofinancing with the governments in the respective countries .
This would be a genuine bottom-up approach .
In order to allow these countries to switch to our market system , PHARE should promote legislation providing for supervision of the banks and financial system because , Mr President , we all know that money laundering has also become very widespread in Central and Eastern Europe .
Finally , our own house is not ready for the new members .
But let us in any event lend the new inhabitants the right assistance to set their house in order , assistance which is better targeted than before .
Mr Wiersma 's report provides an accurate picture of the present situation and an excellent basis on which to conduct policy .
I congratulate him on this and hope that the follow-up to this report can be discussed in Parliament on another occasion when more of Europe 's representatives are present .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too must congratulate Mr Wiersma on his excellent report .
This report could not be more clear .
I therefore hope that the Commission - although Mr Van den Broek is not here to represent it - will take note of all the criticisms it contains .
For how can we judge whether or not European funds are being efficiently spent if there are no criteria by which they can be tested ?
I was recently with a delegation in the Czech Republic where I was asked whether the PHARE programme was primarily an employment scheme for Western consultants .
The PHARE programme has slowly changed and grown from a programme for technical assistance into a programme to support the accession of Central and Eastern European countries .
What does this mean for PHARE and future priorities ?
First of all , it must mean improved infrastructure in these countries in the fields of transport , telecommunications , energy , know-how , and also - as Mrs Van Bladel has already said - in the banking sector , which is very important .
In fact , investment is not possible without it .
A second point is to reinforce the legal and institutional framework and assistance in areas where the Union is placing greater emphasis , such as free competition , the environment , nuclear safety and a favourable climate for small and medium-sized enterprises .
This brings other demands for project support , both from the Commission and from the local authorities in Central and Eastern Europe .
The Commission must make its procedures simpler and more transparent .
But the Eastern European authorities must also be quicker to reform their institutions and reduce bureaucracy so that there is no more under-spending .
However , Western governments cannot meet Eastern Europe 's major financial needs on their own .
There is a also a need for much private financing .
The banks are ready for this .
There is a proposal for a new Marshall Plan and that must primarily come from the private banking sector .
These private investors must be attracted and this requires a stimulating regulatory framework in these countries , combined with stability .
The European Union can actively contribute to this through the PHARE programme .
Conditions can be imposed on these countries which can also serve to increase financing from the private sector .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too must thank the rapporteur for drawing up such a good report .
I am especially glad that he has included many suggestions by colleagues and has had lengthy consultations with the various committees , which makes this an exceptional report , the like of which we have not seen before in this Parliament in connection with the PHARE programme .
The efforts involved in the process of transformation in these countries need special support in areas where the problems are greatest , and we fully endorse that article .
However , the situation is that PHARE alone is not enough to support the integration process of the Central and Eastern European countries prior to accession to the European Union .
That is why it is so important to consider new ideas for a support programme worthy of the accession strategy , directed far more to the structural funds than to PHARE , because PHARE does not match up to an accession strategy in terms of funding available , range of support measures or procedures , which is why it cannot fund the aims in question .
It is worth considering whether we should not even at this early stage use one or other of the structural funds for the Central and Eastern European countries that want to join the EU .
Madam President , Mr Wiersma has written a clear analysis of the shortcomings in implementing the PHARE programme , namely under-spending , the major role of expensive consultants and external experts , and an insufficient evaluation of the results achieved through PHARE .
In the meantime , the Commission has already taken on board a large part of these criticisms in the new PHARE guidelines which were drawn up in March .
Future projects must be more in keeping with the pre-accession strategy .
This means that the Commission will have a louder voice in determining the fund 's objectives .
More attention will be paid to the development of infrastructure and industry and to bringing the internal legislation of Central and Eastern European countries into line with that of the European Union .
In the framework of the pre-accession strategy , priority must also be awarded to the creation of civil society .
A society with efficient and democratic institutions which can count on sufficient popular support .
Commissioner Van den Broek is aware of our concerns for the position of religious minorities in various Central and Eastern European countries .
Through support for democratization PHARE will also promote the integration of these religious minorities .
Finally , during a recent visit to East Germany by a delegation of the Committee on External Economic Relations , of which I was a member , it became clear just how important it is for the PHARE programme to be also applied to cross-border cooperation .
For example , by combining PHARE with the INTERREG programme it is possible to prevent projects stopping at the border and thus being less effective .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in his excellent report Mr Wiersma has rightly identified the inadequacies of the PHARE programme to date and I agree with him when he calls , among other things , for the backlog to be reduced between commitment and payment appropriations and for more money to be concentrated on those countries that are lagging behind in the economic reform process .
Also , I very much regret that evaluation has proved so inadequate up to now .
I consider that unacceptable .
I also regret the fact that the Commissioner responsible could not attend today .
In future the PHARE programme will acquire a new role with the accession to the EU of the Central and Eastern European countries .
So it is urgent to set new emphases and priorities within the programme .
I hope that will also enable us to remedy some of the well-known inadequacies .
I believe that with the adjustment of the support measures we should aim at giving the European Commission more say in the selection of programme priorities and projects in future , giving precedence to building up administrative structures and investments .
The funds must be concentrated and spent more efficiently .
Let me address one particular point on the basis of personal experience .
In my view we should give more precedence to training measures , compared also with what the Commission has proposed in the past .
As past experience shows , initial and further vocational training will play a quite central role in the accession process as a means of stimulating structural reform in the first place .
So the same value must be attached to training people in these countries as to investment in physical assets .
It is simply not good enough just to carry out company reforms under the fashionable heading of management training .
The firms themselves must be involved far more in initial and further training at all levels , especially the non-professional level .
I would ask you to take note of that .
To achieve this we need to build up a network of committed multipliers for partnerships with Western European players .
Investment in this area will create reliable partners for serious projects and have a knock-on effect that may be more important than any investment in physical assets .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Interparliamentary Relations between the European Parliament and the Slovak Parliament met last week .
At that meeting we and the Slovak parliament noted that the Commission had done very good work there .
The Amsterdam summit drew to an end at about the same time and finally decided that Slovakia would probably not be included in the first round of candidates for accession .
We felt that excellent concessions were in fact made during our talks with the Slovak parliament , in relation to electoral law and consideration of minority groups , i.e. , linguistic minority groups , all of which was to be achieved by the end of November , that means very quickly indeed .
I believe that the PHARE programme created the necessary basis for this and that the moves towards accession have been very successful .
The decentralized implementing system has proven itself and the delegations have also done good work , given that they include many experts who have worked together very well with the people in the Member States .
But I also think it is important to involve the SMEs in this process , simply because contacts between people and personal experiences are very important .
Let me also ask the Commission to introduce more educational measures in this field , to monitor expenditure and perhaps also to make the award of contracts and the evaluation more transparent .
I also believe that the interparliamentary delegations can support all this very successfully , perhaps also the monitoring , an area where we could perhaps have closer cooperation in future .
Madam President , the PHARE programme really is the most important European Union programme for bringing the Central and Eastern European countries closer to the European Union , which it has done with a great deal of real success so far , although there are still some serious shortfalls .
Every year we in the Committee on Budgets discuss the difference between the commitment and payment appropriations in the programme and about its causes and results .
Indeed we are in the process of doing so now .
Of course there is a wide variety of causes .
For one thing it is of course difficult to reach any judgment because of the lack of evaluation criteria ; but even if we had them , we could not remove the causes of these shortfalls but only evaluate them better .
In my personal experience , the PHARE programme is still too dependent on the national governments and on their at times very underdeveloped administrations , which means that we keep seeing regional partners drawing up and setting up wonderful projects and programmes , only for the central state then either not to approve them or to drag its feet .
The participant Eastern European states also take very different approaches to the European Union 's aid priorities .
For instance , it is not very difficult to get an infrastructure project approved and running in Poland .
But there is no desire at all there to develop a civil society , which means that hardly any money goes to this sector in Poland .
The question is , of course , whether to leave it to the countries concerned to set the priorities or whether to decentralize the decision-taking more and involve the regions more closely in deciding the programmes .
The Committee on Budgets has never wanted to cut the PHARE programme appropriations .
But that is no reason for us to go on pushing the ECU 3 000 m along in front of us like a mountain .
One point I would make in the light of the forthcoming negotiations on enlargement is that I believe we should consider how to make the PHARE programme more efficient .
Mr Wiersma 's report offers a number of suggestions .
Some of them are feasible , such as the cross-border cooperation programme .
Only , after all these years of talk , we should finally implement it !
Madam President , basically this is a welcome report because it clearly and plainly shows up the superficial and insubstantial nature of the Commission 's reports , or rather of the two reports .
In the rapporteur 's view , these Commission reports do little more than sum up the projects that have been executed in those two years .
I can only agree with him entirely .
No concrete targets are set out .
General objectives , such as transfers of technology , are of no use to effective evaluations of efficiency .
So we have no results that can be monitored and accordingly no way of evaluating the programmes .
Merely to describe the money flows in no way justifies the actual utilization of resources .
The Court of Auditors has also noted the poor monitoring and execution of the programmes for some years now .
It has referred to the need to rationalize their execution .
It has referred to the lack of clarity in the utilization of the resources .
It has referred to problems of coordination in applying the system .
It has also referred to conflicts of interest between the players involved and , lastly , to the restricted invitations to tender .
These inconsistencies criticized by the Court of Auditors must be remedied at once and in full , before we can discuss a possible increase in resources .
Since we all know that only about half of the ECU 6 600 m made available in 1996 was used , there is in any case some doubt about the need to increase the capital injection yet again .
What we need immediately is a clear definition of objectives , efficiency , transparency and a new , diversified support strategy .
What we also need is more co-financing projects so that the Central and Eastern European countries can identify more closely with the projects concerned .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to give Mr Wiersma very warm thanks for his comprehensive report .
Mr Hans van den Broek is presently at a Council meeting in Luxembourg , so I must apologize for his absence and ask you to accept making do with me instead .
However , I can assure you that I will report back to Hans van den Broek on the debate and that I will also try to respond to the suggestions about linking INTERREG and PHARE projects within the framework of my responsibilities .
PHARE is indeed the European Union 's main instrument of cooperation with the Central and Eastern European countries while at the same time representing the most comprehensive international support project for these countries .
We all agree that the PHARE programme must now be directed at and concentrated on preparing the partner states for accession to the EU .
The Commission is aware of the weak points .
On 19 March it therefore decided on new PHARE programme pre-accession guidelines .
These general guidelines were forwarded to Parliament and the Council and we are pleased that the reactions were on the whole positive .
The Commission agrees with many of the points Mr Wiersma made in his report .
Two new priorities are provided for in the new guidelines : assistance for the administrative improvements needed prior to adopting the acquis communautaire , a point which was made by many speakers , and financing the necessary investment .
In this sense we are responding to two of the rapporteur 's main recommendations .
More importance will be attached to investment and we will seek closer coordination and cooperation with the international financial institutions .
In improving the cooperation with public authorities in the partner countries we also want to try to reduce the reliance on consultants .
Apart from these priorities , we are also concerned with developing the civil society and strengthening democracy .
We will continue to pay great attention to promoting and establishing democracy .
The new guidelines also provide for a reform of programme management , including simplified planning and execution reports , together with greater decentralization and the transfer of monitoring tasks to the EU delegations .
The list of measures includes a considerable reduction in the number of programme management bodies , integrating the programme more closely in the activities of the partner country 's authorities , a thorough examination of the on-going programmes with a view to speeding up their implementation , reducing the financial backlog and a thorough revision of the handbook on the decentralized execution of the PHARE programme .
Mr Wiersma , in your report you ask whether in future PHARE should concentrate more money on the countries that are lagging behind in the economic reform process .
The Commission will look into this question in the context of the Santer package it will be putting to Parliament on 16 July .
On the question of evaluation , to which Parliament rightly attaches very great importance , in 1995 the Commission introduced a new monitoring and evaluation system .
Moreover , in line with the SEM 2000 principles on economic and efficient budgeting , the Commission has set up an independent evaluation body .
This body will go beyond the existing ad hoc evaluations and be able to measure the global effects of the programmes more accurately .
We will shortly complete a detailed interim evaluation of the PHARE programme , which we will forward to Parliament before the end of this month , and I hope that will give you a better basis for assessment because it is based on more than 80 evaluations carried out so far .
We hope to see a critical and constructive dialogue with Parliament on the findings of the interim evaluation and will keep Members regularly informed of progress in this area .
Lastly , let me turn to the PHARE programme on cross-border cooperation .
As the rapporteur pointed out , priority should be given to supporting projects that aim at reinforcing democracy , respect for human rights and stability , together with social and economic integration .
I welcome Mr Wiersma 's suggestions here .
When we implement the new guidelines for the PHARE programme we will pay serious attention to the aspect of cross-border cooperation .
At the same time I would point out that cross-border cooperation is already being strengthened by the closer links between INTERREG 2a and 2c with PHARE in terms of both content and finance .
Let me make it quite plain that this is a question of infrastructural and regional development .
Let me also make it clear yet again that the review of PHARE does in fact involve increasing investment funds from 25 % to 70 % and increasing the TEN budget , which means we will be making some headway in this area too , even if it does not mean we can finance all the dream projects or all the necessary projects .
Thank you for the debate and for your ideas .
You may take it that we will seriously consider their practical implementation because we are just as keen as you to ensure that the PHARE programme is successful and makes a real contribution to simplifying the pre-accession strategy .
Did I understand you correctly , Mrs Wulf-Mathies ?
Did you say this document would be available by the end of the month , that is to say by Monday ?
( Mrs Wulf-Mathies confirmed this . ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Mr President , I have a point of order .
At the sitting of 12 May , I asked you about the procedure for a call for tenders , and you told me that it was not a question for the plenary and that I should submit it in writing , which I did the same day .
More than six weeks have now elapsed , almost seven , in fact , so we are well past the deadline .
I raised the question again in Strasbourg and you have still not replied , so I should be grateful to have an answer from you today .
Thank you , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
The answer to your question is being prepared .
As you know , answers must be approved by the Bureau .
The answer to your question will be put before the Bureau at the earliest possible opportunity .
I hope that will be on 10 July and that you will have the answer before the next Strasbourg part-session .
Welcome
A delegation of members from the group of the Flemish Christian-Democrat Party ( CVP ) in the Belgian Chamber of Representatives have taken their seats in the official gallery .
I should like , on behalf of the Parliament , to welcome them , as I welcome this further instance of collaboration between parliaments .
European Council of 16 / 17 June - Dutch Presidency
The next item on the agenda is the joint debate on :
a report by the Council and a statement by the Commission on the European Council of 16 / 17 June in Amsterdam ; -the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the activities of the Dutch Presidency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it gives me great pleasure to be here today to report on the outcome of the Amsterdam European Council and on the action we have taken during our presidency to develop the main items on the agenda which we discussed with you six months ago .
And there is more for me to talk about than just the Amsterdam summit , however important a milestone that was .
Our task during this presidency was to tackle the two main challenges facing Europe as it enters the next millennium : the introduction on schedule of a strong economic and monetary union and the enlargement of the European Union .
There was also another reason why the Maastricht Treaty needed to be adapted .
The European Union is a union of and for its citizens , and their expectations and concerns also lay at the heart of the discussions concluded at Amsterdam .
I would sum up the results of the Amsterdam European Council as follows : we took a positive step towards attaining a Europe which looks after its people , its market , its currency and its environment , and an irreversible step towards the undivided Europe for which new and unparalleled opportunities were created in 1989 .
In addition to the preparations for Amsterdam , there were many other internal and external issues which needed to be dealt with and which we were glad to take in hand .
We could not have been an effective presidency without the excellent teamwork which we enjoyed with all of our partners in the European integration process , including , first and foremost , the European Parliament .
The considerable and very active contribution which you made to the preparations for the Amsterdam Treaty helped to establish it on firm foundations .
We also enjoyed excellent cooperation with the European Commission , and the constructive and intensive support we received from the Council Secretariat also deserves a special mention .
And of course , all presidencies depend to a large extent on what their predecessors have bequeathed them .
In our case the Irish , carrying on from Italy , gave us an extremely solid basis in the form of the Dublin II draft treaty on which we were able to build .
With your permission , I shall look in a little more detail at the results of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Certain aspects of the text to be signed in October are not exactly as the Dutch presidency would have wished , but I think that all in all there is no reason to be dissatisfied with what we have achieved , and I am delighted that , in many respects , this Treaty represents progress towards a better , more democratic , decisive and , in particular , more human Europe .
There are a number of points I wish to emphasize here .
Broadly speaking , the quality of European administration has been improved both institutionally and materially in the form of new , policy-reinforcing articles in the Treaty .
The key words here are democracy and transparency .
I would point out that the legislative role of the European Parliament has been substantially strengthened in three ways .
Firstly , the cooperation procedure which was so unsatisfactory from the democracy point of view has been almost entirely abandoned and - except in EMU - replaced by codecision .
From now on , the European Parliament and the Council will be genuine co-legislators on EC legislation , on an entirely equal footing .
Secondly , the codecision procedure has been considerably simplified , mainly by abolishing the third reading which Parliament so abhorred .
And thirdly , the codecision procedure applies for most of the new ' Amsterdam ' provisions in the Treaty .
Parliament 's role in the area previously covered by the third pillar has also been stepped up .
We are now moving towards the communitization of the free movement of persons , an area in which Parliament has not played a very significant role up to now .
In the new Treaty , however , things are set to change , in that Parliament is given formal consultation rights and the right to adequate information .
It also retains its existing budgetary rights .
The idea of ' transparent government ' is also finally taking shape at European level , first of all by streamlining the decision-making procedures , as I have already mentioned , and secondly by making the Treaties rather more accessible to the layman .
A number of obsolete provisions are to be abolished , and a readable , consolidated text of the Treaty is to be issued as soon as possible after the IGC .
In particular , transparency is to be achieved by providing information for the general public and access to the institutions ' documents .
This principle is set out in the Treaty and is to be developed in detail by the institutions in codecision .
These are issues that directly affect the man in the street as a worker , consumer and someone who benefits from a better environment .
The EC is to play a stronger role in a number of important areas of policy .
First and foremost here is the decision to incorporate the Agreement on Social Policy into the Treaty , which rectifies an anomaly from the past and creates a firm basis for socio-economic development in Europe .
But there is more to it than just that : the Treaty has actually been strengthened in a number of areas .
There is the new basis for Union action in the fields of non-discrimination and equal treatment for men and women , and there are the provisions on combating social exclusion and the reference to fundamental socio-economic rights .
Leading on from this , I would draw your attention in particular to the prominence given to policy on employment .
The Union 's soaring levels of unemployment are the most difficult social and economic problem facing Europe .
The Treaty now contains a new Title which provides a basis for the Union to take action to boost and supplement the Member States ' own policies , and together the Member States and the Union are sure to be able to pursue a more effective and , above all , a coordinated policy .
There are recommendations on how individual Member States can be more effective in this field , and there is also provision for measures to stimulate employment while still meeting budgetary requirements .
I shall return to this in a moment .
I have already mentioned the communitization of the free movement of persons .
The presidency had hoped for a quicker and more unconditional approach , but here again we have to count our blessings .
This time at least - unlike at Maastricht - we were able to effect the transfer to the EC pillar , bringing a number of immediate advantages such as the use of EC instruments , the publication of proposals , a stronger role for the Court of Justice , Parliament and the Commission , and the reinstatement of the four freedoms on an equal footing .
There are also some indirect advantages , however , in that there is scope for further development in future . The Schengen acquis has also been incorporated , establishing a basis for this highly successful form of intra-Union cooperation to continue .
The Treaty now makes a number of provisions for progress in the field of foreign and security policy .
It avoids radical communitization , offering instead improvements in three areas : firstly , better policy preparation ; secondly , decision-making ; and thirdly , clear implementation .
Policy preparation is to be improved and given greater depth through the setting-up of a planning and analysis unit .
Decision-making on CFSP matters is to be streamlined by introducing the possibility of constructive abstention and of majority decisions under certain conditions .
And the appointment of a High Representative for the CFSP should help to strengthen implementation .
On the CFSP budget , I should finally like to say how pleased I am with the interinstitutional agreement concluded with Parliament , and I am most grateful to you , Mr President , and to the Members most involved .
The agreement forms an excellent basis for fruitful cooperation between Council and Parliament .
On the important subject of institutional reform , I would draw your attention to the reforms decided for the Commission .
The Commission President is to be given a stronger position and his appointment is to be subject to Parliament 's approval .
He will be able to appoint his Commissioners in agreement with the Member States , and to set out guidelines for them during their term of office .
I regret the fact that the IGC was not able to reach a clear decision on the future weighting of votes in the Council vis-à-vis the composition of the Commission , on which a number of questions of principle have already been decided .
A number of important decisions on vote weighting in the Council are now going to have to be taken before the next enlargement .
On the subject of institutional matters , the Court of Auditors has been given greater powers to combat fraud , and to enable the institutions and the Member States to manage the Community 's finances better .
The Court of Justice too is given greater powers , including the possibility of examining whether the actions taken by the institutions are consistent with basic rights .
One final word on increased cooperation and flexibility .
I think we have struck the right balance here .
On the one hand , establishing the principle of using the qualified majority means that we can have efficient decision-making , whilst on the other there are sufficient guarantees built into the procedure to prevent its excessive use .
The EC pillar gives the Commission a central deciding role in terms of flexibility , and that is as it should be : the Commission is the guardian of the Treaties , and this principle is the cornerstone of the Community 's legal system .

All in all , I have the impression that Amsterdam has given us a review of the Treaty on European Union which , despite the concessions made on the original aims , has been worthwhile in every sense .
The main preparations for economic and monetary union have now been concluded .
We now have the Pact on Stability and Growth , together with agreement on the EMS II exchange rate system which is to apply from the third stage and on the legal framework for the euro - genuinely vital steps towards the introduction of EMU on 1 January 1999 .
There are many practicalities which are still to be settled , and it is important that clear information should be provided , but on the basis of the decisions taken and in view of the major efforts being made to achieve genuine convergence , I have every confidence that we are well on the way to introducing a stable euro on schedule .
The single currency is extremely important , but it is not , of course , an end in itself .
EMU is all about the links between people , currency and market , and we were able to reach some important decisions on this point in Amsterdam by adopting a resolution on growth and employment alongside the Pact on Stability and Growth .
An efficiently functioning internal market and a healthy macroeconomic climate are essential conditions for generating employment , and the single currency and the single market are both crucial here .
However , this also has to be seen in the context of finding an even balance between a monetary Europe , an economic Europe and a social Europe .
The need to find this balance lay at the heart of the decisions that we took at Amsterdam .
The Member States are to continue to bear the main responsibility for employment policy , but they could learn much more from each other and also work better with one another .
Europe too , through a healthy monetary and macroeconomic policy , could give a more effective push towards creating employment , not by simply providing more money , but by encouraging Member States to make better use of some of the existing instruments and , as I have said , to listen to each other , learn from each other and work together .
Altogether , the new employment chapter in the Treaty , the resolution on employment and growth , and the establishment of a genuine social policy at European level ought to form a useful complement to EMU .
Besides the Intergovernmental Conference and EMU , preparations for the enlargement of the Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean formed a major part of our agenda .
This enlargement needs to be well prepared , not just by the countries concerned but also by ourselves .
We need to build bridges between the countries and people who are to help shape our undivided Europe , and we have tried to do this by ensuring that our structured dialogue with the applicant countries covers as many substantive issues as possible .
In order to focus attention , each meeting dealt with only one or two subjects selected in close consultation with the Commission and after discussion with the applicant countries , and in this way we have been able to secure a genuine exchange of views on a wide range of topics , from preparations for the single market to the constitutional state .
We have also been able to discuss things more freely and in greater depth .
We feel that holding substantive talks with the applicant countries is important not just for the technical aspects of accession , but also , in certain cases , for strengthening popular support in the countries concerned , and we have the impression that our association partners appreciate this approach .
At our meeting with the applicant countries tomorrow , we shall be informing them about the outcome of the Amsterdam summit and at the same time boosting their confidence in our future together in an undivided Europe .
The efficient operation of the single market is still crucial for our competitiveness , economic growth and employment , and therefore for European integration in the broader sense , which was why we put this issue high on the agenda .
Following discussions in the Single Market Council and ECOFIN , the Commission has drawn up an action plan with four strategic objectives : more effective rules , dealing with market distortions , abolishing sectoral barriers and ensuring that the single market offers more advantages for the man in the street .
The European Council has given this action plan its full backing , and we hope that the legislative proposals relating to it will be adopted without difficulty .
The concern to establish a better balance between the market and the environment continues to demand great efforts from us all , and this is why we are delighted that , as well as placing environment policy in general on a much firmer footing at European level , as in the Amsterdam Treaty , we have also been able to make significant progress in the policy we are currently pursuing .
The presidency gave top priority to the problems of climate change , and the European Union has agreed a joint negotiating position for the global climate treaty to be concluded in Kyoto in December .
We are to call for a 15 % reduction in the main greenhouse gases by the year 2010 , and the Union has already started preparing measures to achieve this .
Other important environmental measures taken over the last six months include the promotion of an integrated , sustainable water management system and the reduction of air-polluting emissions from road traffic .
Major progress has also been made on the Union 's internal security .
The Dublin European Council had called for a comprehensive action plan against organized crime , with specific recommendations and a timetable , and a highlevel group set to work on this with great determination .
The Amsterdam European Council was able to approve the group 's report and has now given instructions for it to be put into practice .
A wide range of measures to combat organized crime are now available : prevention measures , judicial instruments , improvements in practical cooperation , the extension of the remit of Europol , fiscal and financial aspects , and international cooperation .
Progress has also been made on fighting the drugs trade , with the approval of an early warning system for synthetic drugs , and various forms of practical cooperation have been launched within the European Union and elsewhere .
In this year against racism , we have succeeded in obtaining approval for the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia , which is to be based in Vienna .
I am very hopeful that the Centre will play an effective role in combating racist actions and mentality , and in fighting discrimination and exclusion and the human suffering that they cause .
The Union 's external policy was the focus of much of our attention , since the Union now maintains a wide range of increasingly varied and intensive relations on the international stage .
It is also a fact that the links between politics and economics in international relations have become much more complicated .
The presidency has done its best to promote the countless dialogues that the Union is pursuing with its various partners .
I shall turn briefly now to a few of the important areas of external policy .
The presidency sought to give a major new boost to transatlantic cooperation by producing practical short-term results to demonstrate the benefits of stepping up cooperation under the New Transatlantic Agenda , and by bringing about structural improvements to pave the way for further results in the longer term .
The Union 's summit with Russia strengthened and intensified cooperation .
Political dialogue has been expanded and trade has shown a further increase recently , but the level of European investment in Russia is still too low because of the uncertain legal and economic climate .
The European Council welcomed the new cooperation agreement between NATO and Russia as a vital contribution to a new European security structure .
Yesterday there was an extremely useful and constructive meeting between the European Union and Japan , at which important agreements were reached on continuing dialogue in the areas of deregulation and distribution , amongst others .
The presidency made great efforts to promote the Barcelona process , since it firmly believes that EuroMediterranean stability concerns everyone in the Union .
A political Euro-Mediterranean conference was held on Malta on 15 and 16 April 1997 and demonstrated the importance which everyone attaches to the EuroMediterranean process .
The political and security dialogue is to continue to be gradually developed .
The options for setting up the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area scheduled for 2010 are to be studied in closer detail , and in the meantime work is to be done on making reciprocal trade easier and encouraging investment .
Greater attention is to be given to the social , cultural and human aspects of cooperation , including human rights and the role of civil society .
The Union has an important part to play in supporting the peace process in the Middle East .
It has already played an active political role in cooperation with the US and in conjunction with its substantial economic assistance to the region , and this is to continue .
I should like to express my appreciation for the excellent work done by Mr Moratinos , our special representative there .
Relations between the Union and Turkey have been given fresh impetus following a number of developments during our presidency .
At the informal General Affairs Council in Apeldoorn in March , particular attention was given to the development of our long-term relations with Turkey .
The Association Council met on 29 April for the first time since October 1995 .
The setting-up of a committee of wise men to look into outstanding territorial differences between Ankara and Athens will , we hope , be able to make a constructive contribution to relations between Greece and Turkey and thus also to relations between Turkey and the Union , as well as towards finding a solution to the Cyprus problem .
There have been further developments in relations between the Union and Cyprus in the form of agreements reached as part of a structured dialogue .
The presidency 's work on the Cyprus question focused on support for the UN , which is the body primarily responsible for finding a solution to the problem .
Alongside the European Council 's political assessment of events in the various countries of former Yugoslavia , as set out in the conclusions , I would draw attention to the coherent strategy that has been developed for the region .
The presidency worked on developing a strategy for relations with all the countries of former Yugoslavia , except for Slovenia , which has a Europe Agreement .
The result was a document setting out in detail the conditions under which the Union is prepared to strengthen its links with Croatia , Bosnia-Herzegovina , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania .
The Commission is to report regularly on whether the countries in question are complying with these conditions .
We monitored the worrying developments in Albania very closely from the outset .
When the crisis became widespread , the presidency helped the OSCE to set up a ' Coordinating Framework ' led by former Chancellor Vranitzky .
It is , of course , extremely important that the forthcoming elections - for which the Union is providing funding and observers - should clear the way to greater stability , with at least basic levels of democracy , plurality and readiness to reform .
Mr President , I shall finish there .
The European agenda , which is so often accused of being technocratic and cold , is actually directly determined by its immediate political environment , which is in turn heavily influenced by the political climate in the 15 Member States and the expectations and concerns of their citizens .
There is increasing interaction between the 15 national political agendas and the Brussels agenda , and this very fact - that ' Europe ' is clearly more prominent and is playing an increasingly important role in national elections , for example - presents a tremendous political challenge , not least for the presidency .
And it was a challenge that we were happy to deal with on the way to Amsterdam .
If we look at the slightly broader political context of the last six months , we feel that there is no reason to be dissatisfied , either with the results we have achieved or with the political will that has been shown to take Europe forward , step by step .
And it has indeed been step by step , but they have at least been steps in the right direction .
We hope that the results we have achieved have established a useful basis for the incoming Luxembourg presidency , and we wish Luxembourg every success .
It can certainly count on our support .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
I should like to pay public tribute now to the spirit of collaboration and the facilities which the Dutch Presidency has provided for this Parliament to work constructively within the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference .
A special thank you .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council in Amsterdam marked a successful conclusion to the work of the Dutch presidency , to which I should like to pay earnest tribute for the energy , commitment and determination it has shown throughout these last six months .
Since Maastricht , my priority has been to bring the European Union closer to the citizen .
The Amsterdam Council did the necessary .
Its conclusions on employment , on freedom , security and justice and on the environment , and the Treaty of Amsterdam , show that the public 's concerns feature on our agendas .
Those conclusions also show that we have embarked on a new stage in Community history .
For that very reason , any additional step is difficult : we find ourselves treading on the most sensitive matters .
Our progress is slow , I grant you , but progress it is .
That is the great thing .
Let me start with employment , the main concern of our citizens .
It has been at the very centre of discussion , both at the Intergovernmental Conference , to which I shall return in due course , and at most of the discussions on other subjects between the Heads of State and Government .
By laying down the final technical preparations , the European Council has given the final green light to the launch of the single currency on 1 January 1999 , while improving the co-ordination of economic policies for the benefit of employment .
The Member States have clearly confirmed their determination to go ahead with the euro under the conditions laid down .
We all know now what the common side of the coins is going to look like : the euro now has a face !
As you know , the Pact for Stability and Growth was adopted in its entirety .
It is accompanied by two resolutions . The resolution on growth and employment makes employment the specific and operational centrepiece of the Union 's priorities .
Then we also have the new chapter on employment , which will be implemented ahead of time , and the strengthening of the social provisions of the Treaty .
Between now and the extraordinary European Council under the Luxembourg presidency we must do everything possible to ensure that concrete action is taken to encourage the creation of jobs .
It 's all very well to talk about these things at summit level - but words have to be translated into actions .
That is the battle this Commission has been fighting for more than two years , with the support of Parliament .
I also welcome the encouraging signals sent out by the European Council for the completion of the internal market , whose effect on competitiveness , economic growth and employment is essential .
The Commission will ensure that the four objectives of the action plan are put into effect efficiently , and on time .
All our institutions must take action , each in its own field .
Finally , I welcome the launch of some 90 regional pacts for employment , each of which will act as a laboratory for employment throughout the entire Union .
Now , Mr President , I come to the Intergovernmental Conference .
This is the third time I have been involved in a revision of the Treaty of Rome .
All the meetings went on into the small hours .
So the idea of working for 18 hours at a stretch is not , in itself , anything out of the ordinary .
The negotiations themselves have never been easy , and I can tell you that they were particularly difficult - sometimes even frustrating - on this occasion .
I several times felt there was a lack of political will and a worrying tendency to give priority to purely national viewpoints .
There were also a few isolated attempts to cast doubt on the key elements of our Community system .
I am very glad to say we were able to rebuff those attempts .
Negotiating is one thing , but the results are another .
Have we achieved the objectives we set ourselves when this Intergovernmental Conference began ?
Have we succeeded in strengthening the Union so that its enlargement can take place under favourable conditions ?
Two weeks ago I spoke to you on the basis of a presidency text that represented a compromise .
As I saw it , that text combined ambition and realism .
And I hoped that an additional effort would be made by the Heads of State and Government to strengthen and improve it .
The fears I expressed in this House on 11 June , Mr President , have to some extent proved well founded .
In some areas , the positions reached have been abandoned .
And what can I say about the proliferation of protocols and declarations : 14 protocols and 46 declarations ?
That must be a record , which does nothing to make the Treaty easier to read .
But let us not lose sight of the main issues .
By comparison with the Maastricht Treaty , important advances have been made .
The final result is very much the same as the opinion that the Commission presented in February 1996 , as a quick analysis of the results shows .
One of our ambitions was to bring the Union closer to its citizens , enabling them to feel that their concerns are being taken into account and to give their support to the new Treaty when the time comes for the ratification procedures .
The net result here is positive .
The new Treaty , as the Commission and the European Parliament both wanted , communitizes much of the third pillar and incorporates the Schengen Accords .
I would have liked to see the Heads of State and Government already moving in favour of qualified majority voting and the codecision procedure , instead of giving themselves time to think about it . I do of course recognize how sensitive these areas are .
But , at the same time , I would say to those who are hesitant about moving to qualified majority voting that it is precisely because this area is so sensitive and crucial that the European Union must be able to take the necessary steps .
I note with satisfaction that , at the end of the transition period , the normal rules of the Treaty will apply as regards the Commission 's exclusive right of initiative .
That is a very good thing .
With regard to the incorporation of the effects of Schengen , I hope that - as the European Council wishes - the measures for implementing the protocol will be adopted as soon as possible .
A solution has been found to the problems of the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark .
On the subject of employment , we have a new chapter and a legal basis for measures to stimulate it .
The social protocol has been incorporated , and that is a considerable step forward .
The new text also includes positive points on the principle of equal treatment for men and women and a legal basis for helping victims of social exclusion .
The European Parliament will be involved in these decisions , which will be of particular concern to the citizen through the application of the codecision procedure .
The strengthening of the provisions relating to health and consumer protection was not challenged at Amsterdam .
I am particularly glad that the European Parliament has been closely associated with the adoption of the veterinary and plant health legislation .
With regard to Article 100a ( 4 ) , the new wording allows the Member States to do more to respond to public concern about environmental protection .
We have , however , taken steps to avoid any risk of the fragmentation of the single market , by allocating the Commission a decisive role in the procedure .
The strengthening of basic rights , the recognition of the role of services of general public interest , which is an essential component of our European model of society , and the tightening of measures to combat fraud are all positive points that can be welcomed .
Next , a word about subsidiarity . The Commission has no problems with the actual content of the protocol that was adopted , because it has been acting along those lines since I first came to office .
However , the principle of subsidiarity must not be used as a pretext to prevent Community action where Community action is essential .
The Member States , incidentally , would be well advised to put their own houses in order , because we are being flooded with requests for proposals or studies in the widest variety of fields .
To say nothing of the national red tape that makes life so difficult for small- and medium-sized enterprises within the Union .
Our second ambition was to equip the Union with the instruments for a foreign and security policy worthy of the name .
In this area , the text largely fulfils the Commission 's hopes .
The instruments have been clarified , and qualified majority voting has been introduced on a broad front .
Of course , certain checks and balances remain - constructive abstention , appeal to important national interests .
Everything will depend on the use made of them .
The structures , too , have been improved : the Secretary-General of the Council acting as the supreme representative of the CFSP , the new troika , the think-tank .
So we have made notable advances , though they have yet to be turned to practical account .
Everything will come down to a question of political will .
In defence matters , on the other hand , I am sorry to say there has been no real breakthrough .
Negotiations on trade policy have been especially difficult .
Some Member States were unwilling to take a major step forward , for a variety of reasons which , I fear , reveal a degree of short-sightedness .
Rather than allow the presidency 's text to be watered down , I preferred to safeguard the future .
I successfully urged the addition of an extra clause to the existing Article 113 allowing the Council , in response to a proposal by the Commission and after consultation with the European Parliament , to extend the provisions of that article to intellectual property and to services .
I am convinced that , sooner or later , reason and consensus will prevail and that this clause will be used .
I now come to the institutional issues which have aroused so much comment .
Very important progress has been made in two areas of direct concern to the European Parliament .
The first is the codecision procedure : a breakthrough has been made in the area of democratization , with a very broad extension of codecision , and simplification of the procedure which will put the joint legislators on an equal footing .
I see this as a genuine sign of confidence in the institution that represents the citizens .
There can be no doubt at all , then , that the European Parliament has emerged from this conference in a stronger position .
The other matter is the threefold reinforcement of the role of the President of the Commission . Furthermore , the President designate will in future be formally approved by the European Parliament .
By contrast , little has been achieved with regard to the extending of qualified majority voting .
The presidency 's package was ambitious , and I regret that the European Council felt unable to sustain that ambition .
There are of course some bright spots - research and the CFSP , for example , and areas such as employment , social exclusion , equality between men and women , and health protection .
But many other provisions have fallen by the wayside .
That does not augur well for the enlargement of the Union , but I live in hope that we shall be able to find some other way through these difficulties before too long .
A word about agreements on closer co-operation .
They should enable those Member States which so desire to move forward , and become a very valuable instrument in an enlarged Europe .
In the first pillar , that instrument will be activated by qualified majority voting in response to a Commission proposal , and I welcome that .
Finally , I should mention the composition of the Commission and the new weighting of votes .
As far as the Commission is concerned , the strengthening of the President 's role is an extremely encouraging sign for its future activities .
He will participate in the appointment of the other Commissioners , and his key role in defining the political guidelines will be enshrined in the Treaty .
The declaration on the internal organization of our institution is also welcome .
I have said on several occasions that we intend to undertake internal reforms , and we shall do so .
The importance of the question of how many Commissioners there should be was probably exaggerated during the negotiations , though it is now accepted by all concerned that a certain number should not be exceeded .
I found that the largest Member States were willing , subject to certain conditions , to give up their right to a second Commissioner .
That will not come easily .
An agreement is , of course , linked to the revised weighting of the votes .
I have no doubt that a solution will be found here , but , to be frank , this matter is of more interest to the Member States than to the Commission and the European Parliament .
I can accept the present weighting system .
Ultimately , the solution adopted by the Heads of State and Government regarding the number of Commissioners is not so very different from the Commission 's view .
We have always felt that the number of Commissioners should be reduced to one per Member State , and that the conference should provide an appropriate procedure for changing the system if the number of Member States rises above twenty .
The reduction in the number of Commissioners , when the time comes , will be based on a general compromise encompassing the reweighting of votes , which will have to come into force on the occasion of the first enlargement .
Furthermore , a new Intergovernmental Conference will have to undertake a complete review of the composition and functioning of the institutions - and I mean the institutions , not just the Commission - one year before Union membership exceeds twenty .
As far as the institutional package is concerned , we shall of course have to show stronger political will when the time comes .
I don 't want to see us compelled , on the very brink of enlargement , to say to future Member States , ' You have done everything possible to prepare for joining the Union , but unfortunately the Union has not been able to prepare to accept you . '
( Applause ) Mr President , the next few years will be crucial for the future of the Union .
In a few weeks ' time the Commission will present its opinion on the candidate States .
It will present its proposals for Agenda 2000 : the future of our policies , including the Common Agricultural Policy and the Structural Funds , enlargement , the future financial framework .
We will need determination and political will .
Let us begin by bringing the Amsterdam Treaty to life and taking full advantage of all its potential .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Santer .
I call upon Mrs Green .
Mr President , I want to begin by expressing my warm support for the efforts of the Dutch presidency over the past six months .
Whatever our assessment of the outcome of the Intergovernmental Conference , we recognize the vigour and rigour which Prime Minister Kok personally has brought to the process .
My group would certainly want to put on record our thanks to the Prime Minister , his Foreign Minister Mr Van Mierlo and his European Minister Mr Patijn and also the other members of his government who have given this Parliament such firm support .
It is our role here today to make an initial political response to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
For my group this Treaty will be judged on two major issues .
Firstly , does the Treaty respond to the aspirations , hopes and expectations of the peoples of the European Union ?
Secondly , does the Treaty make the Union ready for enlargement to Cyprus , the Baltic States and Central and Eastern Europe ?
I want to make it clear that my group recognizes and welcomes the advances which the Amsterdam Treaty has brought in dealing with a people 's Europe .
Firstly , we very much welcome the decision of the Council to put employment at the top of its agenda .
My group supports the inclusion of the new title on employment and the social protocol into the Treaty as well as the reference to fundamental social rights .
We recognize that words in a Treaty never created a single job .
But we also recognize that the new competence allows us for the first time to create a framework in which the serious coordination of the economic and employment policies of the Member States can begin .
This is surely what we can do at European level to ensure that the work being done by Member States to deal with the curse of unemployment is sustainable , ensuring that economic and employment policies across fifteen of the richest countries in the world working in close and careful harmony will make a huge contribution to growth and real job creation .
Knowing as I do the President-in-Office 's commitment to the fight against unemployment , I should like to turn to him with a message from the Socialist Group .
If the Council was really serious about job creation , there is a real opportunity to prove it immediately .
The Union 's broad economic guidelines are yet to be fully adopted by the Council .
There is a stated commitment in the resolution on growth and employment to ensure that employment is taken into greater account when establishing the broad economic guidelines .
You will also know that the Finance Ministers meeting in ECOFIN have a reputation for completely ignoring the entreaties of the European Council .
We need the Prime Ministers of the Member States to exercise their authority and insist that the broad economic guidelines are now revised .
Nothing would give a stronger signal of good intention than that .
Nothing would silence the cynics more quickly than that .
And , President Santer , nothing would prove the political commitment of the European Commission more than if they insisted on such a revision .
Such a move would also give a clear signal that the summit on employment to be held in October under the Luxembourg presidency had real political muscle behind it and was intended to come forward with concrete proposals , rather than the usual ritual blah blah .
The promises on employment now need some flesh on their bones .
The adoption of the broad economic guidelines offers the first opportunity and the employment summit offers the second .
On behalf of my group I also want to recognize the other positive aspects of the Amsterdam Treaty .
The acknowledgement of respect for human rights ; the new no-discrimination clause , although it is such a pity that in the European Year against Racism and Xenophobia the Council could not adopt this competence with qualified majority voting ; the clear step forward on equal opportunities , the environment , public health and consumer protection ; the developments on transparency and openness and the reduction in the number of decision-making procedures and the stream-lining and extension of co-decision for the European Parliament .
I understand that some governments are even now questioning the extended list of co-decision , arguing that decisions made by unanimity in the Council cannot be subject to co-decision with the European Parliament .
Perhaps the Prime Minister could draw the attention of Member States to the existent powers on culture , Article 128 of the present Maastricht Treaty and the existing powers on research , Article 130 of the Maastricht Treaty , both of which grant co-decision with the European Parliament while acting unanimously in the Council .
The Prime Minister will have the total support of this Parliament in insisting that the list of articles to be dealt with by codecision , as published in the draft Treaty of Amsterdam and now widely circulated , is sustained .
My group are also deeply disappointed with progress on the second and third pillars of the Treaty .
We have made it clear all along and have supported your efforts to communitarize some aspects of the justice and home affairs pillar .
We respect the fact that some transfer has been made but I want to repeat the real anxiety we have about the lack of parliamentary control which now exists in these areas - crucial areas of immigration policy , visa controls and asylum .
By retaining unanimity in the Council and only consulting the European Parliament , real democracy in these areas is thwarted .
On the issue of common foreign and security policy , we always knew it was going to be difficult to make real progress , in particular on defence issues and my group is pleased that we are able to integrate the Petersberg tasks into the Treaty .
But we remain concerned about the lack of a coherent foreign policy voice for Europe .
We hear what the Treaty says about a Mr or Ms CFSP but with unanimity in the Council , how will Mr or Ms CFSP know with what voice to speak .
Perhaps our greatest disappointment is with regard to enlargement .
We have grave misgivings about the inability of the Council to agree on any meaningful extension of QMV .
More than any other issue , this puts enlargement at risk .
With even more Member States at the table in the coming years , how can we expect to see high standards being set in European legislation to protect the living and working condition of Europe 's peoples .
Therefore my group believes that it is vital that before enlargement the European Council must come together again to address the question of majority voting in the Council as well as the composition of the Commission and the weighting of votes .
I conclude by saying that my group is firmly of the view that a Treaty which , despite our misgivings , has made steady progress on the agenda important to our peoples cannot be dismissed .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr Kok and his colleagues most warmly on the excellent work they have done .
The Amsterdam summit was certainly a great success for the euro , and we hope that the last obstacles have now been removed .
I think that forces could now be generated by the euro that will give Europe fresh impetus .
Amsterdam was able to achieve what we could not do at Maastricht , firstly with the social protocol - and here I hope the UK will apply the European legislation that has since been adopted - and also in making employment one of the European Union 's main objectives .
Ten years ago when we held the presidency , we tried to achieve a social dimension through consultations between the European social partners , European collective agreements and giving the Community a social focus .
We wasted a great deal of time .
But Europe needs to have a social and a human face , and we must be able to provide answers to the problems which exist in society , including above all unemployment .
We hope that the Luxembourg summit will indeed produce some useful results here .
The European Union has obviously learnt its lesson from mad cow disease , and Community policy on the environment , public health and consumer protection has been greatly tightened .
There has been a real breakthrough in the protection of human rights , with the establishment of equal treatment for men and women , the fight against social exclusion and a ban on discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation , for example .
The protocols and declarations on the abolition of the death penalty and on voluntary work as an expression of social solidarity are extremely important .
The establishment of the Union as an area of freedom , security and justice is an extremely high priority for the people of Europe .
The Heads of Government evidently thought that intergovernmental cooperation was unlikely to produce efficient solutions here , since they have communitized the free movement of persons , asylum and immigration .
However , this decision will not be applied automatically , and unanimity will be required for five more years before the Council can take majority decisions and the European Parliament is given the power of codecision .
We are delighted that Europol is to start operating on schedule and that the Schengen acquis is to be incorporated into the Treaty .
The regulations are extremely complex , however , especially the protocols with the UK , Denmark and Ireland allowing these countries to remain on the sidelines when it comes to freedom of movement .
Progress on the common foreign and security policy was much more limited , and we hope that constructive abstention will make decision-making easier .
The Petersberg missions and the policy planning and early warning unit which can be set up under the Treaty have been ratified , and the high representatives are a good idea .
However , it has again proved impossible to integrate the WEU into the European Union or to expand our trade policy further .
Before Amsterdam , people said that the European Parliament would be the big loser , but the opposite seems to be true .
Our observer , Mr Brok , calculates that Parliament 's codecision has been extended from 15 to 38 fields , an increase of 23 , and the assent procedure from 8 to 11 .
Can the President-in-Office confirm this , particularly for those areas where the Council is to continue to decide unanimously and where Parliament is to keep its powers of codecision , as indicated in the official document we have been given ?
The codecision procedure has also been drastically simplified in a series of very welcome reforms .
I should like to pay tribute to the President of the European Parliament and our two observers for the decisive role which they have played here .
However , the European Parliament must also face up to its responsibilities .
Against all expectations , Parliament is now able to decide on the statute of its Members for itself .
This is a major challenge for the House , and one which I hope we can bring to a successful conclusion within the lifetime of this parliament , by which time we must stamp out all abuses .
The Council will be required to approve the statute unanimously , so we shall see then whether it intends to give Parliament the means to do its job in a credible way .
The reforms at the Commission , with the new political role for the President , are a very positive development .
The conclusion reached by the PPE Group is that Amsterdam has been a continuation of the major reforms that we have seen over the last 15 years since the Stuttgart Declaration in 1983 , on the single market , economic and monetary union , the single currency and political union .
Substantial progress has again been made , and we therefore support the Amsterdam Treaty .
However , we also note that there is one crucial problem that has again been postponed .
Over the next few years , the European Union must accept its historic responsibility by bringing democratic countries on the European continent into the Union .
It cannot do this without institutional reform , and in particular without qualified majority decisions in the Council .
This is why we have pointed out in our resolution that issues which need to be settled before new members are admitted to the Union have been totally ignored .
Without these reforms , the Union will lose momentum , and if it is deprived of strength and coherence , I fear it will collapse under the weight of its historic mission to enlarge .
Despite the very laudable results which this presidency has achieved , we cannot ignore the fact that there is one crucial question that remains to be answered .
It is a question I have often asked myself when I have read the statements made by various prime ministers after the European Council , all claiming to have protected their national interests .
Mrs Thatcher used to do this .
Whenever she went back to the Commons , she would always say she had protected the national interest .
But the great question is , who is defending the common interest ? Who is defending Europe 's interests ?
Helmut Kohl has been doing that , and for many years .
( Applause ) Belgium 's prime minister has been doing so , as have you , Mr Kok .

This is the new spirit we need to generate , otherwise I fear that our historic mission to unite all the democratic countries of Europe within the Union will be too onerous , if we do not have sound , coherent structures and the political will to create a genuine Union rather than just a free trade zone , a genuine Union that has a role to play in the world .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the efforts made by the Dutch presidency , to which we pay tribute , the results of the Amsterdam summit seem seriously inadequate from the strictly institutional viewpoint , if we compare them with the ambitious objectives announced by the Member States when the Intergovernmental Conference was launched .
The simple fact of the matter is that the plan to reform the institutions , so as to increase their efficiency and transparency , has been put off . This applies both to the idea of extending qualified majority voting , impossible without revising the weightings to take account of the demographic and economic importance of the Member States , and as regards reforming the structure of the Commission to enable it to play the full part assigned to it by the Treaties while at the same time safeguarding the legitimate rights of smaller States , which are full Members of the Union .
As for the CFSP , the handful of useful adjustments made to the existing provisions , in order to reflect the lessons of experience , show no signs of any genuine political will on the part of the Member States to equip the Union with the institutions and procedures that would enable it to take an active part on the international stage worthy of its economic importance .
We can only deplore this failure to live up to the high hopes vested in Europe by many third countries which are finding it harder and harder to tolerate the rule of a single world superpower .
This impression of unfinished business given by the IGC 's conclusions has served to obscure the significant and substantial advances achieved elsewhere .
The inclusion of the Social Protocol and the chapter on employment in the Treaty , and especially the incorporation of Schengen into Community legislation , represent quite significant steps forward which must be welcomed as such .
They emphasize , as if such emphasis were necessary , the value of the formula for closer co-operation now recognized in the Treaty which has recently enabled progress to be made by circumventing the obstacle of the unanimity rule .
We also welcome the simplification of the legislative procedure implemented by the European Parliament , the inclusion in the Treaty of a legal basis paving the way to progress with regard to the status of European Members of Parliament and a uniform electoral procedure .
In this context , Mr President , may I offer you my very warm congratulations on the crucial part that you played in this matter .
In conclusion , Amsterdam is not the finished work that we might have hoped for at Turin , but it is a quite significant step along the long and difficult road to European political unification .
It may be that the wager that seems to have been made on the single currency being a powerful force for political integration is a risky one , the difficult discussions on the implementation of a common policy for growth and employment having shown the limitations of the exercise .
From the start , Europe has faced a choice between being a mere free trade area , with or without a single currency , and a genuine union of independent States , determined to make their voice heard in world affairs instead of muttering almost inaudibly as they did in Denver .
Let us commit ourselves to ensuring that , in the further course of events , the challenges of globalization and the organization of our planet into large regional groupings capable of guaranteeing growth and full employment will show us the right course to set for Europe .
Mr President , the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of Communism marked a turningpoint in the history of Europe and the start of a new phase of development for the European Union .
The Union 's goal is no longer the integration of Western Europe : since 1989 , our main raison d 'être has been the integration of both Eastern and Western Europe , bringing together all the nations who wish to share their destiny within a single legal framework .
The Union can only complete this historic task if it is strong enough to bear its weight .
The more Member States there are , the greater will be the disparity of interests within the Union .
This means that we need to strengthen the Union before we enlarge it , and the Amsterdam summit certainly helped to do that .
The most important advance in European integration since 1957 , the introduction of the euro , has been brought a step nearer with the establishment of the stability pact and France 's express support for a sound and therefore strict budget policy .
However , I am still concerned regarding monetary union .
Countries such as Germany , France and Italy still need at least another five years to reorganize their finances on a sustainable basis and to increase their competitiveness , but they are not doing enough to win the public 's support for their policies .
If the three largest Member States cannot meet the criteria on a sustainable basis , the European Central Bank will have no choice but to increase interest rates , causing enormous political damage for the Union .
Ireland and the Netherlands have shown that reducing government deficits and increasing employment can go hand in hand : Germany , France and Italy ought to follow their example .
Otherwise , I fear that the euro could become a divisive rather than a uniting factor .
Another of the tasks of the Amsterdam summit was to strengthen the Union institutionally , and I welcome the fact that the Amsterdam Treaty has extended the legal nature of the Union .
The new provisions on human rights , equal treatment for men and women , non-discrimination and wider powers for the Court of Justice are all significant improvements .
The legislative powers of the European Parliament have again been strengthened , and I should like to thank Mr Brok , Mrs Guigou and particularly Mr Kok for their personal efforts here .
These aspects apart , however , the Amsterdam Treaty is hardly a cue for an ode to joy .
The summit stopped half way , deferring the most important decisions it should have taken .
Asylum policy , the fight against crime , and foreign policy have hardly been made any more effective , if at all , and the Member States clearly prefer to maintain the pretence of national sovereignty , rather than acknowledging the reality of mutual dependence .
Nothing has been done to correct the error made at Maastricht of allocating the Union tasks without giving it the money to carry them out .
Such a Union is neither convincing nor inspiring .
We cannot hope to build a strong Europe with weak institutions .
Now that the Treaty has fallen so far short of expectations , there are calls in various capital cities for enlargement to be postponed for several years , until 2005 or later .
Was that perhaps what some countries wished to achieve at Amsterdam ?
That would be a dangerous mistake to make .
Admittedly , the decisions taken on the euro and the EU Treaty are enough to justify only a limited enlargement , but a number of the 12 applicant countries should be able to join in 2002 .
It is important that this first wave should include one of the Baltic States , such as Estonia , since this will enable the Union to help maintain political stability in a region where NATO cannot yet act .
Helping to maintain political stability in Europe will be the Union 's principal task over the next few decades , so it is important for the accession negotiations to begin on schedule .
However , they will only be completed successfully if the euro becomes a stable currency in 1999 and if the Union 's decision-making is also made more efficient .
Those should now be our objectives .
( GUE / NGL ) . ( ES ) Mr President , we thank the Dutch Presidency for the splendid work carried out , but should like to consider the results of the European Council .
We have to say that , like the whole Parliament , our first reaction was one of great concern .
The Commission expressed that same concern , and Mr Santer reiterated it today by saying that substantial elements of the Community system were in danger .
Then we were disappointed over the past few days at the alarming news from Amsterdam and , finally , when we learned the results , consternation set in .
We do not want to over-dramatize , but that is how we felt .
We felt consternation , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , because the European Council results represent a failure of the plan to reform the European institutions with a view to enlargement and in our opinion it was a mistake to take such a tough line in ratifying the stability pact .
I should now like to deal very briefly with those two matters , placing greater emphasis on the negative aspects than on the positive , not because I want to be alarmist , but rather because I have less time than the larger groups and must hand out the brickbats before the bouquets .
In our opinion it is an error , and we know we are in a minority in the Parliament , to strain national budgets to make social policies , just as it was to punish large deficits with curious sanctions which run counter to the traditional concept of the redistribution of wealth .
With such measures we are bound to push up the deficits where countries have them and make the solvent countries more solvent .
One very positive point however is the proposal by the French government for at last an important institutional debate on employment which will reach its culmination in Luxembourg - not just in rhetoric , I hope , but in terms of decisions .
As regards the three objectives for the Turin IGC on which there is great unanimity in the Parliament , I think that the problem is most serious .
As regards the first objective - taking Europe closer to the citizens and overcoming the democratic deficit - timid steps have been taken far short of what was expected .
A social protocol , albeit very limited , has been incorporated .
Unanimity will be needed for social protection measures .
The ' communitization ' of the justice and domestic pillar will be very limited and there will be no real redressing of the balance within the European institutions .
As regards the second objective - providing the Union with the means suitable for a more effective foreign policy , we think there was too little political willpower on common foreign and security policy and we would mention trade policy , where Article 113 dealing with trade policy became totally bogged down .
In the third objective - improving the operation of the institutions with a view to enlargement - the failure was on such a scale that it would have been better to postpone the end of the conference .
Nor can the cancellation of the third reading in the co-decision procedure be regarded as any great result either .
That just shows how little was achieved at the conference .
Amsterdam became a Maastricht II and does not constitute any substantial change on the road to political union - which is already essential in democratic terms for reaching Economic and Monetary Union - nor does it prepare for enlargement .
We demand a more serious revision of the Treaty with a view to enlargement and the Parliament , without being corporatist , cannot accept that it should be prevented from giving assent on essential points when this European political union is being set up as demanded by all citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question we need to consider today is the condition in which the Union ship has left the port of Amsterdam .
Is it equipped to withstand extremely stormy weather and to cope with the jagged rocks that lie ahead of us ?
There seems absolutely no point to me in taking a magnifying glass to look for the positive points , the notorious ' small steps forward ' .
We need to look at the overall structure and examine whether it is sound .
If a house is crooked and its foundations are collapsing , we do not walk around it admiring the equipment in the kitchen or the furniture in the living room .
We assess the damage honestly and consider how to put things right .
Parliament was always convinced that , after Amsterdam , the Union would need to be ready to face three major challenges .
As well as EMU , we also need a political union to counterbalance the one-sided monetarist approach that has led millions of Europeans to associate the euro , even before it is introduced , with social disintegration and job losses .
But we do not yet have a European political union .
Amsterdam may have polished up the Treaty 's provisions on employment , but the Achilles heel has always been obtaining European funding to carry out the various measures .
This is why we , with Mr Willockx , have in the past had to take measures on behalf of the Ministers of Finance , who are ever reluctant to loosen their purse-strings . Neither the text of the Treaty nor the resolution on growth and employment offers any kind of progress here in terms of concrete guarantees .
Secondly , decision-making in Europe needs to be made smoother , more transparent and more democratic , so that enlargement can be approached confidently and calmly .
Institutional reform was required for this , the main elements being the qualified majority in the Council , the right of codecision for Parliament and a wider role for the Court of Justice .
On this last point , there already seem to be problems and disputes , as previous speakers have mentioned , and I would ask the Council for an explanation here .

The Belgian prime minister called the institutional component an out-and-out failure , but we in the House - or the majority of us at least - are so polite and kind and diplomatic that we can no longer call a spade a spade , yet within a few months we shall once more be complaining that no one takes us seriously .
If only we could begin to take ourselves seriously , starting with what we said yesterday , which we are already beginning to retract .
Thirdly , the Union must make a clear and decisive choice in favour of sustainable development .
Improvements have been made to the Treaty , but the main instrument - eco-taxation - is still blocked by the need for unanimity in the Council .
Following the failure of Maastricht II , more and more voices in various groups have been calling for lessons to be learnt in terms of the Intergovernmental Conference format .
The big question here in political terms is of course what to do next .
Who is really going to protect Europe 's overall interests ?
I believe this is where Parliament comes in , and where it has a pioneering role to play .
But it should not start by making itself a laughingstock with a resolution which goes against public opinion , media analysis and Parliament 's own better judgement in giving an assessment that our electors would not see as an honest political evaluation .
Mr President , much had been hoped for from the European Council in Amsterdam .
Those hopes have been disappointed , to put it mildly .
It is futile to conceal that truth with the exaggeratedly optimistic motion for a resolution before us today .
The truth is a sadder story . Unfortunately , as others have already said , Amsterdam was not a success .
I admit that there are some areas , and all credit to the Dutch presidency , where the net result is not totally negative .
That applies to the single currency , for example .
The euro has cleared the obstacle , after a fashion , and we welcome that just as we welcome the economic and social element where , at last , due consideration has been given to concerns about growth and employment .
But even in those areas the progress made has been incomplete , because virtually no additional credit has been allocated to these activities .
As to what institutions are to implement these policies , absolutely nothing has been done to clarify this issue .
Indeed , it is the institutional questions left by Amsterdam that are the worst .
And yet that was supposed to be the central point of the summit , based on months of preparation by a Intergovernmental Conference in which Parliament was partly associated .
The optimists will tell us that the European Parliament has emerged stronger as a result of the extension of the codecision procedure , and it is true that the new Treaty does seem to strengthen our legislative powers .
Even though , in this area , the Amsterdam text is sufficiently ambiguous to lend itself to restrictive interpretation .
I hope it will not come to that , but we are on the alert .
But if , today , we were to give our backing to the entire institutional reform package as presented to us , we should certainly be doing nothing for the prestige of our institution .
For months , we have been saying that we wanted stronger institutions , if only to pave the way for the forthcoming enlargements .
Well , the failings are obvious .
The abandonment of the unanimity rule is far from becoming a reality .
Many sectors still escape qualified majority voting : social affairs , taxation , internal and judicial matters that have now been communitized , etc .
Even the adoption of a future official status of European Member of Parliament will require a unanimous Council .
Nor has the European Council dealt with the problem of the weighting of votes , or with the problem of the number of Commissioners .
It has refrained from recognizing the legal personality of the Union .
It has provided for a highly ambiguous procedure for revising the Treaties before the coming enlargements .
On all these points , and others too , the texts we adopted two years ago were much more ambitious than the one destined to become the Amsterdam Treaty .
That is why we hope that another Intergovernmental Conference will be set up as quickly as possible to prepare , effectively and sincerely , for the forthcoming enlargements ; or at the very least we hope to see a further reform of the Treaties .
If the Heads of State and Government can only advance on tiptoe , let us at least give them the opportunity to tiptoe a long way .
And then , perhaps , they will eventually arrive at a satisfactory result .
Mr President , the Dutch presidency has managed under very difficult circumstances to conclude the IGC negotiations at the Amsterdam summit , for which it is to be congratulated .
However , I am rather less enthusiastic about the actual substance of the Treaty .
I shall not comment on the individual provisions - though if I did so , the number of minuses would far outweigh the number of pluses - but I would say that I like the way in which the principle of subsidiarity and the role of the national parliaments have been developed in two separate protocols to the Treaty .
I see this as an acknowledgement of the importance of the national governments for the successful operation of the Union , and of keeping decision-making as close as possible to the general public .
Whether those who drafted the Treaty share the same thoughts I very much doubt , because - and this is where the root of my objections lies - the Amsterdam Treaty continues to build on the old idea of a united Europe .
It is yet another step - no matter how small such steps may be - towards further centralization , and totally overlooks the fact that the map of Europe has undergone a fundamental change since the fall of the Berlin Wall .
It would seem logical to strengthen the European institutions to prevent the Union from losing effectiveness as a result of enlargement .
But if we are to have a Union of perhaps 24 states in future , we cannot continue to build on a model originally designed for six .
The addition of another two or three Member States would be possible on the basis of the Amsterdam Treaty , but the European Union needs a rather different structure if there is to be effective cooperation between 24 countries .
That is why we need to have fundamental talks on the current form and substance of the Union and on the role of the European Parliament .
The IGC was an ideal opportunity for the Dutch presidency to launch such talks , but it failed to take advantage of it .
On the contrary , the thinking behind the Treaty was to increase democracy and governability by concentrating more powers at European level .
A section on employment has been added , the social protocol has been incorporated , policy on asylum , visas and immigration is eventually to be communitized , and majority decision-making has been expanded , along with the powers of the European Parliament .
In my view , this centralization will , in the longer term , produce the exact opposite of what was intended , by hampering enlargement and restricting governability and democracy .
Even with the present Union of 15 Member States , there are serious failings when it comes to cooperation and compliance with European legislation , so how will things be with an enlarged Union and an even wider diversity of cultures , legal systems , political traditions and standards of living ?
And will countries which have only just won their own sovereignty be prepared to hand most of it over to Brussels ?
Integration already appeared to be reaching its limits at Amsterdam .
Another important question is whether people can identify with a European Union in which decisions are taken at such a distance .
Can they feel democratically represented by a Parliament which could grow to have 700 Members with 24 nationalities and a large number of languages , and where national political diversity will scarcely be reflected ?
We seem to assume all too readily that a vastly expanded institutional structure will enable us to conquer evil in the world and build a better society .
To sum up , the enlargement of the Union should be given top priority as a political necessity and a moral duty .
In my opinion , the Amsterdam Treaty ought to have paved the way by reforming the Union into a more decentralized cooperative structure , with a limited number of tasks and more modest ambitions .
President de Gaulle once said that it is difficult to make an omelette out of six boiled eggs , let alone 15 or 24 .
The stability of an expanded Union depends not on strong central government , but on the existence of efficient parliamentary democracies within independent Member States .
I therefore hope that fundamental talks will take place on the future structure of Europe before the Union is enlarged any further .
I have received , pursuant to Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure , eight motions for resolutions to bring the current debate to a close .
The vote will take place at noon .
I call upon Mr Hänsch .
Mr President , the Amsterdam Treaty is no peak achievement and there is no cause for rejoicing .
But nor does the Treaty deserve the disapproval , scorn and contempt many speakers are heaping on it .
It will prove itself better than its present reputation .
Certainly , compared with the gigantic problems facing Europe , the heads of state and government have all turned out to be dwarfs .
Mr President of the European Council , for obvious reasons that really does not apply to you !
The new Treaty has remained the same mishmash as the old one .
Not a trace of simplification and clarity !
But above all , the Treaty still does not make the European Union capable of enlargement .
We need further institutional reform before the next accession .
Here it is more important to broaden the margin for majority decisions in the Council than to reduce the number of Commissioners .
The Treaty does not measure up to all that needs to be done in the Union .
But measured against the existing Maastricht Treaty , the new Treaty represents notable progress .
Parliament has been strengthened considerably .
We are co-legislators , with equal rights .
Certainly , there are some gaps , but they can be filled .
If anyone had prophesied two years ago that it would prove possible to replace the entire cooperation procedure with the co-decision procedure he would have been regarded as a nutcase !
Our strategy of concentrating on co-decision was successful .
Our two representatives , Elmar Brok and Elisabeth Guigou , were successful , after spending a year involved in drafting the Treaty under difficult conditions .
I would like to give special thanks to Elisabeth Guigou and Elmar Brok for the outstanding job they have done !
( Applause ) I now hear that attempts are being made to tinker with the Treaty retrospectively because in some cases the codecision right was not established systematically , that attempts are being made to withdraw the co-decision right again in cases where the Council has to decide unanimously .
I must warn against that !
The European Parliament cannot accept any retrospective amendments to the Amsterdam Treaty now that it is adopted !
( Applause ) There has been some progress .
Yes , I too would have wished for a better Treaty , but a better Treaty is no use failing the will to implement and apply it in full .
The Treaty is a step backwards in terms of establishing freedom of movement because it requires unanimous decisions for the next five years .
But although it was possible to take majority decisions for a whole ten years , the governments never did so !
We criticize the common foreign and security policy provisions as totally unsatisfactory .
Yet they do allow for some action if the political will is there .
For instance , if you want SFOR in Yugoslavia to have a new task and its mandate extended , you can decide on that , regardless of the provisions of the new foreign and security policy .
But a chapter on employment is not an employment policy by a long way .
So long as the governments do not do what they themselves decided , namely translate the Delors White Paper and the Santer employment package into political action , they can introduce as many employment chapters as they want in the Treaty .
Incidentally , the point about fully applying the provisions of the Treaty applies to the European Parliament too .
We must change our method of working if we really want to make effective use of our new rights .
( Applause ) So we need this Amsterdam Treaty and we will not stand still ; but , Mr President of the Council , the method used so far for amending the Treaty is finished .
If you continue in this manner you will achieve less and less in future , until you are faced with nothing .
The Union will be forced into further reforms sooner than you might think .
We in the European Parliament will ensure that in so doing it does not lose sight of the vision of a just , democratic , united Europe with the ability to act , to create jobs and to secure peace .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to begin by welcoming Mr Kok here to the European Parliament in Brussels .
You may have seen that an enormous complex is under construction to secure our seat here in Brussels , even after enlargement , so it is with mixed feelings that we view the Council 's decision that we should meet twelve times a year in Strasbourg .
Why does the Council feel it necessary to take a decision on this for us ?
Would it not be something better left to Parliament itself ?
Mixed feelings seem to have been the order of the day in this debate on the results of the Amsterdam summit : we are positive about what has been achieved , but we also feel that we have to criticize what has been left halfdone or not done at all .
We are positive about the way in which the position of ordinary citizens has been strengthened in the Treaties .
The non-discrimination article has been taken almost word for word from Parliament 's resolution of March 1996 , and it should provide an effective barrier against racism and other negative forces in society .
We are also positive about the improvements to the provisions on equal treatment for men and women , though we regret that they are not to have direct effect .
We shall be urging the Commission to come up with some directives very quickly , so that the new provisions can be made a real force for change in society .
We are also positive about the steps taken regarding openness and democracy in the Union , though here again we need implementing directives to flesh out the new articles on openness .
But a European law on open government could be very salutary for Brussels bureaucracy , and some of the army of lobbyists here in Brussels could work to much better effect if they did not have to charge a great deal of money to obtain information for people which they should now obtain for themselves .
We are also positive about the partial consolidation of the Union 's democratic standards .
If I have calculated correctly from Elmar Brok 's list , the European Parliament will soon have the final say on around 80 % of all European legislation , and I agree with our group chairman when he says that Parliament has certainly emerged the winner in this Treaty .
However , we are rather less positive about the failure to achieve an outcome on budgetary powers .
It cannot be good for more than ECU 50 billion to be spent on agriculture in particular without any parliamentary control .
Unfortunately , there are also a number of negative points , especially in the policy area .
Europe 's employment policy has been given fresh impetus , which is something that we welcome .
We support Jean-Claude Juncker 's employment conference and hope that it too will produce results .
A certain amount of progress has even been made on environment policy .
The main problem lies with internal security , foreign policy and immigration and refugee policy , where little progress has been made , and yet they are all extremely important to our citizens .
The fact that our approach to organized crime and cross-border cooperation on police and judicial affairs is still not really off the ground is a serious matter , and actually defies belief when you think how the Mafia is gaining ground in Central and Eastern Europe .
It now presents a major threat to enlargement and the role of the European Union .
Even on foreign policy , we seem to be drowning in indecision , which is simply unacceptable .
I do not blame the Dutch presidency here , which has put forward a number of constructive proposals , firmly supported by a motion from the Second Chamber in the Netherlands . No , I blame some of the Heads of Government , who simply did not wish to make progress on this issue .
We have also let people down when it comes to policy on asylum and refugees , where the public wants to see improvements , better coordination and more fine-tuning , none of which has really been achieved .
I do not have much more to say now .
Enlargement is far too important to be allowed to stagnate because of the lack of motivation shown at the IGC .
However , I would recommend that the areas of internal security , foreign policy , asylum and refugee policy , vote weighting and decision-making should all be reviewed over the next three to four years , to ensure that all the groundwork is done before accession .
Perhaps , with enlargement looming , it can be done : the Union often works best under pressure .
Finally , a few words about the presidency as a whole .
The unfortunate start made by some members of the Dutch Government such as Mrs Sorgdrager and Mr Zalm has been offset by the good work done by other ministers , for example Mr van Mierlo on human rights , Mrs de Boer on CO2 policy , Mr Melkert on employment policy and Mr Pronk on support for Africa .

There can be no doubt of the regard in which the Dutch prime minister is held here .
There are not too many genuine Europeans among the present Heads of Government , and our group chairman is right that general European interests often come second to small-minded national interests .
You are one of the few genuine Europeans , and I hope that you will be with us for a long time to come to help promote progress in European cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft Amsterdam Treaty is the result of a fifteen month-long conference , during which proposals from all the institutional and other players engaged in the revision of the treaty were evaluated , and the negotiations , which were not always easy , produced the compromise of this draft treaty , agreed and initialled the Member States .
There were great expectations of this reform , and there has been great progress , but there is also great disappointment .
It has been said that the Single Act forged the single market , that the Maastricht Treaty was the framework for economic and monetary union , and that the Amsterdam Treaty will bring the social chapter back into the centre of Europe 's priorities , with all its corollaries of balance between the macro-economic and political factors of concern to the Member States .
We certainly applaud this positive thrust and we will back it , but that is not all . We also take a favourable view of the progress achieved in the area of more genuine and effective integration , for example the compromise which has led to agreement on the budget stability pact , the inclusion of the social protocol in the treaty , the new chapter on employment , the strengthening of certain common policies like the environment , health , consumer protection , inclusion in the treaty of the Schengen acquis , the advancs made for EUROPOL , the establishment of a forward planning and early warning unit under the CFSP , and the extension and simplification of the co-decision procedure .
That list is obviously not exhaustive and I could continue , but unfortunately I must move on to painful points .
The fact is we do not think there has been sufficient progress yet on the institutional profile .
In our opinion , certain priority issues needed to be settled before the planned enlargement , in order to ease the adhesion procedure and avoid adding an appendix of unresolved institutional problems to the important negotiations .
Obviously I am referring to the procrastination over the decision on the new weighting of votes in the Council and the linked political problem of the composition and functioning of the European Commission .
Furthermore the slow progress in extending majority voting in the Council undermines the core of the process of integration of the Union , and represents a serious threat to the actual decision-making capacity of the European Union .
The current system of treaty revision also needs to be reviewed as soon as possible , escaping the narrow intergovernmental focus and thus reducing the democratic deficit and involving the citizens more directly , through their elected representatives , in the process of European unification .
Clearly we still have a long way to go , but we are optimistic and the first test will be in a few months ' time when , after the necessary harmonization of texts and finalization of legal details , the treaty will be signed and the European Parliament will then give its final opinion on its content .
So , for the sake of the European Union , its Member States present and future and their peoples , we trust that this period of polishing and desirable reflection , may lead to the approval of a treaty more adequate to the 21st Century , until a future and more profitable intergovernmental conference can be held .
Madam President , the link between a bold reform of the institutions and the opening of accession negotiations has never been challenged either by the Member States or by the European Parliament , for the very good reason that that link was obvious .
Such a reform , a necessity for fifteen Member States , became imperative in the interests of the candidates for accession , in order that the negotiations could be conducted on a sound institutional basis .
The failure to achieve this institutional objective is a disappointment .
That , Prime Minister , is why it would have been more realistic to acknowledge that the hoped-for result had not been achieved , that this could be remedied by setting a new and clear timetable , and that the accession negotiations could go ahead within its constraints .
The responsibility of Members of the European Parliament is to evaluate the content of the Treaty , to give their opinion and to justify their position to the electors .
We have a duty to be demanding .
How are we to approve a draft that contains little or nothing of what was considered essential in resolutions tabled by certain Members of the European Parliament and adopted by a large majority ?
The European Commission , for its part , is responsible for defending the overriding interest of the Union .
In this context , Commissioner Oreja made a courageous and uncompromising statement before the institutional committee .
Does President Santer believe that it should be up to Members of this Parliament to defend the authority of the Commission , especially as regards the visibility of the common foreign and security policy ?
This responsibility borne by the Commission implies a rigorous attitude , independence of judgement and a duty of rigorous evaluation .
We hope the Commission will be able to show its worth in its mid-July report .
My final and perhaps most important point is this : the failure of this conference is also a failure of the intergovernmental method .
What we have to do now is restart the machinery .
Europeans have never lacked imagination and determination .
Such is the political will that must inspire us now , and I have no doubt , Prime Minister , that you will be among the best tomorrow .
Madam President , the European Council 's agenda in Amsterdam was overwhelmed by the introduction of the employment question , at the request of the French Government , and under the pressure of the social movement .
Admittedly , the acceptance of the pact seems to me to be a serious act , but the fact remains that the debate on employment has begun .
That is a worthwhile result , springing from the widespread recent mobilization of opinion in Europe - at Vilvoerde , for example - or the political debate that has been initiated in France and elsewhere .
The French members of my group reassert their total opposition to the stability pact , which imposes a restrictive framework on budgetary policy and demands austerity criteria , backed by penalties , to satisfy the demands of the financial markets .
This pact , which makes a mockery of the sovereignty of the peoples of Europe , is an obstacle to any effective , sustainable solution to the unemployment problem .
The resolution on employment and growth adopted at Amsterdam opens up various avenues of exploration which might lead to the creation of jobs , but it still bears the heavy imprint of the European Council in Essen , with its emphasis on competitiveness , flexibility and reducing the cost of labour .
The extraordinary European council on employment , this autumn , will provide an opportunity for the peoples of Europe to obtain a hearing for their demands , expressed by the Europe-wide social movement .
We are going to set to work to play our full part in the pursuit and intensification of the mobilization of the citizens ' social movement , to achieve a re-orientation of European unity and to make social progress and employment the driving forces of a new economic development in Europe .
Madam President , here we are on the threshold of the 21st century , yet democracy in Europe still seems to be languishing in the 19th .
Those of us who have read the various non-papers and treaty texts produced over the last six months have watched the IGC teetering on the brink of yawning democratic abysses , and if we have not fallen in , then ironically enough it is not because the Heads of Government realize that European integration needs to be more democratic , but because of their belief in the fiction of national sovereignty .
Of course , some progress has been made in the Amsterdam Treaty , but what is really significant - and I shall not list every point , since everyone else has already done that - is the vexed question of the environment guarantee .
Those Member States which care for the environment have had to fight to be allowed to do in their own countries what Europe will not do for them .
On employment , the real issue is whether Europe should be given the instruments to shift taxes from labour to energy consumption and capital , and to improve the distribution of work .
We are no closer to any measures on this , and all the Treaty does is to create false expectations , not real jobs .
The strict adherence to the timetable for EMU stands in stark contrast to the way in which the enlargement of the Union was casually pushed onto the back burner at Amsterdam .
The forthcoming negotiations will be all about breaking the bad news and passing on the message that Western Europe is too busy with its own affairs .
A larger Union requires a longer yardstick and , measured by that yardstick , this Treaty falls some way short .
It is worrying that the communitization of immigration and asylum policy is not to be accompanied by the introduction of normal democratic checks and balances .
The national parliaments are no longer to deal with these issues , and the European Parliament merely has the power to make recommendations .
What is even more telling , of course , is that the Heads of Government have decided that we have seats in Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasbourg , and that we are to meet twelve times a year in Strasbourg .
If Parliament accepts this lying down , it really is not worth a button .
Madam President , my provisional , personal view following Amsterdam is that the de facto barriers to integration have become operational .
We see that the common European denominator is even smaller than we thought in Maastricht .
I believe account should have been taken of the fact that the process of integration is bound to be a gradual one , that common action cannot be imposed by decree but can in fact only be achieved step by step on the basis of a common European will .
We also find that certain areas are not at all or not yet suitable in this regard .
Only if we realise all this and leave the Member States a national margin for decision will further development be possible .
The hope expressed by the Committee on Institutional Affairs , namely that the Treaty could be improved after the event by the way it is interpreted seems an extremely deceptive one .
I do not think one can replace a lack of political agreement by oversubtle interpretations without causing precisely that unease among the people that it was one of the main aims of the Treaty revision to remove .
Madam President , if we look back at the problems we faced before and during the Amsterdam summit , we can see straight away that the Dutch presidency has done a very good job , particularly in getting 15 signatures at the bottom of the Treaty .
Our congratulations go to the presidency on its skilful handling of the matter .
However , the few minutes available to me here today cannot all be devoted to singing the presidency 's praises .
It is an MEP 's role to make a down-to-earth assessment of whether the outcome of the IGC corresponds to our own ideas and objectives .
On a number of issues this is indeed the case , and we feel that progress is gradually being made , but unfortunately it does not apply to those specific areas that will make enlargement possible , where you would need a magnifying glass to see any sign of progress at all .
The same is true of the very necessary changes in cooperation on justice and home affairs , where important decisions have been postponed .
What are we to make , for example , of the new title covering freedom of movement , asylum and immigration ?
What are we to make of freedom of movement that now has so many conditions attached that it no longer deserves the name of freedom ?
We are also going to have to wait and see if there is eventually to be majority decision-making and whether Parliament will have the power of codecision .
And of course we already know that our original demands for the Court of Justice to have normal jurisdiction have not been met .
We cannot broaden without deepening , as we have said in the resolution .
We need to get back to the negotiating table .
Those who have only just finished all the hard work this time will undoubtedly be horrified at the idea , but the process of reform will simply have to be resumed very shortly .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank the President of the Council , Foreign Minister van Mierlo and Mr Patijn and their team for the real spirit of cooperation they showed Elisabeth Guigou and myself in the past months .
I am also convinced that we will see similar cooperation on a number of practical matters in the coming days and weeks .
I think that when we evaluate this document we can often proceed on the basis that the better is the enemy of the good .
For we find that measured against our expectations of the future European constitution this is not exactly a grandiose example of progress .
On the other hand - and I became a Member of the European Parliament in 1980 - we have experienced dramatic and positive change in the European Union with the three intergovernmental conferences of 1985 , 1991 and 1997 and there were more developments in the European Union between 1985 and 1997 than between 1958 and 1985 .
I think we should remember these developments too and remember the situation as it was at the outset .
So we should be a little fair in our judgment .
This Treaty has brought a social balance .
The Single Act was a treaty on the internal market .
The Maastricht Treaty was a treaty on economic union . Now a social title has been added , the Social Protocol of 1961 and 1989 has been incorporated , an employment title has been included , the European Court of Justice has been strengthened and the Treaty includes a number of additional civil rights .
This increased balance in the Treaty may not be sufficient , but it deserves to be noted .
I believe that it is better to communitarize fields of justice and home affairs in the first pillar and to adhere to unanimity for a while longer than to leave them in a third pillar and decide by majority voting even at this stage .
Why ?
Because in incorporating them in the Community structure the heads of state and government have recognized that the intergovernmental approach is not the right one and that the classical approach to integration established by Monnet is preferable ; eventually we will still manage to establish majority decision-making .
That is the strategic decision we should be looking at and that we discussed in the past .
In the field of foreign and security policy , we have managed thanks in particular to Parliament 's activities to ensure that the Commission is involved in planning and analysis and in other areas too and that it is no longer just the governments and the Council alone that decide .
The situation still looked quite different a few months ago !
Surely that is an important step towards gradually incorporating this aspect into the acquis communautaire too .
The fact that Petersberg tasks have been integrated , that the European Union can now issue guidelines for the WEU , that the Union can conclude agreements with third countries in the second and third pillar too , surely these are remarkable steps forward which , I believe , need to be recognized .
In regard to flexibility , Schengen and so forth , this means that the areas that are in the first pillar under the normal Treaty are also decided according to the methods of the first pillar ; no Pillar 3a or 3b or whatever has been introduced .
That too is worth noting .
But we also note that this Treaty has one crucial weakness .
That weakness is that we have too little majority decision-making to give us the ability to act .
The heads of state and government admitted this , pointing out that there will be another intergovernmental conference before the accession of the sixteenth Member State .
I think that admission may have further consequences .
I could imagine , for instance , that the decision , which is to be taken in the Council , to include justice and home affairs in the majority and codecision procedure in five years ' time could be modified and that the timeframe could be reduced , for instance to a date before the first round of enlargement .
Then we would not need another intergovernmental conference but could make considerable progress in this area .
Perhaps the Council could include this in its deliberations .
At present , the European Parliament normally has codecision rights on legislation .
The President of the Commission can only take up office with the approval of the European Parliament .
The Commission as a whole has to be approved by the European Parliament .
The budget cannot be adopted against the will of the European Parliament .
Treaties on enlargement , association agreements and many other agreements with third countries require the assent of the European Parliament .
There are criticisms to be made , there are many more things we have to achieve and we have to make it clear that these intergovernmental conferences are perhaps no longer the right method to use .
We must make it clear that in the long run we need a constituent assembly that includes the national governments , the European Parliament and the national parliaments , in order to overcome some of the bureaucratic resistance .
But we should no longer say that this European Parliament has no influence !
We will be holding elections in 1999 , when we should honestly tell the citizens that this European Parliament is a factor of European policy and that few matters in Europe are still decided against the will of the European Parliament !
Only then can we obtain a high level of electoral participation and only then can we draw the necessary strength to wrest even more from the Council in the next round .
So I would ask you not to play down the results achieved for Parliament ; instead we should show more self-assurance and make use of the instruments we have to move ahead !
Madam President , after two years of discussions , Parliament produced an ambitious list of desiderata which have by no means been satisfied .
Does this mean the end for Europe ?
Not in the least .
At the very last moment it was decided to go ahead with economic and monetary union , an ostensibly technical economic measure which could actually generate a feeling of political solidarity in the longer term .
What is worrying is that the road to enlargement is still blocked by the problem of the structure of the institutions , and I find it particularly regrettable that even the Benelux countries could not find it in themselves to propose a rotating Commissioner for the Benelux .
The Council 's continuing secrecy is also sending the wrong signals to the young democracies of Eastern Europe , and is still evidence of the democratic deficit .
It is unfortunate , not to say completely unworkable , that the number of Members of this House is to increase to 700 .
Why can we not be realistic enough to impose our own restrictions and say that 400 to 500 Members is enough ?
And do the people of Europe feel any safer now ?
The President-in-Office announced a package of measures , but unfortunately what he himself does in practice is exactly the opposite .
The arrest warrant for the international drug-dealer Bouterse has still not been issued , while the public prosecutor has been suspended for some reason .
And Brussels has yet to give the green light to the new legislation , so for now drink-drivers are let off scot-free , which is hardly likely to make people safer .
I understand that the chairman of Parliament 's Legal Affairs Committee , Mr de Clercq , has asked the Justice Minister to come here and give us an explanation .
Measured against what we hoped it would achieve , Amsterdam was not a success , but the Heads of Government who directly reflect the voters ' wishes in the 15 Member States chose to decide otherwise .
This is our snapshot of how Europe looks at the end of the 20th century .
The Dutch presidency did what it could and deserves congratulations , if only for managing to hold together 15 Member States with different problems .
Amsterdam was not a failure , but a small step forward .
Strasbourg , more than Brussels with all its bureaucracy , is still the symbol of peace in Europe .
Madam President , with all due respect for the positive aspects , we must nevertheless concentrate on the objectives the Amsterdam conference did not achieve .
First , given the total failure to carry out institutional reforms we are surely faced with the following dilemma : either the already very poor decision-making structures in the European Union will worsen with the accession of new Members or we will have to postpone enlargement .
Neither option is acceptable , which is why we must emphatically call for the institutional reforms to be undertaken sooner and for the deadlines set in Amsterdam to be brought forward substantially .
Secondly , the results in relation to a common foreign and security policy are nothing if not modest ; the Denver summit showed what great challenges Europe is facing in this regard , for the United States wants to establish its predatory system as a model for the rest of the world !
I believe we have to adjust to this situation and I seriously doubt whether the Amsterdam intergovernmental conference has taken the necessary institutional steps for doing so !
Mr President-in-Office , in Amsterdam important steps were taken , but they were fragmentary and uncoordinated .
One thing is certain , namely that you saved the progress towards the since currency .
That is no small matter , but it does not seem to me enough for the time being .
Besides monetary union , economic union too remains outstanding , economic government as some people call it .
Besides the very positive declarations , a serious policy against unemployment and a truly common social policy remain outstanding .
All these things remain unclear and depend on other decisions , which were not taken at Amsterdam .
What will you decide in the autumn ?
What proposals will you bring us for the budget in the future ?
Or might you set up all those policies with no budget - or with the budget as it is today ?
That would be strange and unbelievable !
And of course , another thing that remains outstanding is a clear perspective for political union .
No country will give up resources and sovereignty for another country , but only for a political whole .
It will therefore be necessary for you to try a new Intergovernmental Conference or to postpone enlargement .
Until then , do at least try to boost the Union 's political credibility .
There will be no action by the Common Foreign Policy unless we seriously condemn all the atrocities committed in Somalia by ' peace-keepers ' from countries belonging to the European Union .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the President-in-Office of the Council for the tremendous effort he has made in a matter which appeared difficult to achieve .
No-one thought two or three weeks ago that it would be possible to conclude the draft Treaty in Amsterdam .
However , I think that many aspects have been covered - there have been many great developments and great progress - but I should like to point to one important gap from the legal point of view .
We are working to build a Community legal order in which decisions are taken in the general interest and not for the good of one State or specific group of persons and in real terms for me that means that my greatest concern lies in the articles on flexibility .
Flexibility presupposes the introduction into the Community legal order of principles applicable to relations between States under International Law .
There is the danger that in Amsterdam the States have rediscovered International Law .
I would point out that International Law was invented 500 years ago by another Dutchman - not the President-in-Office of the Council - but Hugo Grocio .
So I do not know whether we now need to return to this International Law discovered 500 years ago by that illustrious Dutchman .
This is a different matter ; we are creating a supra-national entity and , in that aspect , I think we are running into inadequacies in the European judicial area .
This is something pointed out previously by the chairman of the Socialist group and I think that we must have moved further forward in the field of creating a European legal area because , when the acquis communautaire of the Schengen Agreement is incorporated in the European Union , we might find ourselves in a situation where , since there were no national frontiers , a person might commit a crime in one country with no border checks then enter another country .
That means , in specific terms in this Community , that there is no sense in talking about political asylum when the States are already governed by Community Law rather than International Law .
The articles on the right of political asylum might even presuppose a retroactive element , since I do not think it is possible for a Member State of the European Union to be able to grant asylum to a person who has committed a crime in another country and I do not see any sense in invoking political asylum when we are in a Community governed by democratic States .
In a Community governed by democratic States political asylum is absolutely meaningless .
If one State is failing to fulfil the conditions for democracy then it cannot be a Member of the Community .
There are certainly some exemptions under which expulsion is possible , but I do not see how it is possible for the authority of a State , a judicial authority or an administrative authority , to deny entry to a person who has committed a crime in another member country of the Community - having regard to human rights , which are based on the constitutional guarantees in the Community Treaties - by invoking the provisions of the right of asylum .
Here international agreements on asylum are not applicable ; they are applicable only under International Law .
If we want to be sure of having a free European judicial area , in accordance with constitutional principles , asylum must now be regarded as the major omission from the Treaty of Amsterdam , since it was not possible to set up a European judicial area proffering simultaneously guarantees of freedom and security .
Thank you , Mr Medina Ortega .
Your speech proved interesting enough to stop the clock .
On this occasion , fortunately , we have more time available for this important debate than we did last time .
Madam President , at this first part-session following the Amsterdam European Council , I welcome the results , above all concerning the European Parliament , whose role has no doubt been strengthened .
I am convinced that increasing the powers of our institution is the best way of keeping alive the idea of Europe sown in the Treaty of Rome .
Nevertheless , directly linked to the results of this summit , one event did give us great cause for concern , since in some way it contradicts the bases of this united egalitarian Europe to which I already referred .
During the conference , the United Kingdom tried to have the right of Community countries to register ships in any Member State -dubbed by them quota-hopping - limited in the final text .
The initiative of introducing amendments into the Treaty was not a success due to the fact that it was impossible to include such limitations , contrary to the existing acquis communautaire , although an it was a matter of forcing through a Commission statement smoothing the way for the British demands , which was finally blocked by the Council .
Faced with the possibility that the IGC might be incapable of producing any text , President Santer , on his own initiative and in an amazing unprecedented decision , sent a personal letter to the British Prime Minister in which he unilaterally put at his disposition the services of DG XVI to assist one country - Great Britain - to get their own way over the other Member States even going so far as to make suggestions in that letter which clearly contradicted even three judgments of the European Court of Justice .
Such unilateral action - with the President of the Commission deciding personally to go to the defence of a given country in the face of Community interests behind the backs of the rest of the Member States and the Community institutions and the Parliament itself - calls into question the supposed impartiality and essential transparency which affects the whole Commission , despite what Madam Commissioner Bonino said in an attempt to mitigate the terms of the letter and does not , Madam President , as you will understand , exactly enhance the prestige of the European Union .


I think that the most fundamental duty of the Commission is transparency before the Member States and if the institution over which Mr Santer presides thought that the Community laws - including the judgments of the European Court in Luxembourg - could be interpreted as by Mr Santer , that opinion should have been put before all the Member States and not merely before one - and within the framework in which the problem had arisen .
Mr Santer , you have set a most serious anti-democratic precedent , which neither the Member States nor the Parliament should tolerate , which is why we at the minimum demand the relevant and public explanations .
Madam President , one minute is too short a time for a proper fundamental analysis of the Amsterdam Treaty , so I shall concentrate on one issue .
The Protocol on asylum policy includes an Article which means essentially that an EU citizen is prevented from receiving asylum in another EU State .
In practice this curtails the right of asylum and is in breach of the Geneva Convention .
This is not the only reason why this is a wrong decision , it also sets a very dangerous precedent if other parts of the world should start to apply the same practice , i.e. that regions will not accept asylum seekers from each other .
So this decision taken in Amsterdam is a very unfortunate one .
After the decision was taken attempts were made to tone down its effect .
But it is obvious that it breaches the Geneva Convention and the UN refugee commissary has confirmed this .
It does Belgium credit that it has indirectly renounced this decision in a special declaration .
It is a pity that more Member States did not do the same .
Madam President , I did not expect more from Amsterdam , and as has very rightly been assessed , Amsterdam turned out to be neither a mountain nor a molehill .
Of course , like any treaty , it must be judged in relation to the potential it can promote and the perspectives it outlines .
From that standpoint , I think the results of the meeting were not bad .
Looking , first , at the issue of employment , it is worth stressing the balanced line pursued by this Treaty , despite the fact that the new provisions on employment could have been more ambitious .
However , much will depend on the way those provisions are implemented .
Equally important is the fact that the Social Protocol was incorporated in the Treaty .
This eliminates one of Maastricht 's important weaknesses , which we had repeatedly criticized severely .
The Amsterdam Agreement did not solve the institutional issue , which it refers to new negotiations at the beginning of the new millennium , and I hope that those amendments will be based on the ideas upon which the ideal of the building of Europe was based , and that counterproductive and artificial discriminations between the Members will be avoided .
We should not underestimate some of the new Treaty 's provisions which represent progress in the right direction .
I refer particularly to the joint decision procedure and the abolition of the third reading , which has allowed a balance to be established between the roles of Parliament and the Council .
The results of the Amsterdam Agreement in the area of the Union 's foreign policy activities are limited and not up to what we had hoped for .
Traditional refractoriness prevailed once more in Amsterdam , and no provisions were adopted that would allow the Union to develop its own role .
As I have already said , much depends on the way the Treaty will be implemented .
The inadequacies we have all noted can be compensated , within the limits of what is fair , by dynamically making the most of the new prospects that are opening up .
Madam President , who would claim today that the Intergovernmental Conference has fulfilled its mandate ?
The positive results of two years of negotiations are confined to a few points .
First , the broadly based introduction of employment into the Treaty , as a commitment for which positive signals are to be given at the extraordinary Council in Luxembourg ; next , the integration of the Social Protocol into the Treaty , primarily the result of the victory of the Labour Party in the United Kingdom ; progress with the services of general public interest , which are recognized as forming part of the common values of the Union with a part to play in the promotion of social and territorial cohesion ; and an almost unexpected extension of the scope of the codecision procedure , essentially into areas associated with the completion of the internal market and legislative tasks that have been virtually completed .
Outside the mandate of the Intergovernmental Conference , and a product of the electoral victory of the socialists in France , Amsterdam finally brings us the good news of the resolution on growth and employment , an essential counterpart to the resolution on the stability pact , though that is not to say that a genuine economic government has been set up .
But , as for the rest , we have been short-changed .
Amsterdam was supposed to bring democracy , efficiency and transparency to our institutions .
Instead of the extension of qualified majority voting and the abolition of the right of veto , the sine qua non of any further deepening of the Community , we are offered co-operation , cumbersome to put into practice and ideally designed to hinder the Community dynamic , even though such co-operation will exist anyway because of the euro .
After the three pillars of Maastricht , the worm in the bud of European integration , we now find ourselves in charge of four pillars .
From the institutional standpoint , the Amsterdam Treaty is a step towards non-democratic government .
Amsterdam was supposed to enable the European Union to function better and expand .
In Madrid , the Heads of State and Government had undertaken to begin enlargement negotiations six months after the conclusions of the IGC on the basis of its results .
Clearly , they have not reached that point .
The Heads of State and Government must learn lessons from this , as they failed to do in Amsterdam .
The Amsterdam Treaty is not a satisfactory conclusion to the Intergovernmental Conference .
If Europe is to be a power tomorrow , it needs to progress in both political and social affairs .
On the social side we have achieved something , but on the political side we have hardly started .
We need to break free of our national self-interests , to produce a collective burst of energy .
With the Spinelli project , this House gave Europe a new impetus .
We need to rediscover it .
Madam President , I also think that we have reason to welcome the Treaty and congratulate the Dutch Presidency .
Right from the very moment when Sweden joined the Union two years ago we have been fighting to make unemployment a matter of common concern in the Union .
There were many who thought that we would not succeed but obviously the 18 million unemployed in Europe are a reality which has forced even the most unwilling governments to agree to this in the Treaty .
Now we must fulfil the Article in the Treaty through practical action .
We have a great responsibility to ensure that this happens , at the additional summit meeting on unemployment , for example .
Another proposal which has received attention is increased openness in the European Union , something which we Members from Sweden greatly welcome .
This is not a controversial issue in Sweden where we have high degree of openness and transparency .
But there are great differences between the Member States in this respect .
It is important now that this Article on increased openness in the Treaty is also given a clear and substantial content and that the Union 's institutions really do live up to it .
I think that the results of this Treaty , from the Swedish point of view , show that , contrary to what is sometimes said , the small countries do have the opportunity to influence the primary direction of policy within the Union .
Mr Santer complained earlier that there were too many national interests involved in this process .
I would like to point out that , even if I have spoken a great deal about Swedish issues , I think that these are now European interests .
Employment is a European problem , openness is a European interest , equality is a European right and the environment is a European responsibility .
Madam President , against many odds it proved possible to broaden the agenda for Intergovernmental Conference to include the subjects that concern people most .
Everywhere in Europe people single out unemployment as the problem the political systems should get to grips with first .
At the start of the Intergovernmental Conference , not many people thought that the EU would get its employment chapter , but it happened .
Of course balmier winds were blowing that way , with the election results just achieved in Britain and France .
Now the EU has an obligation to tackle unemployment .
In Denmark a new economic policy has made good progress in creating jobs .
But the effect of this policy would be far greater if it were a common EU policy .
And great expectations are pinned on the jobs summit in Luxembourg this autumn .
What is more important than anything else , however , is that the achievement of a result in Amsterdam means that negotiations can be started with the Baltic and Central and Eastern European countries .
These countries have a right to claim EU membership , and the civilian cooperation between countries which were previously on a war footing with one another or were divided by a concrete wall is the EU 's contribution to peace and stability in Europe .
The affirmation in the preamble to the Treaty on European Union of the principles on which cooperation in the EU is based , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and non-discrimination , was a pious hope at the start of the negotiations , but in the end it became a reality .
The Amsterdam Treaty is truly an improvement of the EU in the direction of cooperation which prioritizes and tackles the problems that people consider important .
I should like to begin by thanking all those who have spoken , particularly for their kind words about the presidency which I shall gladly pass on to my colleagues in the Dutch Cabinet , because much as I am grateful for what people have said about me , we always worked as a team .
So I shall be delighted to pass on your compliments to them .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Brok and Mrs Guigou for their contribution on behalf of Parliament - and this also goes for Parliament 's President , of course - to the progress which has been made .
We very much appreciated their assistance , and I am speaking here particularly for the Dutch Government , because even before we took over the presidency , we worked very hard to ensure that Parliament would be able to play an active part in the discussions .
Having shared my responsibilities with Mr Patijn , I shall now confine myself to a certain number of areas and he will shortly give his response to some of the other points that were made .
I listened very closely to what you had to say , of course , and I can see that , like public opinion in general , you too have mixed views on the outcome of the Amsterdam Treaty .
There are good points and bad points , and these have led to various different political consequences and conclusions .
It is less than many of us , including the presidency , had wanted , hoped for or imagined , but it is still progress .
And it is progress which you should not belittle , because if we do , we are first of all likely to demoralize the public - who may well be left with the impression that no progress can be made - and secondly we are simply likely to underestimate our own individual ability to follow up on these achievements .
That goes for national governments , the Commission , national parliaments and the European Parliament .
There are real possibilities for building on these newly laid foundations , and the building of Europe is and always has been a process of growth .
It is simply a question of whether we wish to go on building with faith in our own strength and with the courage of our convictions .
I sincerely hope that we will , not just in these last few days of our presidency , but afterwards as well .
Employment and all the related social aspects are to be given much more prominence in Europe in future years .
This is a major step forward , and one that was very necessary too , given that we intend to introduce the euro in 1999 , a move which needs to be accompanied by a much more high-profile social , employment and economic policy .
This is a point I would make to the group chairmen , who have all mentioned the subject this morning . The introduction of the euro and the completion of the final stage of EMU are of vital political and economic importance as the final element in the single market , establishing a basis for increased political cooperation in the years to come and giving Europe greater economic power in the world .
I think we sometimes underestimate just how far we still have to go to maintain and consolidate Europe 's structural position after all the catching-up we have done since the mid-1980s when the single market first really came to the fore .
So we need to introduce EMU at the agreed time and according to the criteria agreed in the Treaty , but we must also ensure that Europe is strong not just in monetary terms , but economically and socially as well .
At the recent Denver summit , the Americans once again tried their hardest to prove to us that their economic model is the best , and I should like to take this opportunity to say that Europe can and should be proud of its own model of economic dynamism and social justice , and I think that many Americans and indeed many citizens of other major countries in the world rather admire Europe for being able to balance the two .
We have now managed to strike the necessary balance between Europe 's social needs and a stronger employment policy .
I would point out to the leader of the socialist and social democratic group , Mrs Green , that all governments are now going to have to continue working on the tasks we set ourselves at Amsterdam .
This applies to finance ministers , social affairs and employment ministers , economic affairs ministers , prime ministers - everyone without exception .
I also see no reason to question the contribution made to this process by the finance ministers , who have worked very hard over the last few days on the stability pact , the agreements and the resolution on growth and employment .
Many speakers mentioned the special Luxembourg summit which is to focus on employment .
There are four points I would make here .
Firstly , the date for the summit is to be fixed by the new Luxembourg presidency .
Secondly , the summit needs to be prepared in great detail , mainly by Luxembourg of course , but we must all do what we can to help .
Thirdly , the agenda should focus on practical , comprehensible issues , so that people know what they are talking about .
Fourthly , you should not harbour any exaggerated expectations .
You must not think that a few hours ' discussions at the summit , whenever it is held over the next six months , will produce miraculous solutions immediately generating thousands of new jobs .
However , it will certainly be an important occasion , bringing together all the various ideas and philosophies from around the Union and demonstrating that , as well as a sound monetary basis , attention is also to be focused on developing the coordination of economic policy and a stronger employment policy .
I heard one Member this morning say that more European money needs to be provided .
What is European money - apart from the euro that we are about to introduce ?
You cannot simply say that if the Member States do not have enough money to pursue their employment policies , all we have to do is turn on the European funding and jobs will appear .
It is not as easy as that .
But we can make every effort to ensure that the funding available through the European budgets is used in a more employment-friendly way , and we must learn to work together , learn from each other and listen to each other 's ideas about practical employment policy .
In recent years - and I can say this because I myself was one of those responsible , I am not trying to blame anyone else - an enormous amount of time has been spent on monetary issues and getting experts to agree on EMU , while much less work was done in comparison on the social aspects .
We are now busy making up lost ground , and we must go on devoting all our energies to this even after the end of our presidency in a few days ' time .
I would strongly urge you not to underestimate the progress that has been made on the foreign and security policy and the Community approach to the movement of persons .
Mention has been made of the Petersberg missions , and if little progress has been made on integrating the WEU into the European Union , it is because there are a number of diametrically opposed views on the subject in the 15 Member States .
What we have done , in a number of texts at least , is to give some indication of how these views might be reconciled to enable progress to be made .
Moving on to the subject of institutional reform , I must first say that I agree with all those who have voiced criticism here .
You may think this is a rather stupid thing to say , since I am supposed to be here to defend the overall outcome of the summit , and indeed I do , because I think we could not have gone to Amsterdam without a genuine basis on which to conclude the talks .
So I support the outcome as it stands , we have no intention of running away from it , but I really think we should have had the courage to go a little further on majority decision-making than we did .
Indeed the presidency fought long and hard for this during the preparations and at Amsterdam itself , but in the end we had to agree to let certain Member States reduce the already limited list of extra areas where majority voting was to apply .
There were enough for me to be able to support it , but there were less than we might have hoped .
Next , vote weighting .
There came a point during the last night at Amsterdam when it became clear that Member States had certain mutually exclusive ideas on this issue .
Some were adamant that we should simply have a second ratio based on population size and refused to consider any kind of reweighting on the lines of what the presidency proposed , or indeed any other alternative .
Others wanted the exact opposite .
So as things stood during the last night at Amsterdam , we had the choice of either accepting that these ideas were irreconcilable and ending up with nothing , or trying to do what we did , which was at least to agree that with the first wave of enlargement , the larger Member States will give up their second Commissioners - a highly significant political development - and to agree now , by way of compensation , that before the first wave of enlargement takes place , assuming that it involves less than six Member States , we will have a new distribution ratio for the number of votes in the Council .
This could of course simply be putting off the evil moment , in that we cannot rule out the possibility that the problems we had at Amsterdam will re-emerge when the time comes to decide on enlargement and therefore on the new weighting of votes .
But if this happens - and this is a political comment - and Member States try to use this problem to block enlargement , they will be taking a huge responsibility upon themselves .
I can assure you that I am all in favour of enlargement as soon as possible .
We know that careful preparations need to be made , that the members must fulfil a number of criteria and that they are not yet economically in a position to do so .
There are also the Copenhagen criteria of democracy , minorities and human rights .
But if the applicant countries are committed to meeting the requirements and are able to qualify , then the Europe of Fifteen must not be allowed to slow the pace of enlargement , especially not just because they want to change the weighting of votes to give themselves more power .
In 1989 , we were all euphoric - at least I assume you all were , like me - at the fall of the Wall and the end of oppression , dictatorship and Communism , and we knew that we wanted to offer the people in the countries concerned the prospect of forming part of a new , undivided Europe .
We cannot allow the stalemate on vote weighting to stop the Union from enlarging at an appropriate pace , and this is why we find it hard to accept the idea , which many Members here have suggested , of having an entirely new round of intergovernmental negotiations before the first wave of enlargement .
That would be very dangerous , since we would risk reopening so many questions that we could unintentionally bring the preparations for enlargement to a grinding halt .
It was agreed at Amsterdam that an institutional review is to be carried out at a later stage , once we reach 20 Member States .
So if the first wave involves less than six Member States , there will already have to be an agreement on vote reweighting , while if the limit of 20 is exceeded , there will have to be institutional reforms which - as far as we are concerned - should cover not just the size of the Commission and vote weighting but also the decision-making procedures .
Our whole institutional structure will be in the frame , as it were .
It will be worth the effort , but the question is whether we should allow it to affect the pace of the first wave of enlargement .
I personally certainly would not recommend it .
Finally , Mr Martens spoke very passionately about the conflict between national interests and European interests which became so evident in many of the statements made and at the summit itself .
Things are actually rather more complicated than that .
It is not unusual for the national interest to be simply the product of political and institutional relations within the Member State concerned , and I wonder if the clash of national and European interests which you encounter in some Member States is really as clear-cut as it seems , since it is in everyone 's national interest that we should make progress at European level .
How could it not be in the Member States ' interests , looking 15 or 20 years down the line from now , for us to continue to make steady progress on the construction of Europe ?
We all know that there are times when you have to accept a slower pace , and other times when things move swiftly .
And events are always happening in the Member States to slow things down .
But I would suggest - and this is my final word on the subject , in the form of a sort of appeal - that we should focus not on the disappointment that many of us , honourable Members here , members of governments and the presidency , feel about certain sections of the Treaty , but on the determination that has been shown to continue down the road we have chosen , perhaps sometimes more slowly than we might wish , but nevertheless to press on tirelessly , because we want our children and our grandchildren to inherit an undivided , prosperous and peaceful Europe . If we fail now to strengthen the foundations which the Amsterdam Treaty has established , we may perhaps be making a mistake of historic proportions .
Mr President , following the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council , I shall be relatively brief and not go back over all the points that have been raised in your speeches , which in any case generally reflect the concerns we expressed ourselves in our introduction .
In assessing the future Treaty of Amsterdam , we are to some extent confronted with the old conundrum of whether a glass is half full or half empty .
It all depends on how you see it , on whether your attitude to the Amsterdam Treaty is an optimistic one or a pessimistic one .
We are well aware of the breakthroughs achieved at Amsterdam .
The President-in-Office , too , has just explained his own disappointments and his anxieties about the future .
On the other hand , though , we should recall what was at stake at the European Council in Amsterdam .
I am completely certain that if it had not proved possible to reach agreement both on the single currency and on the pact for stability , growth and employment , it would also not have been possible to reach agreement on the Intergovernmental Conference .
And vice versa .
That was what was at stake at Amsterdam , and the Dutch presidency avoided that stumbling block .
Indeed , it was one of the notable successes of that presidency that it achieved agreement on the preparations for the single currency because , as we know very well today , the euro is up and running along the right lines ; its other achievements included the successful completion of Articles 102a and 103 of the Treaty by formulating the economic guidelines and incorporating the employment objective ; again , it also succeeded in completing the negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Of course , at the Intergovernmental Conference , compromises did have to be accepted in order to achieve unanimity among the fifteen Member States . But in order to evaluate those compromises one needs to know whether they were progressive ones .
And yes , there were progressive compromises , compromises that head in the right direction .
There was no retreat on any point .
That is the essential thing for all of us - the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council - if we are to derive maximum benefit from all the potential inherent in the new Treaty for the future of Europe .
If I may , Mr President , I should like to return to a question which Mrs Fraga Estévez put directly to the President of the Commission a little while ago .
It has nothing whatsoever to do with the European Council in Amsterdam , and in fact relates to an issue that was not even mentioned in Amsterdam : quota-hopping .
In reply to Mrs Fraga Estévez , may I make it quite clear that it is proper for the Commission to give an answer to a Member State when it is asked a question .
It is the most basic courtesy for a President of the Commission to reply to a Prime Minister regarding a problem with the application of Community law , which in fact is what the quota-hopping issue was about .
Knowing that the quota-hopping issue is a very sensitive one , not just for the British but equally so for the Spanish , Mrs Bonino as the Commissioner responsible and I myself wanted to ensure that the Spanish authorities were always kept informed about contacts with the British authorities .
The Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , has always respected ECJ case law , and as far as quota-hopping is concerned it must be said that the Court has accepted the requirement for a genuine economic link to exist between the boat and the Member State to which the fishing quota is allocated .
Turning more specifically to the manner in which this link can be demonstrated , I confined myself in my letter to the British Prime Minister to listing a number of possible alternatives -landing a minimum percentage of the catch in a port of the Member State that holds the quota , some of the crew members residents of that Member State , the ship sailing from that Member State on a majority of occasions - all these alternatives being compatible with the Court 's case law provided they are applied in a proportionate , non-discriminating and non-cumulative manner , in other words leaving it to the owner of the boat to choose one particular way of proving this economic link .
There was one question , or rather a concern , that was raised by a number of speakers to which I must reply , relating to the scope of the codecision procedure .
In the Amsterdam Treaty , we did indeed agree that the scope of codecision and Parliament 's involvement in it should be considerably extended .
Some Member States said that if we moved certain articles from the qualified majority list to the unanimity list , then we would also have to move the same articles from the codecision list to the consultation list .
The presidency did not see the logic of this , firstly because it was not specifically agreed at Amsterdam , and secondly because there have been precedents since the Maastricht Treaty that matters requiring a unanimous decision in the Council , such as the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds , could still be adopted by Parliament by codecision .
So the presidency does not see any reason to change the decisions that were made at Amsterdam .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place immediately .
Votes
: rejected



Joint motion for a resolution on the meeting of the European Council on 16 / 17 June in Amsterdam

( Parliament adopted the resolution )
As I am sure you are aware , the Amsterdam Treaty has as yet to be ratified .
It therefore has no effect on the work of this House .
Mr President , you are absolutely right .
That was clearly one of Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's less ingenuous interventions in this House .
As a man who is greatly concerned with these matters , perhaps if he had attended yesterday he would have understood that today we are only establishing the estimates .
The budget votes will be in October and will be in Strasbourg .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I wish to make a personal statement .
Mr Tomlinson , who unfortunately seems not to be in the Chamber at present , made a comment about me just now , in which he not only said that I had got my facts wrong - forgetting that , even before the Amsterdam Treaty , we had the Edinburgh Decision , whose existence I noted -and also stressing my absence from the Chamber yesterday afternoon .
I could derive some satisfaction from the fact that he noted my absence , but I should simply like to remind him that I was present at the meeting of the Committee on Budgets when his report was examined , and that I participated in the discussion . The reason I was unable to attend this House yesterday was , quite simply , that I had a municipal council meeting and that the speaking time allocated to my group made it impossible for me to be present on that occasion .
Mr President , we have heard it said on numerous occasions during this debate that the draft Amsterdam Treaty fails to prepare the Union 's institutions for enlargement .
My group agrees with that statement , though I am sure our reasons are not the same as the federalists ' .
As far as they are concerned , adapting the institutions to deal with enlargement means , quite simply , speeding up the application of their unending programme , first by generalizing majority voting on the Council .
They hope to compensate for the risk of dispersion which they believe the prospects of enlargement pose by a tightening up of centralized procedures .
For us , however , this strengthening of a monolithic Europe within a single institutional framework would be an error , imposing greater rigidity where what is needed is greater flexibility and greater capacity to adapt to the requirements of different peoples .
Under these conditions , enlargement does not require any acceleration of the federalist programme .
What is does require is a rethink on the subject of Europe , and the emergence of more differentiated institutions .
At the Amsterdam Council , it was as if the Heads of State and Government , presented by the Dutch presidency with a preparatory text largely inspired by the old arguments , had second thoughts and ultimately preferred to wait to obtain a clearer view of the enlargements before decreeing certain reforms .
Which is why we feel as we do .
Granted , we are on the wrong course , but in fact the vessel is drifting , engines stopped .
An intellectual conversion like the one awaiting Europe does not take place overnight , and it is not insignificant that the idea of reinforced co-operation has become established , pending the arrival of differentiated co-operation at some future date .
Let us allow time for ideas to germinate .
Mr President , unlike the majority of my group , stifled by ponderous Dutch arguments , and despite the vote on Amendment No 7 , I did not vote for the resolution , which seemed to me to be too weak .
We must call a spade a spade , and call a failure a failure .
The mission is unaccomplished .
The Union is not institutionally ready for enlargement .
And that poses the problem of ratification .
At previous key moments - the Single European Act , Maastricht - disappointment has been tempered by the feeling that , however slowly , Europe was moving forward and that its progress should be encouraged .
Today , is ratification the short cut to genuine reform , to the essential strengthening of the institutions ?
Frankly , I have my doubts .
Mr President , the Treaty of Amsterdam includes a number of improvements to the existing Treaties .
On the other hand , it singularly fails to make the necessary changes to make a union of more than 30 Member States capable of functioning .
The improvements are numerous .
They concern the employment chapter , the social chapter , better language on environment , public health and consumer protection , the extension of the co-decision procedure and the procedural changes to that procedure that this Parliament wanted and asked for .
It includes many other things as well .
Therefore , the Treaty should be ratified because it is a step forward .
But it is an insufficient step forward , especially as regards the capacity of the Union to function with over 20 Member States .
On that issue the European Council itself recognized that it has to return to the issue at least as regards the weighting of the votes and the size of the Commission . We must ensure that it also returns to that issue as regards the extension of the field of qualified majority voting because anything that requires unanimity in a Union of more than 20 Member States will be subject to paralysis .
That is the challenge facing this Parliament .
We must make sure that enlargement incorporates the necessary institutional changes .
We are very pleased that employment has got its own chapter in the Treaty .
Many of the governments of EU Member States are not prepared to invest public funds to get people back to work .
As long as there is a lack of political will , particularly among the Christian Democrat / Conservative and Liberal parties , we will not see any marked improvement in employment in Europe .
The areas which we oppose in the new Treaty include the fact that more political areas are to be centralised at EU level .
The European Parliament will also gain co-decision rights in a significant proportion of EU legislation and will be able to influence the financing of foreign policy .
Giving greater power to the European Parliament is a step towards increased federalism in Europe and there is reason to doubt whether the European Parliament is mature enough for this task .
In contrast , the role of national Parliaments , the bodies which after all have the greatest democratic legitimacy in each of the European countries , has fallen into oblivion .
The only thing which has been offered to national Parliaments is that they will have access to the Commission 's Green and White Papers in good time .
It has now been confirmed , once again , that the sessions of the European Parliament will mainly be held in Strasbourg , committee work will take place in Brussels and administration will remain in Luxembourg .
Such duplication of buildings , unnecessary travel and transport is an unacceptable waste of resources .
There is also a risk that enlargement of the EU to include those States in Central and Eastern Europe who now wish to join will be delayed if a new Intergovernmental Conference has to be held when five new countries have joined , as there are eleven countries interested in joining .
The final position adopted on the common foreign and security policy was essentially based on the joint initiative taken by Sweden and Finland prior to the Intergovernmental Conference .
This we support .
We cannot support the text of point 10 in the joint resolution proposal which expresses disappointment over the fact that there has been no integration of the WEU and the EU .
We think that these organisations should be kept separate .
Nor can we support points 8 and 12 .
The common resolution proposal supports the continued implementation of EMU and the stability pact .
We do not think that these two political actions will help to increase employment , growth or peace in Europe .
Unfortunately they could have the opposite effect .
It is our fundamental view that the EU should be a co-operation between independent States .
We want to see a Europe in which democracies cooperage , not the creation of a ' superstate ' .
It is a myth that a European Federation is the only way to achieve maximum growth and employment .
I voted against the final resolution because of the adoption of Amendment No 12 tabled by the Greens , which rejects the protocol on the seat of the institutions .
.
( DA ) The Amsterdam Treaty consists of a series of small steps and some great leaps in the direction of MORE UNION .
There is not a single decision that is referred back from Brussels to the Member States and regions .
On the other hand , there are new transfers of power and the introduction of majority voting in new areas .
The two things will ensure more centralization of decision-making in the EU .
In form the Amsterdam Treaty is an international agreement , but in content it is the constitution for a new state with common rights and freedoms and Union citizenship .
Important decisions still require unanimity among the governments - but as voters , we no longer need to be asked .
We lose our sovereignty as electorates .
The democratically elected national parliaments lose legislative power .
The European Parliament is to get more power to put forward amendments and veto new laws .
But the right of veto is not democratic government and , even if the European Parliament took over the legislative power , it would be a poor replacement for the local democracy that is possible in the Member States and regions .
There is as yet no European people that is prepared to have a common European government .
And government without the people is government without democracy .
That is the democratic poverty of the Union and the reason why every democrat must vote ' no ' to the Treaty that has come out of Amsterdam .
We , who prefer a Europe of Nations to a United States of Europe , also have other reasons for voting ' no ' .
We do not want a common foreign policy with majority decisions , a common foreign ministry and a common foreign minister .
We do not want armed forces mixed up in the civilian EU .
We do not want a common legal affairs policy and a federal police force .
We want gentle and friendly borders around free and democratically ruled nations and binding cooperation on all cross-frontier questions .
In one area , the Amsterdam Treaty is better than its predecessors .
There are kind words on employment .
But it is difficult to discern the new jobs that are to replace those which are being swept away by the conditions for the single currency .
Openness can now be blocked by three countries , such as Spain , France and Germany .
The environmental guarantee is being cut back in terms of content and coverage and geographic scope .
Enlargement in Eastern and Central Europe is being put off .
We want to make Europe whole , not to divide it , and we call on everyone to demand a referendum .
The conclusions of the Amsterdam summit leave a sour taste and a feeling of incompleteness , even of a missed opportunity .
I admit , let 's make no mistake about this , it is much better than Maastricht !
At every level , genuine progress has been made , and we should tell the negotiators as much , and congratulate the Dutch presidency .
We agree that , when it comes to employment , the fight against unemployment and the idea of a social Europe , there has been real progress , thanks to the political changes in the United Kingdom and especially in France , with clear perspectives and a specific timetable .
The framework is now in place ; a framework within which we can act .
It confirms much of the Commission and it confronts the European Parliament with its responsibilities .
The Luxembourg employment summit lies ahead .
The national governments , the Commission and Parliament no longer have any ' right to fail ' , nor any right to be vague in their proposals or unclear about their commitments .
Europe 's citizens expect specific measures and a specific timetable ... at least as specific as the monetary , financial and banking timetable .
On the institutional front , the balance sheet is much more negative .
Parliament 's powers have been strengthened by the broadening of the codecision procedure , but the inability of the summit to decide on the necessary action simply to make the Council and Commission ' manageable ' in the event of enlargement is a serious failure .
We cannot reasonably open negotiations on this basis , because we would be condemning the European Union to total inefficiency and inertia .
The European Union , then , must very quickly go into greater detail with its proposals to favour growth and social change and to counter unemployment , while at the same time reopening the debate on the European institutions , which must be very swiftly adapted and reformed if a crisis is to be avoided .
This view was reflected in spirit in the joint motion for a resolution , and I was prepared to vote in favour .
However , the rejection of the protocol confirming Strasbourg as the seat of the European Parliament prompted me , together with my French colleagues , to vote against .
Like many of my colleagues in the European Parliament I wished to see a large step forward in European integration taken at Amsterdam .
This has not happened .
What we have is a number of small cautious steps improving and deepening integration .
These small but significant steps are welcome nonetheless .
The power and influence of the European Parliament has been strengthened in a number of areas , our ability as a small Member State to nominate a Commissioner has been preserved and a new chapter on employment has been inserted into the Treaty .
Most importantly EUROPOL , the coordinating police agency , will be given an operational role and the 15 Member States have promised to strengthen the fight against drug trafficking and related crime .
Little progress was made in improving the operation of EU foreign policy .
We will remain impotent on the world political stage until we have the courage to develop a strong EU foreign policy .
I have always favoured a properly negotiated enlargement of the Union to the East .
The failure of the Amsterdam Summit to agree on institutional reform will make these negotiations complicated beyond belief as all the decisions not taken at Amsterdam will now have to be negotiated with the acceding countries .
My remarks today are made in full awareness of the responsibilities facing us - facing me .
As a new Member of this Parliament , may I first thank Honourable Members for the way I have been welcomed here - the advantage of being a novice .
I shall be as brief , simple and straightforward as possible .
Amsterdam has brought both results and disappointments .
But the bottom line , it must be said , is that Amsterdam is a failure for Europe , and unless we can remedy that failure today we shall face more serious failures tomorrow .
I shall not dwell on the positive achievements of Amsterdam - others have already done so , excessively in some cases .
So what are the shortcomings and the failures ?






I would list the principal ones as follows : 1. social issues lack a proper legal basis and the necessary financial resources ; 2. the Union has not been endowed with the legal personality it needs ; 3. hopes of a common defence policy have become more remote ; 4. there are insufficient resources for common foreign policies ; 5. reinforced co-operation has been virtually stalemated in advance by the conditions for its implementation : those states which want to go farthest will be unable to do so ; 6. the citizen , once again , has been forgotten : the texts are becoming more and more incomprehensible , debates more and more obscure , and citizens ' rights are still not clearly safeguarded .


How can we really expect the public , in their day-to-day lives , to accept that this Europe , with its much-vaunted merits , is indeed beneficial ?
And , last but not least , 7. the reform of the institutions has , in essence , been deferred until the third millennium .
Let me dwell for a moment on this fundamental point . I have attended the meetings of the Committee on Institutional Affairs since 18 June .
The issue here is not legalistic quibbling but the future of the enlarged Union .
The Union cannot move forward on a single monetary leg .
It cannot move forward on two legs - one monetary , the other social .
Because the legs cannot move , cannot act , without a brain to give them orders .
And that brain is policy , and , therefore , the institutional structure that allows it .
It means taking decisions by a majority vote , not unanimously .
To be even more specific , it means the taking of genuinely European decisions , that is by a majority vote , rather than paralysis or the accumulation of nationalistic micro-decisions .
If we can agree on this diagnosis , we need to seek the means to cure the patient , and especially to prevent his disease becoming chronic .
The medication is already known : the reform of the institutions and , primarily , the extension of majority voting .
All we need is for the patient to agree to take the medication .
Today , he is refusing to do so .
We must explain that he needs it , and strongly urge him to swallow it .
With this in mind , let us not be too diplomatic today .
That is not our job .
Let us say , clearly and concisely , that it won 't do .
And , before any enlargement takes place , let us demand a further review of the Treaties , which in essence means a review of the European constitution .
Let us ensure that this review takes place more democratically and transparently , so that the peoples of Europe can begin to understand it and , consequently , to support it .
Many voices have been raised in this House to say the same thing .
An amendment tabled by members of various groups , in paragraph 1 of the compromise motion , asserts it forcibly .
The PSE , at the urging of the French socialist delegation , has taken its cue from that motion and supports the essential demand : reform of the institutions , now .
We welcome that .
If we are firm in our criticisms and our proposals , we may cause a little alarm today but we shall serve a purpose tomorrow .
I hope I have not alarmed you too much , and that I can serve a purpose tomorrow .
I shall vote in favour of the joint motion for a resolution accepting as a whole the result of the European Council held in Amsterdam , especially the new Treaty to be known as the Treaty of Amsterdam .
However I am not fully happy about it .
In any case the best of the Amsterdam agreement is that agreement was reached as regards the stability and growth pact , thus strengthening the agreement to realise Economic and Monetary Union and the Euro within the time-limit and under the conditions envisaged and , formally , we have a new Treaty , although this new Treaty cannot hide the major gaps and worrying delays decided on key questions .
The European Union has for years lacked leadership and ambition .
It is not responding to the challenges of the present world situation , nor is it taking advantage of the extraordinary possibilities available to the EU following the situation created when the Soviet Union broke up and Central and Eastern European companies gained access and freedom which the European Union should welcome with generous solidarity .
I repeat my concern at the excessive weight and veto of the Member States in the decision-making process , the modest progress in the role attributed to the Committee of the Regions and the limitations now in existence for the development of European policies in the field of external relations , justice and domestic policy , even within the scope of economic and monetary policy which is absolutely necessary and essential since we are to have an internal European market and the prospect of Economic and Monetary Union and a single European currency .
I again condemn the serious uncertainty created because no agreement was reached on the necessary institutional strengthening for the political leadership which the European Union requires for the twenty-first century .
.
( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have one or two objections to the resolution .
Paragraph 10 on the integration of the WEU into the EU cannot be supported because of a Danish reservation .
In addition , it is not possible to support the incorporation of the Schengen Agreement into the Treaty , and we do not consider that enlargement has become more difficult following the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
We are not therefore voting for paragraph 5 .
Despite these objections , we vote for the resolution because it affirms that the areas that are most important to us , such as openness , democracy , human rights , the environment , consumer protection and employment have been given a higher priority in the new Treaty .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) Perhaps the Amsterdam Treaty does not go as far as many would have liked or as many feared .
But even so the power of the EU will greatly increase and it will be the supranational bodies , the European Parliament , the Commission and the Court which gain increased power .
The European Parliament will gain co-decision rights in approximately 75 % of real EU legislation and influence over the financing of foreign policy .
The Commission and the Court will , for example , have more say in issues which previously fell into the area of inter state co-operation , that is in issues concerning foreign and security policy and domestic and justice matters .
In a separate protocol , because of the planned enlargement of the EU , there is a promise of more votes to those countries with two Commissioners , in other words the larger countries .
The only thing of any substance offered to the National Parliaments is access to the Commission 's Green and White Papers in good time .
The development of the Union should be placed in the wider context as well .
The fundamental laws of the EU have changed completely three times during the last eleven years .
The European Union Act in 1980 introduced majority decision making on a large scale , particularly in order to promote free movement of goods , labour and capital , which radically restricted the sovereignty of Member States .
The Maastricht Treaty in 1991 introduced new regulations for foreign policy and for domestic and justice affairs .
But above all Maastricht was a breakthrough for EMU .
Currency union in itself will lead to closer integration and a real reduction in self-determination for the Member States .
The Amsterdam Treaty is confirmation that the Union is moving constantly towards ever closer union , a federation , although the speed and intensity of progress in this direction may vary .
The Amsterdam EU Treaty is an assault on democracy .
I believe that the resolution tabled by the major political groups does not adequately reflect the gravity of its consequences .
For that reason I have voted against that resolution .
Democracy was ruled out of bounds by EU leaders for some of the most important developments made by the Treaty , especially in the area of justice and home affairs .
The European Parliament was given a mere consultative role in most justice developments but now has no say whatsoever on Europol , the federal police force .
The role of the European Court of Justice in most developments remains unclear .
On environment policy , the Treaty has become a charter for stagnation .
Member States will be barred from implementing ambitious strategies for environmental protection that went beyond the EU norm .
Effective waste management measures , such as Denmark 's ban on aluminium drink cans , would be among those placed in jeopardy .
The goal of boosting employment stated in the Treaty is incompatible with efforts to achieve economic and monetary union ( EMU ) .
It is vital that the Treaty is put to referendums in all the Member States which have the referendum instrument .
Otherwise citizens will be denied any real voice in the EU 's future development .
The democratic deficit will be greatly widened .
I reject suggestions that fears over Irish neutrality were allayed at Amsterdam .
Although a proposed merger between the EU and the nuclear-armed Western European Union ( WEU ) was postponed , the Treaty still provides for ' the progressive framing of a common defence policy [ which ] will be supported , as Member States consider appropriate , by cooperation between them in the field of armaments ' .
There is no doubt that Ireland is being sucked into a military union , which wants the support of its own arms industry .
The Amsterdam Summit was very disappointing and even a serious failure .
Hopes were not high , but the results were even more disastrous than expected .
In the first place and as regards the institutional questions , one basic conclusion needs to be borne in mind : the planned amendments to the Treaty are fully within the spirit of Maastricht and do not take the slightest account of the marked reservations and mounting opposition which has grown up and is still growing up on all fronts .
It is true that some of the negative proposals which were on the table were not , at least specifically , considered .
There is an insistence on a federal framework , although it has not been adopted : decision-making powers are concentrated at Community level , the citizens are ever more remote from the decision-making and consequently democratic deficits are increased .
At the same time , at the economic and social levels there are one or two aspects which need to be mentioned .
First unemployment and its inevitable link with a forced march towards a single currency and the stability pact - fundamental questions at the present moment - were finally included on the agenda for the Summit , as we had always advocated .
In spite of that , the Council decisions in this field are disappointing .
There are too many intentions and too few measures and means for putting them into practice .
The present restrictive policy is continued for the most part with the inevitable negative effects on the field of employment and at the same time there is a total lack of effective measures and means for fighting unemployment ; that runs completely counter to the intentions stated in the social field .
A majority in the European Parliament is still far removed from reality and the anxieties and concerns of the citizens and is again showing an inclination to blindly follow the relevant Council decisions .
That seems clear from the motion for a resolution under discussion . We shall therefore not support it or vote for it .
Following the accusations against European public opinion - with great headlines in the media , citing nationalist prejudices and visions in the building of Europe , it is a good thing for the European Parliament to be the forum for the expression of the views of the institutions - the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament .
Over and above any detailed analysis , the message which should get through to public opinion is that the Treaty of Amsterdam is a new , positive step towards the political building of Europe .
Having said that , one negative point is that there is a lack of political willpower to move forward in fields which were perfectly defined in the preparatory stages .
We must condemn the basically nationalistic type of view adopted by quite a number of Heads of State and Government , forgetting that the best defence for national interests is within the EC .
The existence of 14 protocols and other such statements in itself constitutes a failure by the European Council which did not have the political stature historically required to move forward in unity whilst preserving diversity .
Myopia ruled the day .
Nor was the long wording of the preamble a good sign , but it was rather a further indication of the denaturing of the Treaty , which is peppered with articles laying down petty rules .
One further cause for concern is the steps taken by some governments which have recently come to power and have not followed the principle of institutional loyalty which should oblige governments to adhere to agreements already signed .
The citizens should demand that European policy be made a state matter quite apart from the whims of the previous government .
I have always maintained that it is perfectly possible to evaluate progress .
All aspects of communitization of the second and third pillars of the second and third pillars would be a clear sign of real willpower to pursue European integration .
If reasonable progress has been made with the third pillar and within the scope of foreign and security policy , all will depend upon the political willpower shown by the Heads of Government .
But the citizens should not blame Europe for any possible failure in this field ; it is non-Europe which is responsible .
The extension of voting by qualified majority and of policies governed by the co-decision process is another key political barometer .
Certain significant aspects of progress must be noted : Parliament and the Council are in certain fields still redressing the balance of their power for the benefit of European Unity .
Institutional reform is still pending , but it is better that it should be .
Some of the proposals debated entail a denaturing of the spirit of the Treaties .
The Council is clinging on to the right of veto , unanimity and blocking majorities .
They give it the illusion that it has decision-making power .
However , it is well known that solitary voting never achieved anything other than political isolation .
The famous blocking minority , as its name indicates , serves only to delay the building of Europe .
It would be impossible to understand the scope of the Treaty of Amsterdam without mentioning that its birth was preceded by the ratification of the irreversible launching of the single currency .
The Euro will dictate all the most nationalistic and individualistic trends .
We should be glad : Europe is continuing its inexorable political construction .
Fontaine report ( A4-0204 / 97 )
We consider the report presented by the rapporteur contains a significantly better proposed Directive than the proposal from the Commission .
Above all we would like to emphasise the proposals on employee rights put forward in the report .
It is important to promote the protection of the employee and the small shareholder in this respect .
But the adopted position in question only applies if a Directive is to be established at Community level .
We consider it doubtful that there is a real need for a Directive at Community level .
Tomlinson report ( A4-0178 / 97 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group does not give its approval to the Tomlinson report .
It is , in fact , unacceptable for five reasons .
This report is unacceptable , first , because - as I said earlier - it is presented during a supplementary part-session in Brussels whereas the budgetary session is held , and will continue to be held , in Strasbourg .
This report is unacceptable in that it envisages eleven five-day part-sessions in Strasbourg and seven additional part-sessions in Brussels , which is contrary to the Treaties , whether we refer to the Edinburgh compromise or to what will shortly become Community law in the wake of the Amsterdam European Council meeting .
The report is also unacceptable in what it has to say about the reimbursements , charges and expenses of Members of the European Parliament .
How can we overlook the hypocrisy demonstrated by our colleagues in adopting the proposed amendment when we know - and I am particularly well placed to know , because I am a member of the working group - that the working group set up by the Bureau is going to lead to nothing .
Nothing has changed regarding this very important point .
The report is also unacceptable with regard to Parliament 's buildings .
The rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson , worries about excessive reliance on monies obtained from the European taxpayer .
It 's true , we need only look around , inside and outside this Chamber , and we will see that we could hardly build or buy much more than we already have built and bought here in Brussels .
Finally , the report is unacceptable in that it deals with the financing of the European political groups .
The budgetary will is further increased to respond to the aim fixed by Article 138a of the Treaty , by adapting the nomenclature of Chapter 37 , even though there is no necessity to justify this creation .
All this presages nothing good for the 1998 budget .
We await that budget and we shall participate in its discussion , but the decisions that have been taken - because decisions they are - have not directed that budget along the right lines .
We must make some comment on this budget even if we are voting for the report .
1.The most ridiculous thing from a cost point of view is that Parliament is located in three different working areas .
This gives rise to excessive and unnecessary administrative costs but is not something which Parliament itself can control.2.It is unreasonable that travel expenses are paid according to a fixed rate per kilometre .
Travel expenses can be easily administered by giving Parliamentarians travel cards .
Our voters rightly wonder what we are doing with their money , and they have taken exception , amongst other things , to our generous expenses .
Almost BFR 2 billion in travel and subsistence allowances for 626 Members really is a very considerable sum indeed .
At the end of last year , after yet more critical coverage in the press , the President of Parliament promised that improvements would be made , but since then all that has happened is that a Bureau working party has been set up .
The rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson , has taken a step in the right direction , for which I congratulate him , but I still think that the voters are waiting for a clearer signal from us .
That is why I and a number of colleagues have tabled an amendment to the effect that travel and subsistence allowances can only be refunded on the basis of the actual costs incurred , for which documentary evidence must be provided .
Approving this amendment would show public opinion that we mean business .
Openness and transparency also mean that every citizen of the Union should be able to read about the activities of the EP in his or her own language .
We should like to see this principle of ' equality ' set in stone , as the Amsterdam summit set it in the Treaty .
We agree generally with the proposals put forward by the rapporteur with respect to the budget .
It is a good thing , for example , that there is finally to be an environmental review of the European Parliament buildings and methods of working which hopefully will lead to better use of information technology in Parliament .
With regard to amendment proposal 3 , which concerns the Members ' pension fund , we have of course decided to vote in favour of this .
This is a moral and ethical matter which has great symbolic value .
It is important that the Members who belong to the pension fund are allowed to pay from their own accounts , which means that Members must actively participate instead of having the amount deducted directly from their allowances .
We are voting against the proposal to establish a staff shop in the European Parliament 's new building in Brussels .
It is unacceptable to have separate shops selling tax free goods to the ' EU elite ' who are already taxed at a low level on their salaries .
We are hesitant about the allocation of money for European Political parties as in some cases they could be seen as a fanciful excuse for increased subsidies and not a requirement of the people .
On the other hand we support the motion that all official languages should be treated equally in the European Parliament , and that all documents used must be translated into each of these languages .
Finally , we support amendment proposal No. 15 which states that travel expenses for members should only be paid for actual costs incurred and not , as they currently are , in the form of a generally high allowance which does not require receipts showing actual costs .
.
( DA ) I have voted for Amendment No 15 to paragraph 10 from Mr De Coene , despite the fact that I sit on the working group in Parliament whose task is to draft proposals on changes to the conditions under which Members work .
I agree that the rules on travel should be amended so that Members are refunded for actual travel expenses duly documented .
On the other hand , it would surely be too bureaucratic if expenses for entertainment and eating out etc were to be covered by refunds of expenditure actually incurred .
In that area both public bodies and private firms apply a form of per diem expenses .
We must make some comment on this budget even if we are voting for the report .
1.The most ridiculous thing from a cost point of view is the fact that Parliament is located in three different places .
This gives rise to excessive and unnecessary administrative costs but is not something which Parliament itself can control.2.It is unreasonable that travel expenses are paid according to a fixed rate per kilometre .
Travel expenses can be easily administered by giving Parliamentarians travel cards.3.Furthermore , we think that the EU parliamentarians ' pension fund should be self sufficient and not subsidised by public EU funds .
Previous subsidies ought , therefore. to be reclaimed .
The system of travel expenses and allowances must be changed to bring it into line with what is acceptable to the general public .
The expenses system must be more open , easier to follow and easier to control .
Travel expenses should be refunded on submission of a receipt .
The EU budget should not be used to finance European parties .
There must be a complete cost review of all buildings which have been or are being built in Parliament 's three working locations to examine whether resources are being used effectively .
Parliament must do its utmost to ensure that the buildings which have been built , the administrative buildings in Brussels for example , are not under-utilised or used in such a way which gives rise to unnecessary costs for the people .
STOA is the European Parliament 's office for Scientific and Technical Options Assessment .
Although administratively it forms part of Parliament 's Directorate of Studies ( DG IV ) , it is nevertheless an independent assessment body working for our institution .
It is steered by a group of Members of Parliament representing each of the specialized committees : the STOA panel .
STOA assists these committees in areas where science and technology play a dominant role .
The STOA 's work programme is drawn up at the end of each year for the coming year , in response to proposals from the Members of the various committees and taking due account of Parliament 's timetable .
It is adopted by the STOA panel and by the Bureau of Parliament .
The reports prepared by external contractors , selected by invitation to tender , result in working documents that are presented to the STOA panel before being considered as definitive STOA documents .
As a result of this reorientation , STOA is an assessment office that assists the activities of Parliament and is better co-ordinated with the work of the committees , while retaining its independent expert status .
It is therefore clear that the merging of the two budget items 260 and 261 is incompatible with the constant efforts of STOA to guarantee management based on greater budgetary transparency : the appropriations included in item 261 are specifically intended to finance STOA , whose mandate was confirmed by the Bureau at its meeting of 17 February 1997 .
The Committee on Budgetary Control also receives a quarterly report on the implementation of the budget .
Thus , the adoption of paragraph 37 , and in particular the one-third reduction in the pre-allocated amounts , would result in the circumventing of the political responsibility exercisedby the Bureau of Parliament and the STOA panel , in favour of a purely administrative form of management involving at least three authorizing officers .
Apart from casting doubt on democratic control , such an arrangement would lengthen the reporting period and jeopardize the recently restored co-ordination of the work of STOA with that of the committees .
For all these reasons , and in agreement with the members of the STOA panel , I ask you to vote against paragraph 37 of the motion for a resolution contained in the Tomlinson report , in order to enable STOA to continue assisting the committees in their legislative activities involving science and technology , upon which , among other things , the future of the European Union 's economy depends .
The completion of the new buildings in Strasbourg and Brussels presents huge budgetary problems for the European Parliament , and cuts will have to be made in other items to finance them .
The Tomlinson report makes a start on this by proposing , amongst other measures , that the establishment plan should be stabilized .
However , further cutbacks will also be needed before Parliament 's budget can be definitively adopted .
With the current Tomlinson package , we are still more than ECU 4 million above the group chairmen 's recommendation of 1988 that Parliament 's budget should not exceed 20 % of total administrative expenditure .
An additional factor is that , in drawing up its estimates , the Bureau has assumed a very favourable ECU / BFR rate , but if the current positive trend were to change in 1998 , the Bureau would have serious problems .
Something will have to be done , amongst other things , about the voluntary pension scheme for Members .
The expenditure here may be 28 % less than in 1997 , but this figure gives a misleading impression , because there was an extremely large deficit in previous years , two thirds of which was made up by Parliament anyway .
Parliament will also have to make some very necessary savings on travel and subsistence allowances .
It is extremely important that the working party should deal with these problems and bring forward some proposals as soon as possible , so that they can be included in the budgetary procedure for 1998 .
I support the rapporteur 's proposal to freeze travel and subsistence allowances at 1997 levels pending the working party 's conclusions .

I also support the idea that the budget heading for the European political parties should be dropped , but I am opposed to the inclusion of a reference to Article 138a of the Treaty in the remarks on items 3705 , 3706 and 3707 , which would open the way for funding for international political structures which are quite separate from the European Parliament .

I also object to the creation of a new A7 post for the European Ombudsman .
This institution seems to be expanding endlessly , and particularly at a time when the budget margins are small , the block on recruitment recommended by the Bureau should surely also apply to the Ombudsman .
To sum up , I broadly support the Tomlinson report , but extra cuts will have to be made in a number of areas before the first reading if we are to prevent Parliament from claiming more than 20 % of category 5 for itself in 1998 .
Hendrick report ( A4-0163 / 97 )
.
( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a Council Decision adopting a multiannual Community programme to stimulate the establishment of the information society in Europe .
The development of the information society in Europe is having a dramatic influence on the way people live , learn and work .
Marginalization and exclusion are very real risks in the context of the development of new information and communications technologies .
The Danish Social Democrats want to avoid new class divisions in society due to the development of the information society and therefore take a very positive view of initiatives in which the legislator plays an active role in influencing developments .
For that reason the Danish Social Democrats voted ' yes ' .
But the Danish Social Democrats are opposed to the proposed legal basis for this measure .
It is a fundamental principle of law that the legal basis used for legislation should be as specific as possible .
We think that other legal bases could be used , such as provisions authorizing initiatives in the field of the internal market , TENs , education , the environment and transport .
To disseminate ' information ' on the information society - who could gainsay that ?
Workers , employees , those working in the educational and social fields will all need far more information than is circulated today if they are to master the changes summarized under the heading ' information society ' .
But that is not enough - and even ' information ' cannot just be absorbed passively !
We finally need a broad social debate , a democratic discussion on the forms of the ' information society ' .
The question cannot simply be : ' how do we adjust to the new situation ' , but ' what kind of information society ' do we want , what form should we give it ?
Let me dare to make a prediction : unless the EU itself makes political provision for a democratic debate on the information society in Europe , the people will take over this task and fight for it themselves .
If the Commission and the Council continue to fail to tackle this task , the political forces in this Union will simply have to begin here and now to get a social debate under way .
Boogerd-Quaak ( A4-0208 / 97 )
Let me simply point out that Commissioner Bangemann , who has been plaguing us for years with his policy of small steps ( which he describes as inevitable for technical reasons ) , has already promised to present this House with a framework directive on preparing for the information society .
We are waiting for it !
However , the aim must not be to establish deregulation and privatization as the main principle of our technically imparted social and cultural communication processes , as Commissioner Bangemann still wants ( cf. the ' convergence ' debate ) .
On the contrary , we must in fact try to determine more clearly what the limits and conditions are of private acquisition , to allow people to organize and structure media communications democratically themselves again and take this out of the hands of the billionaire monopolies that are trying to acquire private ownership of the ' collective idea ' of the ' global village ' as a new source of wealth .
Ahlqvist report ( A4-0200 / 97 )
I have voted for this report today as I share the rapporteur 's welcome for the Commission Communication on Learning in the Information Society .
As a former teacher myself , I am struck by both the opportunities and the challenges which information technology presents to our education services .
The Commission 's proposals to encourage the use of multimedia teaching are therefore to be supported .
One of the best ways for children to learn is by doing things and this is made much easier if the child or student is able to use a multimedia computer .
Such technology is often more familiar to children than adults , so the Commission is right to encourage teachers to learn how to us I.T. to improve their teaching .
However , I share the rapporteur 's concern that a further objective needs to be put into the Commission 's Action Plan .
There is a danger of simply using technology for its own sake without thinking through its impact on all aspects of our life .
Children should be encouraged to see information technology as not just something they use at school to learn or at home to play games on .
It will affect their whole lives in future .
The more familiar our young people are with such technology at an early age , the more likely they are to make the systems work for them - rather than the other way around .
In the information society in its globalized state anyone not moving forwards is moving backwards .
Urgent , on-going and coordinated action is therefore needed by the Member States to create a European industry which is sound in content and new generations who are in general able to use the information and communication technologies to advantage , that is to improve the quality of life .
For such education to be provided effectively and swiftly we must promote the translation into other European languages of the best educational software and multi-media products made in Europe , in particularly those which encourage education for citizenship .
Finally , there should be a survey of the existing non-government cultural bodies in each Member State which could actively support schools in the development of projects at grass-roots level as the only way of avoiding social fragmentation . The greatest danger to be avoided .
Chesa report ( A4-0032 / 97 )
We have voted in favour of the report by Mr Raymond Chesa on co-operation with Kirgizistan .
We have done so because we naturally support the establishment of economic and trade relations with all the new States which have grown up following the break-up of the Soviet Union .
But we are critical of the structure of the report which concentrates so greatly on economic liberalisation and privatisation .
In a country where , according to the report , 70 percent of the population live in poverty , greater attention should have been paid to the question of how there can be real development linked with a fair distribution of resources .
Hormone treated meat
Mr President , the European Parliament is rightly in revolt against the preliminary report by the World Trade Organization which , responding to a complaint by the United States and Canada , condemns the European ban on imports of hormone-treated meat .
The unfortunate thing about this business is that the report 's argument is based , in particular , on a provision contained in the agreements of the Uruguay Round , approved by this House in 1994 .
Article 2 of the agreement on health and plant health measures provides for the possibility of restrictions on international trade in order to protect human health only if those restrictions are based on scientific proof .
Now , in the case of growth hormones although we have very serious indications that they are harmful , we do not have absolute proof .
Of course , logic dictates that the principle of caution should be enough to justify our ban .
Unfortunately , however , Article 2 of the agreement to which I have referred makes no mention of the principle of caution .
Nor does it make any reference to the fundamental right of peoples to choose their form of agriculture , food , way of life and society .
During the mad cow crisis , many Honourable Members accused the European Commission of having made the free movement of goods a higher priority than consumer health .
Now here we are again with precisely the same problem , this time with the aggravating circumstance that this disastrous policy has been inscribed on a tablet of stone - an international treaty .
Brussels today is being hounded by the consequences of its past actions .
We therefore call upon the institutions of the European Union not just to refuse to yield in this matter of hormonetreated meat but to lodge an official request for the renegotiation of the GATT .
The case of the hormone-treated meat shows , yet again , just how many defects and injustices that treaty contains .
To challenge them is not a matter of protectionism but the just defence of our peoples ' rights .
.
( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats consider that the WTO panel which dealt with the complaint of the USA over the EU ban on the import of beef treated with hormones did not look at the right context for this affair .
The panel 's approach is that it is a question whether the EU has a consistent policy in the field of concern over hormone residues in beef .
Three issues are mentioned : the EU has no limits for the content of natural hormones in meat , the EU has no maximum values for residual concentrations of hormones for the veterinary treatment of animals and , finally , the EU allows Carbadox to be used as a growth promoter in pig production .
We do not think that matters can be presented in a manner such that , if one thing can be accepted , then the other must also be accepted .
Health measures must of course be based on scientific principles , but complete scientific certainty and unanimity are rare .
If there is scientific uncertainty as to the harmfulness of a substance , the government must be free to give consumers the benefit of the precautionary principle .
We think that the EU 's consumer policy in particular should be based on this thinking and that this is where the great difference arises between the WTO and the EU .
International trade must be built on the rights of consumers and concern for public health , not on the interests of the market .
The recent arbitrary decision by the World Trade Organization on the banana market has revealed a growing and perceptible tendency for this Organization to bend to the interests and wishes of the American economy .
This time the WTO decision that the measures banning the importation of meat treated with hormones are not justified goes beyond the bounds of what is acceptable , since it disregards scientific and veterinary opinion , shows contempt for public health , forgets the minimum rules for the health and welfare of animals and tries to undermine the confidence of consumers as a whole in the quality of meat sold in the European Union .
An appeal must be made against that arbitrary WTO decision , but also the current ban on importation from the USA and Canada of meat from animals treated with growth hormones must be firmly upheld by means of stepping up external and internal controls to make that decision effective .
We must also insist on a total ban on hormones at world level .
Continuing that line , public health and animal health must be protected and we must stop or prevent the spread of new diseases such as BSE .
For all the above reasons we shall vote in favour of the political resolution approved today by Parliament .
Novo Belenguer report ( A4-0210 / 97 )
One year after the reform of the Structural Funds for the period 1994-1999 , the Commission has presented its report on their implementation .
Unfortunately , the verdict still has to be extremely unfavourable .
Unfavourable as regards the slowness of the administrative procedures ; unfavourable as regards the under-implementation of the appropriations by the Member States ; and unfavourable as regards respect for the principle of additionality .
I congratulate the rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy on his work , and on his presentation of all these criticisms .
In my capacity as the elected representative of an Objective 2 canton , I , like all the other local actors ( the relevant authorities and the social partners ) , am confronted with these problems with the setting-up of projects to create jobs .
We have a duty to set up a flexible system , involving the simplification of the decision-making procedures and greater additionality with other Community policies ( employment SMEs , the campaign against exclusion ) .
I think Mr Novo 's report will provide a sound basis for discussion in the run-up to the official Commission proposal on the forthcoming reform of the Structural Funds .
The Structural Funds , as you all know , are one of the essential elements of the European Union 's economic and social cohesion policy .
It is therefore extremely important that we should be vigilant regarding their implementation , to ensure that they are as effective as they possibly can be .
Mr Novo Belenguer 's report has the virtue of singling out the continuing problems with the management and implementation of the Structural Funds , and of proposing lines of action to remedy these defects .
That was why I voted for it .
I would simply like to stress two points made in that report which seem to me very important .
The first is the underimplementation of the Structural Funds .
The problem is a substantial one , even though today 's figures are less alarming than they were in 1995 , the first year of the programming period .
I also speak as the representative of a French department .
This under-consumption is closely linked to the cumbersome procedures that have to be confronted by those involved in local development .
It seems necessary for the implementation procedures to be simplified , at both Commission and Member State level .
One way of achieving this simplification , undoubtedly , is by reducing the number of Community initiative programmes so as to avoid the piecemeal scattering of funds and provide the local actors with a clearer framework .
Let me also briefly mention the importance of partnership , emphasized by Mr Novo Belenguer in his report .
Great advances have already been achieved , but it is essential to continue along the same lines .
By doing so , we shall achieve a better match between local needs and the utilization of the Structural Funds .
Finally , I cannot conclude without expressing my disappointment regarding the recent decisions made at the Amsterdam summit .
Mr Novo Belenguer 's report makes clear the need for the European Parliament to be a joint legislator on issues associated with the Structural Funds .
I share that opinion .
However , contrary to what was proposed by the Dutch presidency , the codecision procedure has not been adopted for the provisions of Article 130d concerning the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
The assent procedure remains in place .
I regret that very much , and I hope that between now and the signing of the Treaty in October 1997 the European Parliament will be able to indicate its disagreement on this point .
I am happy to support this report today .
I think that people across the European Union will share the rapporteur 's wish to see a more effective system for spending European funding in our regions .
Those who bid for EU funding know that money is limited .
They appreciate that they have to come up with high quality projects in order to be considered .
So it is unacceptable that so much money allocated for regional and social projects goes unspent .
It is simply unjust that some projects receive no money , that others only receive a minimum amount , whilst elsewhere in the budget precious funds sit in the bank unused .
I am frankly amazed that Germany , which contributes so much to the EU budget , is so slow to take its fair share out - two-thirds of the Social Fund money allocated to Germany could not be assigned to projects .
I agree with the rapporteur that we should decentralize decision-making on funds , involve local authorities more in the whole process and see the Commission as a kind of regulator to see that funds are spent properly .
If there are